




















































Hansard: December 03, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 23A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1959 

 December 3, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly six individuals seated in the Speaker‟s 

gallery. They are with the All Nations Hope youth leadership 

project. They are with Aboriginal youth coordinator, Jessica 

Parisian — if you could give us a wave there, Jessica, very 

good — and Chantal Lankey, youth mentor. Very good. 

 

We‟ll be meeting with them very shortly, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m 

very glad to see them in the Speaker‟s gallery at their 

legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce to you and through you to other members of the 

legislature two gentlemen seated in your gallery. Firstly my 

uncle, Vernon Harrison who is a lieutenant in the Saskatoon fire 

department, an accomplished athlete, and represented 

Saskatchewan at many national level slo-pitch tournaments. 

 

And the other gentleman whose birthday it is today — 87 years 

old — my grandpa William Harrison who has lived all his life 

in the Quill Lake area on our family homestead, and is very 

active and follows the proceedings of this House very closely. 

So welcome, and happy birthday, grandpa. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you in the Speaker‟s gallery is my president of Sask Rivers 

constituency, Dave Halstead. Dave teaches natural resources at 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] in Prince Albert. So I‟d like you to give him a 

warm welcome to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the need for maintaining quality 

health care services and specifically touches on the issues of 

recruitment, retention, ensuring adequate staffing, adequate 

funding, and bargaining in good faith. And these petitions, the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed from residents in Cabri, 

Swift Current, Ponteix, Gull Lake, Leader, Saskatoon, Elrose, 

Rosetown, Herschel, Delisle, Kindersley, Eston, Flaxcombe, 

Tompkins, Hazlet, Watrous, and Young. Mr. Speaker, I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present petitions on 

behalf of residents of Saskatchewan concerned about daycare 

spaces. Mr. Speaker, it‟s well known that inadequate access to 

quality and affordable child care is a major roadblock for 

parents who want to access the labour market. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Saskatchewan. I so 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. speaker, I rise today to present 

a petition in support of affordable housing for Saskatchewan 

seniors — a major concern many have in the months ahead. I‟d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2008 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary education. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Regina Students‟ 

Union, the University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union, and 

the First Nations University of Canada Students‟ Association. I 

so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of child care in Saskatchewan. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now these petitions are signed by concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan from the communities of Oxbow, Redvers, 

Arcola, Carievale, and Carnduff. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, December 3, 

is International Day of Persons with Disabilities, a very special 

day declared by the United Nations in 1992 to promote 

awareness of disability issues and abilities of people with 

disability. 

 

Dignity and Justice for All of Us is this year‟s theme, a very 

timely and important message as it has been estimated that 10 

per cent of the world‟s population, or 650 million people, live 

with disabilities, and tragically 80 per cent of whom live in 

poverty. We must break this cycle of poverty and disability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the United Nations, in celebrating this day as well 

as the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human 

Rights next week, is using a theme, Dignity and Justice for All 

of Us, as a rallying call as these principles are far from being 

realized for everyone. 

 

Dignity and justice are embodied in the civil, cultural, 

economic, political, and social rights promoted by the 

convention. Therefore now is the time to make a renewed 

commitment to the ratification and full implementation of the 

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its 

optional protocol. We would add our voice to urge both the 

federal and provincial governments to do all they can to ensure 

quick ratification of the convention and its optional protocol as 

the best vehicle to ensure full and fair participation of all 

citizens in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing today 

as International Day of Persons with Disabilities as we all work 

to make Saskatchewan, Canada, and our globe a much better 

place to live. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Support for Saskatchewan People with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

rise today and advise the House that the Government of 

Saskatchewan has proclaimed December 3 as International Day 

of Persons with Disabilities in Saskatchewan. Our government 

is pleased to join with the United Nations and people around the 

world to promote greater understanding of disability issues and 

to rally support for the dignity and inclusion of all peoples with 

disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that 145,000 people in 

Saskatchewan live with disabilities, of which 6,550 are 

children. This year‟s theme is Dignity and Justice for All of Us. 

We are pleased as a government to have made significant 

announcements and to be investing millions of dollars, all to 

improve the lives of those with disabilities. 

 

For years, Mr. Speaker, people with disabilities across 

Saskatchewan have been asking for an income support program, 

one that affords dignified and equitable support. 

 

Providing much needed support programs and creating a 

separate disability income support program honours 

Saskatchewan‟s historic values — values that build strong 

communities through compassion, caring for one another, and 

doing our best to ensure everyone is included. Our goal, Mr. 

Speaker, is to help achieve full and equal enjoyment of human 

rights and participation in society by people with disabilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are committed to making life better for today‟s 

families and building a better future for people with disabilities. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



December 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

Canadian Merit Scholarship Winners 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend the Canadian 

Merit Scholarship Foundation chose its provincial winners and 

the students who would advance to the national competition. 

The Canadian Merit Scholarship Foundation is a privately 

endowed fund that recognizes students with the most leadership 

potential, community service, and entrepreneurial spirit. The 

national winner is called the Loran scholar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 12 student finalists came from all over 

Saskatchewan. Three of the finalists were from Walter Murray 

Collegiate in my riding of Saskatoon Eastview. Mr. Speaker, all 

of these special students had impressive applications. The level 

of community involvement, the projects initiated, not to 

mention more 100s that I have ever seen on an academic record, 

was actually humbling. 

 

The overall winner, Divya Pahwa, comes from Walter Murray 

Collegiate and the second winner, Danica Kindrachuk, is from 

Moose Jaw. Both Divya and Danica will travel to Toronto to 

represent Saskatchewan in the national competition in February. 

The third place winner was Racheal Berger from Central Butte. 

Honour citations went to Carmen Currie from Regina and 

Tenielle Bradley from Gull Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all around exceptional young women and 

I congratulate them. I also want to congratulate all of the 

students who by their achievements made it to the finals in 

Saskatoon. I wish Divya and Danica good luck in the national 

competition, and all the finalists good luck in their future 

endeavours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatchewan Residents Teach Egyptian Children 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today with pride to share 

with you and this House a story of two of my constituents. One 

of the things that I find most interesting and satisfying as an 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] is that this job 

allows you to share in the lives of people you serve. It allows 

you to listen to their stories, both happy and sad. 

 

The people that I speak about today, Mr. Speaker, are Delmar 

and Betty Rempel. Del and Betty are without a doubt two of the 

most gentle, caring, hospitable, and spiritual human beings that 

I‟ve ever met. Their story is about touching the lives of children 

in Egypt. 

 

Last year Del and Betty visited Egypt, and while touring 

businesses supported by MEDA [Mennonite Economic 

Development Associates], the Mennonite economic 

development association, they met 12 to 15 children who were 

interested in photography. Lucky for them, Del has 27 years as 

a professional photographer and holds a Masters with four bars, 

so when he returned to Saskatoon, he sent the children six 

cameras for them to practise and told them he would return in 

the following year to look at their work and teach them. 

 

Del and Betty did return to Aswan, Egypt where they were met 

by over 30 children who were full of excitement and wonder, 

aching to learn about photography and how to become a 

professional photographer. Del and Betty turned no child away, 

and the children enjoyed their learning adventure. 

 

Del and Betty, on behalf of these children of Egypt, your fellow 

constituents, and members of this House, we thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Multicultural Council Director Becomes a Mentor 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Tara 

Blanchard, the executive director of the Moose Jaw 

Multicultural Council, recently became one of Saskatchewan‟s 

first accredited settlement workers at the mentor level, which is 

the highest level that can be achieved. 

 

Tara‟s 65-page submission for accreditation was completed on 

her own time and was designed to show her proficiencies in the 

required areas. These included a minimum of seven years 

experience and a minimum of 200 hours of documented training 

related to settlement work. 

 

Tara will become part of a Saskatchewan team that will mentor 

and assist other settlement workers to complete application for 

accreditation. The process serves to further professionalize the 

settlement sector and thereby provide consistent and 

standardized services to all new Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council was formed 

in 1974 and has been growing ever since. Their reputation for 

providing great service to immigrants making Moose Jaw their 

home is well known. Not only do they welcome the new 

residents, but they also have available settlement programs, 

language classes, a host program, employment services, and a 

child care facility. The Multicultural Council recognizes the 

richness that diversity adds to our community and actively 

encourages newcomers to promote and retain their heritage 

while embracing their new home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Tara for her accreditation and offer congratulations to the 

Multicultural Council for their fine work in our community. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress, the 

Minister of Highways. 

 

Wickenheiser Centre in Shaunavon 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of southwest 

Saskatchewan and the Cypress Hills constituency, I am proud to 

congratulate Sharon Dickie, the mayor of Shaunavon, for her 

outstanding fundraising efforts for a community project. 

 

Shaunavon is a community where eight-year-old Hayley 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2008 

Wickenheiser started her hockey career. In the last several 

years, Hayley Wickenheiser has become a household name. She 

has earned many reputable titles such as world and Olympic 

hockey champion and is considered by many to be the world‟s 

foremost female hockey player. She has reached the pinnacle of 

success, all the while remaining a lifelong ambassador for the 

community of Shaunavon. 

 

To honour Hayley for all her endeavours, Mayor Sharon Dickie, 

along with the Shaunavon Town Council, passed a motion to 

name a brand new recreation facility in the community the 

Wickenheiser Centre. 

 

There has been tremendous community support for this project 

over many years, however Mayor Dickie has been instrumental 

in raising funds from the business community outside of the 

immediate Southwest. Recently she has met with major 

business leaders in head offices in Calgary. To date, Mayor 

Dickie has raised $765,000 from seven oil companies. As of 

August, a total of $5 million have been raised for the complex. 

It is hoped that the facility will be open in time for the 2010 

World Junior Hockey Championships which are coming to 

Saskatchewan. I don‟t think they‟re coming to Shaunavon 

however. 

 

I would ask that you join with me in extending our 

congratulations and thanks to Mayor Dickie for her productive 

community contributions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Gary Tinker Federation 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, nearly 20 years ago Gary 

Tinker, who suffers from cerebral palsy, completed a 650 

kilometre walk from La Ronge to Regina using crutches. This 

amazing journey helped inspire and pave the way for the 

formation of the Gary Tinker foundation, a non-profit agency 

and advocacy group for the disabled in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a particular focus of the Gary Tinker foundation is 

the employment and training of people with disabilities. The 

foundation‟s success in this area has not only helped people 

with disabilities find employment, but has also raised awareness 

among employers about the value of an eager but too often 

overlooked segment of the workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as vice-chairperson of the foundation, Gary Tinker 

is a powerful voice for persons with disabilities throughout 

northern Saskatchewan. His continued tireless efforts on behalf 

of the disabled are an inspiration to all of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this September in La Ronge, in conjunction with 

the 20th anniversary celebration of his walk, the Gary Tinker 

Federation is hosting a conference to discuss the many issues 

that affect individuals living with disabilities in northern 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Mr. Tinker, I want to 

take this opportunity to extend an invitation to all of the 

members to attend. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Proposed Land Sale 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the media reported yesterday that 

more than 41 000 hectares of land in northwestern 

Saskatchewan will be put up for auction next Monday by 

Saskatchewan Energy and Resources. It was also reported that 

several environmental organizations have reached an agreement 

with forest company Mistik Management and the Ministry of 

Environment‟s lands branch to designate the area in question as 

a protected site. It seems that in this Sask Party government, the 

left hand doesn‟t know what the right hand is doing. To the 

minister: why is the Sask Party auctioning land that the 

Ministry of Environment says should be protected? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are aware of 

the Saskatchewan Environmental Society‟s concerns with 

respect to this. Resource development in Saskatchewan will go 

forward as always, in the most environmentally responsible and 

sustainable way that we can have it done. The criteria of course 

for this government in terms of resource development is 

environmentally responsible development, socially responsible 

development, and of course economically responsible 

development. 

 

So the concerns of the Saskatchewan Environmental Society 

came to light here a couple of days ago. We are looking into the 

areas of interest to them, and we‟ll certainly be making 

representations back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, we already know the Sask Party 

doesn‟t listen to forest companies and forest communities when 

it comes to the future of their industry. Now we know that they 

also don‟t listen to the forest companies when they recommend 

designating areas as protected sites. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agreement between Mistik Management, 

several environmental NGOs [non-governmental organization], 

and the province was a product of a lot of co-operation on all 

sides. Now everyone‟s wondering why the Sask Party has 

thrown a monkey wrench into the things at the last minute. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party so deaf to any 

recommendation that comes out of the forestry industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



December 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member, clearly 

that‟s not the case. We have said all along that development has 

to take place in an environmentally responsible fashion, a 

socially responsible fashion, and an economically socially 

responsible fashion. The area in question that the member 

brings to everyone‟s attention here was not designated as a 

protected area. The Environmental Society is suggesting that 

maybe it should be; that‟s a suggestion that we are willing to 

take a look at, and we certainly will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The clock is ticking, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan Environmental Society executive director, 

Allyson Brady, told The StarPhoenix that the way this is being 

handled is quote „“. . . highlights the fact this is happening in an 

ad hoc, unplanned, irresponsible way.”‟ 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is missing an opportunity here to 

provide certainty to businesses and assurances to stakeholders 

who try to engage in responsible land use, and that their 

planning work won‟t be in vain. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party undermining people who 

have made the effort to work co-operatively to resolve these 

issues? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, any successful land 

development or oil and gas development or mining 

development must go through a very rigorous authorization 

through the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of 

Energy and Resources. That‟s been the process that‟s been 

adopted by this government, followed by the previous 

administration as well. 

 

The same designation that was asked for in this one is being 

looked at, is also the same designation that Oilsands Quest got 

that the former administration put in place at that time. Exactly 

the same process today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in terms of any kind of development going forward or 

anything of that nature, in terms of being irresponsible, what is 

really irresponsible in Canada today or in Saskatchewan today 

is an opposition opposite that wants to take the government of 

the day in Ottawa down. They want to fall in bed with the 

separatists in Quebec today . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Political grandstanding is going to be cold 

comfort to the people that are worried about these Canada 

protected sites, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of 

urgency to this issue. The sale in question is planned for 

Monday, the Monday coming up. The window of opportunity to 

act is closing. The Ministers of Environment and Energy and 

Resources have just two days to come up with a solution. So 

let‟s help them along, Mr. Speaker, by proposing one right now. 

 

To the Minister of Energy and Resources: yes or no, will he 

defer any sale of the land in question until the land in question 

has been designated as a protected site? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the last authorization in this 

area for oil and gas development was authorized by your party. 

The last one that came forward was to the Oilsands Quest. It 

was the same kind of environmental protection plan 

authorization and exactly the same kind of procedure that we 

are following that you, on that side of the House, followed at 

the time. 

 

But in terms of any kind or irresponsibility, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of irresponsibility, the last thing that we‟ll take lessons 

from is the NDP [New Democratic Party] opposite. The fact of 

the matter is, is that they are supporting the separatists in this 

country today. They are authorizing coalition meetings across 

this province today in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The fact of 

the matter is, is we are in favour of a duly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister may finish his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan 

to date people are looking at the situation in Ottawa and saying, 

where does the Government of Saskatchewan stand? Well 

clearly the Government of Saskatchewan stands on the side of 

the duly elected government, not on the side of the people who 

want to overthrow the government of this country, Mr. Speaker, 

as is the members that are . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Home Ownership Programs 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know 

Saskatchewan is facing a labour shortage and one of the best 

ways to address that shortage is to ensure that Saskatchewan 

people can find an affordable place to live. One way to ease this 

pressure on the rental housing market is to give long-time 

renters a chance to own their own home. But the government‟s 

programs to encourage home ownership ran out of money 

earlier this year and the Sask Party has failed to put more 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2008 

money in. They‟re missing an opportunity to give low-income 

families a chance to own their own home and at the same time 

reduce the pressure on the rental housing market that keeps 

rents so high. 

 

To the minister: what is her plan to help low-income families 

who want a chance to own their own home? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite should know that when his government was in power 

and when he was sitting at the cabinet table, they had the 

neighbourhood home ownership program and they let that 

program expire and didn‟t continue. So it was done when he 

was sitting at the cabinet table, making decisions. 

 

Then on the eve of the election — on the eve of the election; 

they didn‟t even get the program going — it was just before the 

election they announced the home ownership program, which is 

indeed out of money. And he‟s right, Mr. Speaker, it is out of 

money. 

 

It allows people to access money who have incomes up to 

50,000. Right now in our housing situation we have to worry 

about the most vulnerable. We have to look at those that don‟t 

even have an income close to $50,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this government has still not 

replaced HomeFirst home ownership program, despite their 

historic surpluses. And the lack of action really is a missed 

opportunity. Mr. Speaker, organizations like SHIP [Saskatoon 

Housing Initiatives Partnership], Regina Rescue Mission, and 

Sasknative Rentals, among others, have the expertise to manage 

home ownership and home building programs that meet the 

needs of their clients. 

 

To the minister: will she commit here today to establishing a 

CBO [community-based organization] building fund this year 

so that these organizations can contribute to making home 

ownership more affordable for Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll point out that 

the member opposite, who sat at the cabinet table when the 

NDP were in power, let their existing home ownership program 

become useless because they didn‟t adjust it for today‟s market. 

On the eve of the election they announced a home ownership 

program. They didn‟t worry about it before that. And when they 

were on the hot seat trying to win an election is when they 

decided home ownership was an issue. 

Mr. Speaker, we have the legislation in place. We will be 

forming a board that‟s going to look at what will work well 

within our market as it exists today. But what can he say about 

his support for his leader? Because we have a commitment by 

our existing federal government to help fund housing programs. 

Does he support the coalition that didn‟t mention housing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ll put up our record any day of 

the week against their record. But I‟m glad that she brought up 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forbes: — The housing corporation Act. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the vast majority of students are renters. They make up 

a significant portion of the renters in this province. Measures to 

help student renters would reduce the pressure on the rental 

market. We know that for sure. 

 

Now in the past, the minister suggests that student housing is 

not part of her mandate. But section 19(1) of the Sask housing 

corporation Act clearly states, and I quote: 

 

The corporation may encourage the construction of student 

housing or the acquisition of existing buildings and their 

conversion to student housing in areas where a need can 

be established for the purpose of providing adequate 

housing for students. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, she has a mandate to act. To the minister: 

given the historic surplus this government enjoys, why is she 

missing this opportunity to act on student housing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to highlight important work that‟s under way 

regarding student housing, Mr. Speaker. That is most directly, 

despite the lamentable — lamentable — work that went on on 

the other side of the aisle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On this subject what we can say is, on November 21, Mr. 

Speaker — they might have missed it — on November 21 a 

36-family unit was established for the SIAST Woodland 

Campus, Mr. Speaker, reinforcing support for post-secondary 

students in safe, affordable, quality homes, Mr. Speaker, a $3.5 

million investment that should be open next fall, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s what we‟re undertaking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 



December 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

recommendations from the minister‟s own task force that she 

has not yet implemented, including measures to increase the 

supply of affordable rental housing. The minister hints that 

some of the government‟s infrastructure money may be used for 

housing, but then she fails to act. Meanwhile, it‟s been more 

than a year, more than a year since any new money has been 

allocated to build affordable housing. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party missing so many 

opportunities to act on affordable housing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I have said it in the 

House before and I will say it again — because the member 

opposite cannot remember from one day to the next what has 

been said — there are 935 units that are in various stages of 

development since November 2007. Some of them are student 

housing, Mr. Speaker. We announced student housing. He 

obviously missed that press release, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what is his record? He said that he will just stand by his 

record. Well his record did nothing about shelter rates, which 

helps the most vulnerable within our society. We acted on the 

task force immediately. We increased the shelter rates. We 

indexed their shelter rates. We increased the rental supplement 

and we indexed it as well. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll continue to 

help those that are most vulnerable in our society, unlike the 

member opposite who sat at the cabinet table and for 13 years 

they increased shelter rates by $5. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Proposed Sale of Crown Subsidiary 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister Responsible for CIC [Crown Investments Corporation 

of Saskatchewan] has said that his plan to hold a fire sale of 

Crown assets is not based on ideology. He says the government 

will only sell off those investments that are not directly 

benefiting the people of Saskatchewan. But in his recent news 

release the minister says he‟s looking at selling off DirectWest, 

the Saskatchewan phone book company. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how does the Sask Party selling 

DirectWest meet any criteria that is not driven simply by blind 

ideology? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, as I have had the 

chance to articulate in this House before, the Sask-first policy is 

one that‟s well regarded across Saskatchewan, highlighted by 

the investment by this government into SaskTel of some $90 

million for a $130 million program. We didn‟t hear from the 

opposition if that was a good program or a bad program. They 

seemed to agree with it but, Mr. Speaker, it is possible because 

we are getting out of money-losing ventures outside of Canada 

and putting that money to work here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, DirectWest employs about 

120 people in Saskatchewan. Their head office is located right 

here in Regina. The phone books are developed and printed in 

Saskatchewan. The company sponsors more than 75 community 

groups throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, every aspect of 

DirectWest is about making life better for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

So again to the minister: how does this company that employs 

people directly and indirectly, supports the economy of 

Saskatchewan, how does that meet any criteria that isn‟t simply 

naked ideological? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been clear 

with the people of Saskatchewan. Money-losing ventures that 

are operated under the Crown corporations will be no more. 

DirectWest Canada and its operation have not contributed to the 

well-being of the overall Crown corporation. 

 

And as far as naked ideology goes, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

greater threat to any Crown corporation, to the people of 

Saskatchewan or their financial well-being, than the 

Bloc-Liberal-NDP coalition that is threatening our country 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Bizarre, Mr. Speaker. DirectWest has been 

publishing phone books in Saskatchewan for more than 50 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, DirectWest has 50 years of local 

investment. And according to the minister‟s SaskTel latest 

annual report, on page 47, just to help the minister, “The most 

significant contributor to the increase in other revenues was 

DirectWest . . .” So much for money-losing ventures, Mr. 

Speaker. This is one of the most profitable subsidiaries of 

SaskTel — one of the most profitable, Mr. Speaker — and has a 

long history of being so. 

 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2008 

To the minister: why is he selling off a profitable company that 

employs hundreds of people in the province of Saskatchewan 

and has a record of more than 50 years of doing so? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, unlike members 

opposite, this government has listened to what Saskatchewan 

people wanted. They wanted enhanced cellular coverage across 

Saskatchewan. They wanted enhanced high-speed Internet 

across this province, so every resident, whether rural or urban 

— we know what they thought of rural Saskatchewan — where 

every resident in urban or rural Saskatchewan has the same 

opportunity to start their small business, to have the education 

that they want. That‟s our commitment, to do it here in 

Saskatchewan. We will use the resources of SaskTel and this 

government to ensure that that happens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The business 

community simply rejects the arguments that this minister is 

making. And I want to quote from The StarPhoenix editorial 

dated October 30. And I quote, quote: 

 

What Mr. Cheveldayoff ordered this week seemed more 

like ordering Crown executives to employ meat tenderizer 

mallets on the companies until they are soft enough to be 

sold . . . 

 

Is the minister telling us these business commentators have got 

it all wrong? Or is he going to reverse his blind ideological 

drive to sell off our Crowns? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s very clear the 

opposition has not got any traction on any issues in this whole 

entire session. They‟re going back to questions that they asked 

at the very beginning of the session. 

 

Just to remind you of those questions and the responses from 

the members opposite. The former premier and the critic had 

talked about, oh there‟s nothing new in the Saskatchewan-first 

policy. We‟re just doing what we already said we would do 

back in 2005. Well they had one sleep, Mr. Speaker, and what 

did they do? They decided that they‟re against the 

Saskatchewan-first . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, they had one sleep to 

think about it, and then they decided that they‟re against the 

Saskatchewan-first policy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had a chance to implement the results 

of that Sask-first policy by the $130 million commitment that 

we put towards SaskTel. We‟ve heard resounding results of that 

from people across Saskatchewan. It‟s the best announcement 

that they‟ve heard from a Crown corporation in a long, long 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remember to the time, Mr. Speaker, when the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana had a sign that she went up and said, don‟t 

sell our Crowns. Well today she should have a different sign: 

don‟t sell our country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Professional Public Service 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party election platform 

pledged to ensure, quote “. . . [that] promotion in the public 

service is based on merit, not patronage.” And the Premier 

made statements to the effect, on August 2007, while he was 

still leader of the opposition, telling the Leader-Post that any 

changes to the civil service would “. . . be based on merit, not 

patronage or partisan politics.” 

 

These are fine words, Mr. Speaker, but the Minister of 

Agriculture has suggested that promises made in opposition are 

not always honoured in government. So to the Minister of the 

Public Service Commission: does the minister still support the 

principle of a professional, non-partisan public service? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, that is a very interesting 

question. It‟s a very interesting question coming from a group 

of men and women who sought to let go literally hundreds of 

people without cause during the tenure of their government. 

 

The question really is, did they believe in a professional public 

service and, if so, why did they treat their public employees in 

that way? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, within weeks of the election they 

dismissed more than 70 public servants. The Deputy Premier 

justified the firings by claiming quote, “. . . all those dismissed 

— even those without identifiable political connections — did 

not fit with the direction and philosophy of the new 

government.” 

 

A few weeks ago, we revealed the Sask Party has already spent 

more than $4 million of taxpayers‟ money for civil servants 



December 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

they fired, and will likely spend millions more. To the minister: 

if the Sask Party believe in a professional public service, why 

have they dismissed long-time public servants without cause 

and at great expense to the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Provincial Secretary, Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the principle of a 

professional public service is one not only that we subscribe to, 

but which we are supporting financially. This government 

promised to commit $250,000 a year over four years to the 

Shoyama-Johnson school of public policy. We are following 

through on that to help develop young people who are going to 

come in to the public service in this province and possibly in 

provinces elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also talked very diligently and directly to 

the public service about training opportunities and how we want 

to improve those opportunities for members of the public 

service across the piece. We have already undertaken some very 

specific examples of where those opportunities might be 

obtained outside of the school of public policy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I‟m concerned about is the duplicity and 

hypocrisy associated with this question. This is coming from a 

group of men and women who in the years 1992 to 2006 

actually let go without cause 645 public servants. Mr. Speaker, 

that is the rub of this question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, today I am proposing a Bill, the 

professional public service employees protection Act. The Bill 

states that every public servant with the exception of those 

listed may only be terminated for cause. The list of people 

exempted from the Act‟s protection includes staff in ministers‟ 

offices and Executive Council, and order in council employees 

hired outside the normal staffing process or at the direction of a 

minister or the Premier. This Bill provides for clarity that public 

servants and Saskatchewan people have sought and failed to 

receive from the Sask Party government. 

 

To the minister: will he support the professional public service 

employees protection Act, or will he miss an opportunity to 

give public servants the peace of mind that they deserve? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary, the 

Minister Responsible for Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. The question, 

Mr. Speaker, is not so much whether we will respect the public 

service. The question is, why are they such 

johnny-come-latelies on this issue? It‟s really rich for them to 

present a private member‟s Bill on the protection of the public 

service when they were the masters of the fate of 645 public 

servants. They were the ones that let go without cause 645 

public servants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me read into the record, let me read into the 

record the views of the pretender to the crown over there, Mr. 

Dwain Lingenfelter: 

 

Cabinet minister Dwain Lingenfelter said the government 

dismissed Doug Price as president of the Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corp., and Leo Larsen as 

president of STC, in order to replace them with people 

who better reflect the needs of the government. 

 

Apparently 645 other individuals suffered the same fate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary, Minister 

Responsible for Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Capital Plan for Transportation Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

inform the House that the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure‟s five-year rolling capital plan was released this 

morning. This plan shows forward thinking in infrastructure 

spending and proves this government‟s commitment to strategic 

highway investments. 

 

The rural highway strategy, a critical component of our rolling 

five-year capital plan, will provide the infrastructure needed to 

sustain our existing economic activity. This further provides 

new opportunities for growth by systematically assessing all . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟ll ask members to allow the minister 

to make his ministerial statement without interference. I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the rural highways strategy 

uses five criteria to determine the order in which projects will 

receive funding. Those criteria include the specifics of the 

engineering economics associated with the road. The necessary 

services the road provides to communities, such as access to 

health . . . 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — It would be greatly appreciated if members 

would at least allow the courtesy for the minister to make his 

statement and then have the response. I‟ll recognize the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the rural highway strategy 

uses five criteria to determine the order in which projects will 

receive funding. I‟ve already identified a couple of them. But 

the third one is the safety and comfort of our travelling public, 

the impact of the highway in ensuring provincial economic 

growth now and even more importantly in the future; and lastly, 

the willingness of communities to be our partners in ensuring 

their highways meet their immediate and long-term needs for 

safety and reliability. These are the five items that are weighed 



1968 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2008 

by our panel of transportation experts when they established the 

plan. 

 

As a component of the rolling five-year plan, the rural highway 

strategy was developed in collaboration with the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities as well as the urban 

municipalities, the area transportation planning committees, the 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Association, 

Saskatchewan Tourism, the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, Enterprise Saskatchewan, and industry 

representatives. 

 

Now one of the most significant aspects of this five-year capital 

plan is expanding our ability to move more truck freight more 

efficiently on more Saskatchewan roadways by expanding the 

primary weight designation of various highway routes. Mr. 

Speaker, the primary weight system, as a result of this 

announcement, will increase by over 5 000 kilometres to a total 

of now 14 400 kilometres. That, Mr. Speaker, is an increase of 

53 per cent in total length. 

 

We had previously announced the first two years of the plan, 

and today the government‟s new construction project priorities 

for the next five years were announced. Today‟s announcement 

gives the affected communities a tool that they can use to plan 

for their own growth. It also provides transparency to industry. 

They now have critical information that they can use to make 

important investment decisions. And this announcement is a 

signal to the Saskatchewan road building and construction 

industries that they can now plan with confidence their future 

equipment purchases and staffing requirements. 

 

This announcement of the five-year rolling plan is the 

fulfilment of this government‟s 83rd election promise and again 

signals our commitment to the long-term economic prosperity 

of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member, I think it‟s 

unfair for the public when the Minister of Energy and 

Resources, the Minister of Health, the member from Nutana, 

and the member from Prince Albert Northcote, after they‟ve 

been asked to come to order, continue a private dialogue. I 

would ask members in future to either go behind the bar . . . It‟s 

certainly unfair to the members who are speaking. I recognize 

the member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to start out by 

thanking the minister for providing me a copy of his remarks 

just before entering the House here today. 

 

I think in principle, Mr. Speaker, that the long-term plan for 

highways construction as announced by the minister is a good 

plan. It‟s a good idea. I think it‟s good for the communities to 

have an idea what the minister‟s plans are and priorities are for 

building. I hope that communities will have the opportunity to 

influence those plans before they firm up to the point of beyond 

no return. 

 

I think it‟s also probably good for the contractors who are 

looking at making expansions to their equipment and 

purchasing new equipment and making investments in their 

businesses to have an idea that they will have a long-term 

rolling plan here of work into the future. I think they all realize 

— I think as well as we realize — that the five-year plan is 

great; only it is subject to each and every year of funding from 

the budget through the budgetary process. 

 

So what might be the plan might not be reality. It might be 

influenced by the ability of the province to live with Finance‟s 

plans. It‟s good when you can bring various groups across the 

province into play here, whether the SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] or SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] or transportation planning 

committees, Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Association, Sask Tourism. All these people have the province 

at stake, at heart, and the betterment for the province. And I 

think when you bring these people together and have them 

working collaboratively and working in one direction, this is 

truly a good endeavour. 

 

There are some questions that come about as a result of the 

minister‟s announcement with the long-term plan now in place, 

and will this cause . . . [inaudible] . . . the minister and his 

department be working with groups out there who may be 

interested in getting into the construction business? Some new 

people who may be interested in taking up the occupation of 

contracting and road building business, will they be working 

with these people? Will there be more competition at tendering 

time for these jobs that they tendered out year after year? Will 

there be an increase in costs of construction? Will this plan 

simply result in perhaps not more kilometres of road being 

built, simply more expensive kilometres of road being built? 

 

Those are some of the questions that come to mind. It‟s 

interesting, in quickly glancing through the details that the 

minister released with his announcement, particularly when it 

comes to the northern transportation strategy. Looking at the 

plan for the next five years for northern Saskatchewan, we see 

no mention, no mention of Highway No. 123. That‟s the 

highway to Cumberland. We see no mention of that in spite of 

the fact that my colleague has raised this particular issue and 

this particular issue of this highway with the minister in this 

House. 

 

Petitions have been tabled in this House in regards to work to 

be done on Highway 123. It‟s a dangerous road. That‟s been 

proven with the number of rollovers, the number of injuries, the 

number of accidents that have resulted in deaths on that road 

over the years. In spite of the fact that local leaders have been 

calling for work to be done on this road, the minister has not 

included it anywhere in the five-year plan. And in some ways, 

Mr. Speaker, I think this road could be considered a resource 

road because at the end of this road is the community of 

Cumberland where there are people, and people are the greatest 

resource of this province. 

 

Highway No. 10 is not mentioned anywhere in the five-year 

plan either particularly the stretch from the junction of No. 1 to 

Fort Qu‟Appelle. It‟s a high-traffic count on this particular 

stretch of highway. In fact the traffic count on this particular 

stretch of highway is equal to any of the traffic counts on the 

highways in Saskatchewan that‟s being twinned as we speak. 

It‟s high tourism traffic on this particular stretch of road, and 

it‟s also the main artery for agricultural commodities, 



December 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1969 

agriculturally produced commodities to be transported to three 

major inland grain terminals. Yet it‟s not mentioned anywhere 

in the five-year plan. 

 

Highway No. 7 from Rosetown to the Alberta border, if you‟ve 

ever had the opportunity to travel that road, you‟ll know that 

there‟s a lot of heavy truck traffic on that road, and quite 

frankly one has to be on his toes driving that road because it‟s a 

scary stretch. 

 

In principle, Mr. Speaker, the five-year rollout plan is a good 

idea. Unfortunately this particular plan is flawed. It has holes in 

it that the minister has not been able to address, and I‟m hoping 

that over the next five years the minister will recognize the error 

of his ways, the inadequacies of this plan, and address them. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 78 — The Victoria Park Capital Inc. 

(Investment Management Agreement) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 78, 

The Victoria Park Capital Inc. (Investment Management 

Agreement) Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has moved that Bill No. 78, The Victoria Park 

Capital Inc. (Investment Management Agreement) Act be now 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

58, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies has moved that Bill No. 58, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. When 

shall the Bill be considered in committee? I recognize the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

58, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No .2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 58, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

48, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

48, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 without 



1970 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2008 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 48, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 

2008 without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I lay on the Table 

the annual report of the Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions numbered 159 through 167. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 159 through 167 tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Answers to questions 168 through 173 are 

ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 168 through 173 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 

numbered 174 through 182. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 174 through 182 tabled. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions For Supply 

 

The Chair: — The motion before the committee is dealing with 

supplementary estimates and the resolutions. I recognize the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, the sum of $529,624,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Before the committee is no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, the sum of $529,624,000 be granted out of the 

general revenue. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? All in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Resolution no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

March 31, 2010, the sum of $4,000,000 be granted out of 

the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Question before the Assembly is no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, which to the extent that they remain unexpended for 

the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year ending 

on March 31, 2010, the sum of $4,000,000 be granted out 

of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Chair: — Are all those in favour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



December 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1971 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The Chair: — Minister of Finance has moved that this 

committee now rise and report progress. 

 

Is that the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the same, 

and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions 

be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 77 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 4) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly, I move that Bill No. 77, The Appropriation Act, 

2008 (No. 4) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 77, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 4) be now introduced 

and read the first time. Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, and under Rule 72(2), I move that the Bill be now 

read a second and third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 77, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 4) be now 

read a second and third time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I just want to remind the Assembly that His 

Honour is here for Royal Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 14:36 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Please be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour‟s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 602 - The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day 

Act 

Bill No. 53 - The Medical Profession Amendment 

     Act, 2008 

Bill No. 42 - The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

Bill No. 62 - The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 

2008 

Bill No. 64 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2008 (No. 2) 



1972 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2008 

Bill No. 58 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

     (No. 2) 

Bill No. 48 - The Financial Administration Amendment 

     Act, 2008 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty‟s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 77 - The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 4) 

 

to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour‟s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty‟s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:38.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:39.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1959 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1959 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1960 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1960 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1960 

 Support for Saskatchewan People with Disabilities 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1960 

 Canadian Merit Scholarship Winners 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1961 

 Saskatchewan Residents Teach Egyptian Children 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1961 

 Multicultural Council Director Becomes a Mentor 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1961 

 Wickenheiser Centre in Shaunavon 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1961 

 Gary Tinker Federation 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1962 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Proposed Land Sale 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1962 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1962 

 Home Ownership Programs 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1963 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1964 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1964 

 Proposed Sale of Crown Subsidiary 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1965 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1965 

 Professional Public Service 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1966 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1966 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Capital Plan for Transportation Infrastructure 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1967 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1968 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 78 — The Victoria Park Capital Inc. (Investment Management Agreement) Act 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1969 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1969 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No .2) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1969 

 Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1970 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1970 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1970 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions For Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1970 



 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1971 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 77 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 4) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1971 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1971 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


