




















































Hansard: April 22, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 30A  TUESDAY, APRIL 22, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1045 

 April 22, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to introduce to you and through you some of the members 

of the Regina Council of Women. 

 

The Regina Council of Women was founded in 1895 and has a 

long, proud history of serving people in Regina. And as the past 

president, I am especially proud of our role in building the 

city’s first hospital, and our ongoing contribution to the welfare 

of women in Regina. I salute the women who helped build our 

city, and I look forward to working with the women who shape 

our future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce someone through you and to you that is 

sitting in your gallery. And he’s a regular attendee at these 

proceedings. His name is Richard Lepp, and he’s with the 

Saskatchewan House of Prayer, which is a non-partisan 

Christian organization, and he’s helping us spiritually to do 

what is right. 

 

I’d also like to say I worked with Rick in Saskatoon in the 

police service. He let me drive for about 30 minutes one day, 

and I had to let him take over the wheel because he was clawing 

up the passenger’s side of the dash. So I’d just like to add that 

Rick is one of the people that you meet in life that is truly 

spiritual and possesses the Holy Spirit. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy today to 

introduce some people to this Assembly, their Assembly, 

constituents of mine from Yorkton. It’s the Sliva family: 

Robert, Lydia, their daughter, Stephanie, and son, Joseph, 

today. But that is not whole clan. They are much more in 

number than that. 

 

They’re a very talented family. They’re here today on an 

educational trip for their kids. They’re a home-schooled family 

and are very good at it. Their kids are very well known in the 

community and very good stewards of the community. They are 

very talented singers and very, very adept and talented 

Ukrainian dance family. And I’d like all members to just say 

hello them and invite them to their Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

presenting petitions today with the concerns that citizens have 

in this province with respect to two Bills that have been 

introduced, Bills 5 and Bill 6, the essential services Act and The 

Trade Union Amendment Act. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw The 

Public Service Essential Services Act, Bill 5, and The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007, Bill 6, and hold 

broad public consultations about labour relations in the 

province. 

 

And I’m presenting these petitions on behalf of the good 

citizens of Saskatoon, Wilkie, Landis, Mervin, Turtleford, 

Cochin, Edam, Spruce Lake, Livelong, and Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present petitions 

today in support for Station 20 in Saskatoon and in opposition 

to the government’s withdrawal of the funding. And the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by the people of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Earth Day Celebrations 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today in recognition of Earth Day. 

This day is a special time set aside to honour the earth, our only 

home. Earth Day, which began in 1970, is recognized as the 

birth of the environment movement. It’s a day to raise 

awareness about humanity’s increasingly large ecological 

footprint and to stimulate positive actions aimed at local, 

regional, and global issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in celebration of Earth Day, the Royal 

Saskatchewan Museum, in partnership with the city of Regina, 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

hosted their annual Earth Day event on Sunday, April 20. It was 

a very successful day attended by approximately 600 people 

who came out and enjoyed a number of activities planned to 

make people more aware of Earth Day. 

 

There was an Our Mother, The Earth tour in the museum’s First 

Nations gallery and an opportunity to do some bracelet crafting. 

There was live musical entertainment and First Nations survival 

demonstrations presented by the Aboriginal group, Kakwa. 

Regina Girl Guides provided a compost bin building 

demonstration, and the Science Centre was there with its GO! 

science games and activities to entertain and educate. 

 

There were composting demos by the Regina EcoLiving and the 

city of Regina water division. And people went home with a 

Shand Greenhouse tree seedling. The royal museum continues 

to partner with institutions, and I would like to thank them, Mr. 

Speaker, for their informative programs to promote and 

celebrate Earth Day. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

A Memorable Earth Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, today people around the globe are 

actively participating in Earth Day. This year will likely be the 

most memorable Earth Day since its inception in 1970, as this 

year Earth Day groups are demanding serious action on climate 

change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of activities that are taking 

place this week in Saskatchewan. Just to give a few examples, 

on Sunday a collaborative effort between the city of Regina, the 

Royal Saskatchewan Museum, and the Saskatchewan Science 

Centre provided the opportunity for environmentalists, 

conservationists, families, and children to take part in various 

activities together. 

 

This morning at 9 a.m. participants in Regina joined walkers 

from 13 cities across Canada in Aveda’s five-kilometre Walk 

for Water event to raise awareness to the necessity for global 

clean water rights. In developing countries, it is common for 

water collectors, usually women and girls, to have to walk 

several kilometres each day to collect water. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the environmentally conscious community of 

Craik will be hosting an Earth Day film festival taking place 

from April 25 to 27, commencing with a social and dinner at 

Solar Garden Restaurant in the Craik Eco-Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all my colleagues to applaud the 

efforts of those in our community who are putting forward the 

extra effort to raise awareness of the importance of protecting 

our global environment and the serious consequences of global 

climate change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me ask you a 

question. What is the most valuable publicly traded company in 

Canada today? Is it an oil company headquartered in Calgary? 

No. Is it a bank based out of Toronto? No. It’s the Potash 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, based on yesterday’s closing 

share price, PotashCorp is now worth $66.6 billion. The value 

of potash can be seen throughout our province, Mr. Speaker. 

Take for example Mosaic Potash’s recent announcement of $1.7 

billion expansion. That means . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It’s become increasingly difficult to 

hear the member that’s been recognized to offer his statement. I 

recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The value of 

potash can be seen throughout our province. Take for example 

Mosaic Potash’s recent announcement of $1.7 billion 

expansion. That means 700 new jobs, Mr. Speaker, 300 in 

Esterhazy alone. My home of Yorkton is sure to see some of the 

spinoff from that development. Great news, Mr. Speaker, great 

news for PotashCorp and great news for Saskatchewan and a far 

cry from where our potash industry was back in the ’70s when 

it was almost destroyed by the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

and its ill-conceived, ideologically driven takeover of the potash 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank goodness times have changed and thank 

goodness the government has changed. And just in case the 

NDP ever gets an ill-conceived idea about wanting to change 

and take it over and wreck the potash industry again, our 

government has introduced legislation to prevent that from ever 

happening. 

 

We lead the country in population growth, economic growth 

and sales growth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Women in Politics 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — In March 2008, after winning the Spanish 

national election, President José Luis Rodriguez Zapatero 

appointed a remarkable cabinet. For the first time in history, the 

majority of cabinet ministers are women, including first 

vice-president María Teresa Fernández de la Vega. 

 

The list of cabinet ministers, female cabinet ministers includes 

the ministers of Public Works, Education, Equality, Labour and 

Immigration, the Environment, Public Administration, Housing, 

Science and Innovation. 

 

Especially noteworthy is the appointment of Defence minister, 

Carme Chacón Piqueras, a 37-year-old pregnant mother. After 

receiving her doctorate in Law from the University of 



April 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

Barcelona, Señora Piqueras conducted postgrad studies in 

Canada. 

 

In 2007 in countries throughout the world, women held about 

18 per cent of national elected seats. In Canada the national 

average is about 21 per cent women, with Saskatchewan 

presently matching the national average. I’m aware of the many 

economic, social, and political obstacles that women face. We 

need to seek and encourage more women to join us in the 

political arena. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

acknowledging the first cabinet in history with a majority of 

women and also acknowledge the contributions of women who 

have helped lead the way to help build our own nation and 

province through their roles at various levels of government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

King George Community School’s 

Outstanding Reading Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I’m especially proud to 

stand in the House today and speak about a fine group of 

elementary students in my constituency of Prince Albert 

Carlton. King George Community School has won the 2008 

Exemplary Reading Program Award for Saskatchewan from the 

International Reading Association and the Saskatchewan 

Reading Council. 

 

The award recognizes outstanding reading and language arts 

programs in schools at all grade levels throughout Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, King George’s reading program was introduced in the 

school five years ago to improve the reading skills of the kids. 

About 200 students from grades 1 to 8 are in the program today. 

It includes one-on-one after school tutoring and an after-school 

reading club. 

 

King George teacher Cathy Anderson and school division staff 

member Sandra Quayle will accept the award on behalf of the 

school during a convention on May 4 in Atlanta, Georgia. 

 

Education is extremely important to this Saskatchewan Party 

government, and we commend the day-to-day work of teachers 

and school divisions across this province. So today, Mr. 

Speaker, as I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

staff and students at King George Community School in Prince 

Albert on a job well done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Celebrating Sexual Diversity 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Friday, April 18 the Avenue Community Centre for Gender and 

Sexual Diversity in Saskatoon held its annual gala, Carnevale 

2008. My colleague from Saskatoon Meewasin and I were able 

to attend this wonderful evening as both the everyday 

contributions of the Avenue Community Centre and some very 

good people who stand up daily for sexual diversity in 

Saskatchewan were celebrated. 

 

Glen Horton, a long-time volunteer at the centre and a member 

of the Bridge City Chorus received a well-deserved Community 

Service Award. He is well known for helping out in the 

background, but perhaps more importantly for his work on the 

support phone line, a very critical service in the LGBT [lesbian, 

gay, bisexual, and transgender] community. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Jennifer Brockman from Prince Albert also received the 

Community Service Award, actively involved in the Prince 

Albert queer community. She was instrumental in bringing 

about Prince Albert’s first Pride Parade. She also helped 

establish the Two Spirits of the North group. Special Merit 

Awards went to M.A.C. [Make-up Art Cosmetics Inc.] AIDS 

[acquired immune deficiency syndrome] Walk for Life team. 

The staff at M.A.C. cosmetics is the biggest supporter of the 

annual AIDS Walk for Life event, so this merit award is very 

well deserved. Diva’s Gender Bender Players, a local queer 

performance art group, were also recognized for their 

outstanding community work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these groups, Glen, and Jennifer for their outstanding 

contribution in celebrating our sexual diversity and making 

Saskatchewan a great place to be. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Drawing the Line Against Sexual Assault 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve recently had the honour of 

taking part in an event that raised awareness of two important 

issues — victimization and healing. Last Saturday, I gathered 

with dozens of others in the courtyard of Regina City Hall to, 

quote, “Draw the line against sexual assault.” 

 

Dozens of shirts were hung on a clothesline to represent sexual 

victims. The event was organized by Regina Women’s 

Community Centre and the Sexual Assault Line in conjunction 

with the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, the Ministry of 

Justice and Attorney General victim services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, providing a voice for victims is critically 

important function in our society. They often feel powerless and 

alone. By gathering together shoulder to shoulder reminds them 

that they are not alone and that we stand with them and they can 

start down the healing path. 

 

As sexual assault survivors, these men and women bear the 

stigma of being assaulted in a way that our society still 

struggles with. By drawing the line against sexual assault in 

such a public fashion, a healing light can be cast into dark 

corners chasing away shameful shadows that can haunt these 

victims their entire life. 

 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

After taking part in last Saturday’s event in city hall, I received 

many thank you notes. I just want to thank the organizers for 

allowing me the privilege of taking part in such important 

event. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Sources of Electricity Generation 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The outgoing NDP 

government’s Green Power portfolio was based on a vision of 

environmental sustainability and renewable energy. We 

promised in 2003 that any new electricity coming on to the grid 

would come from renewable sources. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

delivered on that promise. 

 

For three years now Saskatchewan has led the nation in terms of 

electricity generated through wind power, electricity which is 

totally greenhouse gas emission free. In the space of just a few 

years, we went from producing zero megawatts from wind to 

having enough wind power generation to power 73,000 

Saskatchewan homes. 

 

To the minister: on this Earth Day, what is the Sask Party 

government’s plan to expand wind power generation in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a pleasure to take that question on Earth Day. I 

have always said, in Saskatchewan, SaskPower, the generation, 

it’s not an either/or question. Certainly we’re in favour of 

electrical generation. We’re in favour about talking about 

nuclear generation. We’re in favour of hydro generation. And 

yes, Mr. Speaker, we’re in favour of wind generation. 

 

And SaskPower has stated very clearly that they will accept any 

proposal that’s brought forward. They will look at it. They’ve 

had a request for proposal. Anything to do with wind 

generation, they will consider it. And if it is accepted, it will be 

done on a net metering basis where commercial rates will apply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has led 

the way in terms of wind power, but sadly we are clearly in risk 

of losing our way. Other provinces are actively pursuing wind 

power. Manitoba Hydro recently announced they’ve shortlisted 

10 companies wanting to sell up to 300 megawatts of power to 

Manitoba Hydro. BC [British Columbia] is now looking at 

Canada’s first offshore wind project. And Ontario is looking at 

2000 additional megawatts of renewable energy, including 

significant investments in wind power. 

 

To the minister: what is being done to maintain Saskatchewan’s 

nation-leading position on totally renewable wind power 

generation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, again thank you to 

the member for his question on Earth Day. It is an appropriate 

question that we should be asking ourselves here in 

Saskatchewan, and the answer is a favourable one. 

 

Surely the member opposite knows that wind generation is not 

part of the base load emphasis in the province. It is something 

that can be done on a peaking basis. And again SaskPower has 

made it clear that they will entertain any offers from the private 

sector or others outside the province that want to do work in 

Saskatchewan that involves wind energy, and we’d be most 

favourable to looking at that. 

 

I would remind members opposite that the demand curve for 

energy in Saskatchewan is certainly increasing because of the 

economic activity generated by the businesses and the people of 

Saskatchewan. That will entail increased generation from wind 

energy, from hydro, from electric, from all sources. And that’s 

what we’ll be looking at, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government is axing environmental spending devoted to 

renewable energy such as wind. And they’re doing it despite 

having more than $1.3 billion in the bank. 

 

New Democrats’ totally renewable centennial wind power 

project cost $250 million for 150 megawatts of new additional 

power. 

 

The Sask Party has plans to spend at least four times that on 

their fossil-fuel-gulping clean coal initiative which seems to 

have been written on the back of a paper napkin. We still 

haven’t seen any business plan. We still haven’t seen any 

projections. We still don’t know how this will affect power 

rates. And we still don’t know if the minister’s faith in private 

sector investors is pure fantasy or merely fiction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no due diligence done. To the minister: 

why is the Sask Party government putting all of their eggs into 

one clean coal project, especially when there is still so much to 

be done and so much potential for alternative projects such as 

wind power? 



April 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve answered 

the member opposite’s questions in my previous answers, but 

again for his benefit I’ll go through it. 

 

It’s not an either-or situation in Saskatchewan. Because of the 

demand that our province is creating — it’s a good problem to 

have — we will be looking at each and every source of 

electrical generation. We will be looking, we will be looking at 

wind power, as he questioned earlier. We will be looking at 

hydro power. We will be looking at clean coal technology 

because yes, it is a fact that Saskatchewan relies on coal for 

electrical generation. We will do that in the auspices of a federal 

program that gave us $240 million out of $250 million. We will 

continue to do that. Will we negotiate with the federal 

government? Yes, we will. Negotiations are continuing. And I 

would add that’s a lot farther than the clean coal project that we 

saw from members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Personnel Changes in the Public Service 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the government is now facing at 

least four lawsuits as a result of its handling of civil servant 

firings. Media reports state the plaintiffs claim their firings were 

without cause and done in a way that tarnished their 

professional reputations. 

 

In the Deputy Premier’s haste to convince the public that his 

axing of lifelong public servants were justified, he has gone 

over the top and put taxpayers’ dollars at risk. If he had been 

more focused on dismissing long-term civil servants with an 

ounce of compassion and tact and less focused on getting big 

pay raises for Sask Party buddies, perhaps the whole mess could 

have been avoided. To the Deputy Premier: how many more 

lawsuits should taxpayers expect as a result of your 

incompetence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank that 

member for another transition question, Mr. Speaker, because 

it’s very clear that this transition team has moved forward in a 

much more respectful fashion than what the NDP did in 1991. 

The record is clear as to what they did when they were putting 

in place their transition changes. There were people that were 

dismissed on Christmas Eve. There were people that were 

dismissed after being told that in fact they weren’t going to be 

dismissed. 

Mr. Speaker, there is a process in place. There have been people 

that have been released without cause, and without cause 

enables those individuals to work on a solution that is 

negotiated between their legal representatives and our legal 

representatives. 

 

There are some individuals who, through a state of negotiation, 

want to enhance their position, and as a result we’re seeing 

some of the court cases or the lawsuits that the individual has 

referred to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in January the Deputy Premier said 

it would take a week or two for him to come up for the cost of 

these severance packages. It is now April, and the Deputy 

Premier’s telling reporters it will take a year to find out the cost. 

 

He had no problem giving an estimated cost of severance for 

legislative staff dismissed by our government before 

negotiations were complete, but now he thinks it would be 

better to wait and see. How convenient. To the Deputy Premier: 

the public has waited long enough. What is the cost of 

severance so far? And what is the estimated cost of providing 

severance to all civil servants he fired without cause? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the circumstances around 

dismissals, whether they were the dismissals that were handled 

by the former NDP premier in releasing the 150-plus members 

that were employed within this building, there is an estimate. 

There is an estimate that was provided to the media. It’s an 

estimate that we are not sure is going to be realized because in 

fact some of those employees have been re-employed by this 

government in this building. So therefore there is a change. 

 

There will be uncertainty, Mr. Speaker, as we move through the 

course of a year, whether or not some of the conditions that are 

involved in the release and some of the conditions that were 

negotiated with those employees are in fact realized. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve indicated that it will take about a year to ensure 

that the entire process is allowed to continue to its end, and in 

the final stages I am prepared to release all of that information 

which will appear in the public accounts documents anyways, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we still don’t know where the buck 

stops when it comes to the Deputy Premier’s purge of lifelong 

civil servants. We know the Deputy Premier went to work 

immediately, canning eight lifelong civil servants, including 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

some who worked and served politicians of every political 

stripe. Then the Deputy Premier threw due process to the wind, 

doing the Premier’s bidding by axing an additional 70 civil 

servants that he claims didn’t fit the Premier’s philosophical 

approach — whatever that means, Mr. Speaker. We know the 

government has more people on their list, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Deputy Premier: how many civil servants has he fired, 

and how many more are at risk to get pink slips? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, since November 8 when I 

was entrusted with moving the transition process forward, we 

have had a process of renewal. We have had the ability and the 

opportunity to look at individuals to ensure that the objectives 

of a new Sask Party government are in fact realized. Mr. 

Speaker, there have been changes made. There have been 

changes that are far fewer — they number less than 100, Mr. 

Speaker — unlike the NDP who did a wholesale change of 

hundreds and hundreds of people in 1991-92. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will continue to be changes. There always 

will be changes, Mr. Speaker, because of retirements, because 

of the fact that there are other individuals who move. The fact, 

Mr. Speaker, is that we’re in the process of debating a budget, 

and in that budget there were changes made to within 

ministries. And within those ministries, Mr. Speaker, there will 

continue to be changes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s commitment to a 

professional public service is evaporating faster than dry ice in 

July. We recently learned that the Premier’s good friend, Ron 

Dedman, is looking after recruitment to the civil service, 

something that used to be done by the Public Service 

Commission. But it seems Mr. Dedman needs to do something 

to earn his $14,000 a month salary, so he ships resumés of 

political allies over to the Public Service Commission for 

consideration. I’ll remind the members opposite that they were 

vehemently opposed to the politicization of the public service 

when they were in opposition, but they seem to have forgotten, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: was it all just an act? Why is it okay for the 

Premier to pay his friend over $170,000 a year to politicize the 

public service? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think there’s one very 

important thing that that member has forgotten about. Mr. 

Speaker, he’s forgotten about what the NDP have done in the 

past. Mr. Speaker, I want to again enter into the record the 

quote from the Leader-Post dated Wednesday, October 23, 

1991, in which then Premier Romanow is quoted as saying this: 

 

He said if they are politically incompatible with an NDP 

administration, “it makes the person not competent to 

carry out the job.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the position taken by the NDP. That was 

the position taken by former Premier Roy Romanow. It is the 

position that that group adheres to, Mr. Speaker. So for him to 

suggest that we cannot make changes to ensure that we have a 

political philosophy that is understood, that we can have people 

that will carry out the objectives, is ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Measures to Assist Low-Income Workers 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the government is continuing 

its attack on the working people by cancelling the 

Saskatchewan workers’ health benefits program, a program that 

was recommended by the commission on vulnerable workers. 

Not content, Mr. Speaker, with the axing of the Station 20 West 

project and the cancellation of the dental sealant program, the 

members opposite made another petty, vindictive cut, this time 

axing a program that helps working people transition from 

social assistance to the labour market. 

 

To the Minister of Labour: the government claims it doesn’t 

have anything against the poor, so how does it explain another 

attack aimed squarely at some of Saskatchewan’s most 

vulnerable workers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the program that the member talks about was a 

program that had very, very little uptake. In fact there were, I 

don’t know, I think there was about maybe 50 or 60 vulnerable 

workers that were on that program. They will see their benefits 

continued, Mr. Speaker. That program has been cut. In other 

words, there is no more money going into it than what is in 

there right now that will continue to see the workers that are 

there being serviced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when it comes to other programs, and we’ve talked about 

them already, there are many challenges left from that former 

government, that NDP government, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

to deal with. We have to deal with many issues as far as 

infrastructure issues and as far as human resources, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve made good decisions for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 



April 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, what about the future of the 

workers in Saskatchewan? That’s what the question here is. Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan workers’ health benefits program is 

designed to help low-income workers access additional health 

services. The program provides drug coverage assistance, eye 

care assistance, and other services to individuals who earn less 

than $21,000 per year. While the members opposite were giving 

$60,000 increases to their friends, they were stealing benefits 

right out of the hands of workers living below the poverty line, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is this type of callousness, it is this type of 

mean-spiritedness, it is unacceptable at any time but especially 

when the government is sitting on a mountain of money. To the 

minister: will the government stop its attack on the poor and 

restore funding to the Saskatchewan workers’ health benefits 

program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, workers 

that were accessing that program will still have those benefits 

covered. It was not taken up. It had a very poor take-up, Mr. 

Speaker. But what I can tell you, for workers around this 

province under a new Saskatchewan Party, there are jobs 

available for all, Mr. Speaker. There are high-paying jobs for 

all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many of those workers that were working for very low wages 

will see opportunities like they’ve never seen before, 

opportunities that they never saw under an NDP government, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the benefits of a strong economy 

will be spread to all including high-paying jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, now that the cabinet has 

declared war on the working poor in Saskatchewan, I’m not 

sure if the Premier feels his job is done, or perhaps there’s 

maybe more. But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem to 

be cutting programs simply because, as mentioned, they are 

NDP programs. Station 20 West, the dental sealant program, 

and now the Saskatchewan workers’ health benefits program 

are three casualties of that vindictive government. 

 

The members opposite, in a vengeful and backward approach to 

politics, seem more interested in trying to hurt the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, than in helping Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable 

citizens. To the Premier: will he stop putting politics, putting 

politics over people, start acting like a premier, and commit to 

doing the right thing for Saskatchewan people? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

more than happy to stand today to answer that member’s 

ridiculous question. We were no sooner elected, Mr. Speaker, 

when, in the city that he lives, we came to an agreement with 

the city council to give increased funding so that they could 

continue to have discounted bus passes. That was to help the 

most needy in the city of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, we just 

recently announced the largest increase ever to the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We just 

announced just last week the largest increase ever to the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement. That’s to help families 

of lower-income individuals to supplement . . . the amount of 

children that they have. It was a substantial increase to help the 

lower-income working people to remain in the workforce. 

That’s because we believe the prosperity of Saskatchewan 

should be shared with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Government Appointments 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been well over 

a month since the Minister of Labour swung his axe squarely at 

the Labour Relations Board. The minister has spent a month 

telling us why the firings . . . or he has spent a month avoiding 

telling us why the firings occurred in the first place. 

 

Can he update the House on the status of the severance 

negotiations with the three members of the Labour Relations 

Board? Can he tell us how much his bungling is going to cost 

the people of our province? And can he assure members of the 

public that the outgoing Labour Relations Board members are 

going to continue to hear and complete their cases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question regarding the Labour Relations Board. Mr. Speaker, 

what we’re happy to say is, obviously under the competent 

leadership of Ken Love things are proceeding nicely. 

 

What we’re doing is holding an open competition for the 

Vice-Chair position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I’ve said before, Mr. Speaker, I’m not prepared to speak 

to the specific cases that the member opposite makes reference 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

to. What we can say is that we had cases going back to 2004, 

2005, 2006, 2007 and, Mr. Speaker, that’s a shameful record, 

Mr. Speaker, that the people of this province ought not to have 

to put up with. And that will be a thing of the past under the 

new leadership of Ken Love. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we do remember how 

that minister was pressured into holding a competition before 

filling the vacant Labour Relations Board Vice-Chair position. 

First he refused to answer the question and then about 24 hours 

later he claimed that it had always been his intention to hold an 

open process. We’re not so sure about that. 

 

But in any case, I’d like today to table the ad the minister 

referred to, advertising the vacant position, as well as the ad that 

was placed two years ago. There are a couple of interesting 

differences. The successful applicant no longer needs any 

litigation experience in labour, nor does he need any or she 

need any training and experience in mediation and conciliation. 

 

Can the minister explain to us why he decided to lower the bar, 

and does he have some candidate in mind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re holding an open competition. We said we 

would do that, Mr. Speaker, and obviously I’m not going to 

comment on the candidates at this time, Mr. Speaker. What we 

can be assured of is that there are qualified, capable candidates 

that will be coming forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

certainly have an interesting selection process when it comes to 

filling vacancies of arm’s-length agencies. When it comes to 

Vice-Chairs, all this minister does is lower the bar, and when it 

comes to Chairs, it seems that he doesn’t like competitions at 

all. 

 

We’ve got Ken Love, who got himself a $180,000 job at the 

LRB [Labour Relations Board] based on his work on his 

government’s transition team and his experience representing 

employers before the board. At the Workers’ Compensation 

Board we’ve got David Eberle, who donated thousands of 

dollars to the Saskatchewan Party and served on the Sask Party 

management committee. 

 

To the minister: why is it that the only things that appear to be 

ready for growth are the pocket books of some Sask Party 

supporters? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. It 

reminds me of a movie called Groundhog Day. I think we’ve 

covered this territory before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we can say, Mr. Speaker, is that obviously 

we’re very pleased with the skill set, with the competence, with 

the capability of Mr. Love and Mr. Eberle as they’re showing 

leadership within those respective organizations, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is Groundhog Day 

because the member opposite obviously hasn’t seen his shadow 

. . . [inaudible] . . . prepared to answer the question. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have documents that I want to table 

today that show that the minister’s hand-picked Workers’ 

Compensation Board Chair will get about $20,000 more than 

the previous Chair and almost $40,000 more than the previous 

Chair started out with in 2001. 

 

So we have the Sask Party appointment of Ken Love. He gets a 

$60,000 raise. Then we have Mr. Eberle. He gets a $20,000 

raise. I guess the question is, why is it that Love gets $40,000 

raise versus the $20,000 raise for Dave Eberle? Does it have 

something to do with Mr. Love’s participation in this shadowy 

transition team process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to 

finally get a question regarding the Workers’ Compensation 

Board. What we can say, Mr. Speaker, is there’s been a surplus 

this year — obviously reinvestments in the Injury Fund, 

Disaster Reserve Fund, Occupational Disease Reserve Fund, 

Second Injury Reserve Fund, Economic Stabilization Reserve. 

 

What we can then turn and say is under the former NDP what 

we saw was the committee of review, they sat on 69 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve seen most 

recently, Mr. Speaker, is the message from the CEO [chief 

executive officer] where increasingly what we’ve seen is the 

current injury rate of 3.8 per cent is the lowest level since 1992. 

That’s the type of questions the member opposite ought to be 



April 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

asking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Commitment to the Environment 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today April 

22 is the 39th annual celebration of Earth Day. Across 

Saskatchewan, across Canada, and around the globe citizens, 

businesses, communities, and governments are taking actions to 

express their commitment to protecting our environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me real satisfaction as this government’s 

first Minister of Environment to stand in the legislature and 

confirm our commitment to the environment. This year we have 

committed an additional $10 million to fund green initiatives in 

Saskatchewan, bringing the total funding to seventeen and a 

half million dollars. This is in keeping with our promise to the 

people of Saskatchewan to more than double the funding for 

green initiatives. 

 

The money will be used to deliver on our commitment to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions in Saskatchewan by 32 per cent by 

the year 2020. It will be used to support innovative technologies 

to reduce greenhouse gas emissions right here in Saskatchewan 

at the Technology Research Centre and the International Test 

Centre for Carbon Dioxide Capture. It will be used to research 

climate change impacts and adaptation on the prairies, research 

that supports the Premier’s commitment to a national strategy 

on climate change adaptation. It will be used to support 

recycling through an increase in funding to SARCAN’s 

beverage container program, an increase that reflects the 

growing participation of Saskatchewan people and the recycling 

programs across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are already seeing this government’s 

commitment to the environment being put into action. Earlier 

this month, we announced a 20 per cent rebate on SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] insurance premiums and 

registration fees for the owners of hybrid and fuel-efficient 

vehicles. This keeps our promise to help Saskatchewan people 

go green on the road. 

 

And we’re leading by example within provincial government. 

The central vehicle agency of the Ministry of Government 

Services has purchased 440 flex-fuel vehicles. In addition all 

vehicle purchases will be hybrid or in the top 20 per cent for 

fuel efficiency in their class. 

 

In addition new buildings are being designed and built to 

comply with a leadership in energy and environmental design, 

or LEED, certification standards. This includes the Regina 

Provincial Correction Centre, the Saskatchewan Disease 

Control Laboratory, and new courthouses in both La Ronge and 

Meadow Lake. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we celebrate Earth Day on April 22 each 

year, what we are all really talking about are the choices that we 

make each day, and the impact those choices have on the 

environment. Our government is committed to making sure 

people of Saskatchewan have the support they need to make the 

choices that count. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 

minister for getting me this statement. I appreciate that. But I 

also want to recognize, that this isn’t truly a ministerial 

statement; however I will make a response. 

 

Earth Day is very important, Mr. Speaker. It’s an occasion to 

reflect on the current situation and to recommit to addressing 

the issues facing our environment. Mr. Speaker, it might make 

the minister feel better to stand up and take credit for the many 

initiatives that had their beginnings under the NDP government, 

but the Sask Party’s record tells a different story than the 

minister does. 

 

They question the science on climate change, and there are 

many quotes to substantiate that. They cut the green initiatives 

fund from $320 million to a $40 million commitment on their 

behalf. They abolished the Office of Energy Conservation. 

They also abolished the office of climate change secretariat. 

 

The minister went for a jaunt to Australia instead of dealing 

with a report by Environmental Defence that Saskatchewan is 

bearing the brunt of air emissions as a result of oil sands 

development in Alberta despite . . . a development 

Environmental Defence calls, “the most destructive project on 

earth.” 

 

The science is clear on this, Mr. Speaker, and in case the Sask 

Party is confused on that, they simply need to refer to the quotes 

of their members. In spite of all the NDP programs that the 

minister has just mentioned — that the Sask Party has not yet 

been able to cut — the minister and her party still have no issue 

on the credibility of the environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill 15 without amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh I’m 

sorry. I request leave to waive consideration in Committee of 

the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill now be read for the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 15, The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I now 

move that this Bill be read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 15, The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 be passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 4 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 4, 

The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed 

Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007/Loi 

de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative 

et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 4, The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 30 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 



April 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 30, 

The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 30, The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 11 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 11, 

The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2008 and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 2002 

sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 11, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now the third time and passed under 

its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 20 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Justice has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 20, The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2008 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Administration of Estates 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la 

Loi sur l’administration des successions 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 20, The Administration of Estates Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 12 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 12, 

The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 12, The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise today on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of 

Finance, and move second reading of Bill 35, An Act to amend 

The Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during last fall’s election, our government made a 

number of commitments to Saskatchewan people. Our budget, 

delivered on March 19, fulfilled over 40 of those commitments, 

Mr. Speaker. This Bill will enable the implementation of three 

of those key initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made a promise in our 2007 election platform 

to double the personal income tax credit for caregivers. This tax 

credit will help families caring for elderly parents and adult 

disabled children living at home. Our budget not only doubled 

the amount of the caregiver tax credit but also, Mr. Speaker, 

enhanced the other disability . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill doubles the caregiver tax credit amount to 

$8,190 for the 2008 taxation year. The infirm dependent tax 

credit amount is also doubled to $8,190. In addition, Mr. 

Speaker, the disability tax credit and the supplement to that 

credit for individuals under 18 are both increased again to 

$8,190. 

 

These increases ensure Saskatchewan people living with severe 

and prolonged disabilities and those who are supporting elderly 

or disabled relatives are better able to deal with the costs 

associated with their care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our 2007 election platform also included a key 

commitment to give families with young children a tax break on 

children’s activities. Our budget, Mr. Speaker, delivered on this 

commitment with the introduction of the active family benefits 

starting in 2009. Mr. Speaker, for parents of children between 

the ages of 6 and 14 years of age, the active family benefits will 

rebate up to $150 per child for cultural, recreational, and sport 

activity fees. 

 

You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the active families benefit 



April 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

was introduced in a Bill tabled by my colleague, the Hon. 

Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. That Bill set out 

the eligibility criteria for the new benefit. Amendments to The 

Income Tax Act, 2000 will allow the active family benefits to 

be administered through the provincial income tax system as a 

refundable tax credit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, we made a commitment to Saskatchewan 

graduates to introduce the most aggressive graduate retention 

program in the country, Mr. Speaker. This year’s budget 

delivered on this commitment by introducing the graduate 

retention program to provide tuition fee rebates to our 

post-secondary graduates beginning January 1, 2008. This new 

program replaces the previous graduate tax exemption. Mr. 

Speaker, the graduate retention program will rebate up to 

$20,000 in tuition paid by graduates of Saskatchewan 

post-secondary institutions. To fully qualify for a tuition rebate, 

graduates must remain in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for seven 

years after graduation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the graduate retention program was introduced in 

a Bill tabled by my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. That Bill sets out the 

eligibility criteria for the new tuition rebate program. Mr. 

Speaker, amendments to The Income Tax Act, 2000 will allow 

the tuition rebates to be paid through the provincial income tax 

system as a refundable tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister will be pleased to answer 

questions concerning the amendments to The Income Tax Act, 

2000 when discussing the Bill during committee review. Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of the Act to amend The 

Income Tax Act, 2000. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Corporations has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 35, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to enter into debate about this 

very important Bill. As the member has indicated, this Bill puts 

into place their commitments during the last provincial election 

and their commitments, yes, of this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It does a number of things, including putting in place increased 

credits for disability assistance, Mr. Speaker, for those who are 

providing assistance for those with disabilities. It also puts in 

place two new programs that they have put forward in their 

platform, their graduate retention program, and the 

Saskatchewan active families benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those particular new benefits to Saskatchewan families are 

contained in this particular piece of legislation, as well as 

individual pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. But at this time 

because of the nature of this particular Bill and our need to 

consult with stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, I would move we 

adjourn debate. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it 

is a pleasure to rise today on behalf of my colleague, the 

Minister of Finance, to move second reading of The Corporate 

Capital Tax Act, Bill No. 38. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to declare that this Act will be treated 

as a confidence vote. Mr. Speaker, the government is 

introducing an amendment to The Corporation Capital Tax Act 

to increase the threshold amount for small financial institutions 

in order to maintain their eligibility for lower corporate capital 

tax rates. The threshold amount is being increased, Mr. Speaker, 

from 1 billion to $1.5 billion of aggregate taxable paid up 

capital, effective for fiscal years ending on or after October 31, 

2008, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increasing the threshold will encourage small 

financial institutions to continue to expand and provide quality 

financial services in Saskatchewan. In turn, Mr. Speaker, the 

financial services offered by these institutions will encourage 

small business to expand and be a part of the growing economy 

that we enjoy today, both now and well into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move today second reading of The 

Corporate Capital Tax Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Corporations has 

moved that Bill No. 38, The Corporate Capital Tax be read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

very small Bill that deals with a very particular problem, one 

that helps smaller financial institutions in our province. Mr. 

Speaker, in fact, this particular Bill, as I would understand the 

situation in our province, helps a single financial institution, 

Mr. Speaker, a smaller institution that has difficulty being 

competitive against the larger financial institutions in our 

province and perhaps in other parts of the country as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There is some concern about this enhancement and its ability to 

help this particular financial institution, Mr. Speaker. We need 

to check with individuals from that institution and clarify facts 

around this particular change, Mr. Speaker, so at this time I’d 

move we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 24, The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be read a second 

time. 

 

Through the amendments to our legislation today, we are 

providing flexibility in the number of vice-chairpersons 

appointed to the Labour Relations Board. Specifically we are 

proposing an amendment to subsection (1) to provide for the 

appointment of not more than two Vice-Chairs to the Labour 

Relations Board. This change means that we are able to have 

one vice-chairperson on the Labour Relations Board, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is strongly committed to ensuring 

that the Labour Relations Board delivers timely, responsive, 

and effective services to Saskatchewan’s labour relations 

community. In stark contrast to the glut of cases that were 

allowed to linger recently at the LRB under the previous 

government, our government is focused on improving service at 

the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that believes in finding new, 

innovative, and efficient ways to accomplish our goals in a 

manner that will benefit this province not just today but in years 

to come. Permitting flexibility in the number of Vice-Chairs to 

the Labour Relations Board is yet another example of how this 

government is moving forward on an agenda that we feel is 

about serving the people of this province. 

 

Today’s amendment reinforces our commitment to this 

province and to ensure that we keep our promise to help foster a 

fair and balanced labour environment in Saskatchewan. We are 

working to promote co-operative and productive work 

environments for employers and employees while ensuring that 

Saskatchewan is competitive with other Canadian jurisdictions. 

 

Our focus is on enhancing the service delivery of the Labour 

Relations Board, and I believe that today’s amendment to The 

Trade Union Act will be a simple but important part of this 

process. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

Bill 24, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has moved second reading 

of Bill No. 24, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the Sask 

Party was in opposition, on a number of occasions they 

complained about the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board, 

and they said that the Labour Relations Board was unfairly 

biased against business, despite the fact that former Chief 

Justice Frank Gerein concluded that there was, and I quote, “no 

evidence” to, and I quote: 

 

. . . to conclude that bias exists within the Saskatchewan 

Labour Relations Board or that there is justification for a 

reasonable apprehension of bias. 

 

To conclude otherwise, this court would be acting on pure 

conjecture or fantasy. That is not good enough. 

 

Now this is a quote from former Chief Justice Gerein when 

people took a decision from the Labour Relations Board to the 

court and he concluded that there was absolutely no evidence of 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask members, if you have 

personal discussions, if at all possible to either tone it down or 

actually behind the House would be greatly appreciated in order 

to hear the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

raised the spectre of political interference in 2006 when one of 

two Labour Relations Board Vice-Chairs’ terms was not 

renewed upon expiry. They alleged that this Vice-Chair’s term 

was not renewed because the NDP and labour saw this person 

as too, and I quote, “ pro-business.” That being said, at no point 

leading up to and including the election did the Sask Party 

mention any changes to the Labour Relations Board. 

 

The Sask Party was elected on November 7, 2007, and in their 

very first legislative session one month later they introduced 

Bills 5 and 6 to bring balance, and I quote, “balance to 

Saskatchewan’s labour environment.” Bill 5 is essential service, 

though the Sask Party had told reporters in the days leading up 

to the election that this would not be legislated, and Bill 6 

includes a number of amendments to The Trade Union Act, and 

both Bills, no doubt, Mr. Speaker, should see passage during 

this sitting of the legislature. 

 

On March 6, reports surfaced that in the middle of a Labour 

Relations Board hearing, the Chair and the two Vice-Chairs of 

the Labour Relations Board were fired. One Vice-Chair read 

into the hearing’s proceedings the letter received from the 

Justice officials on her firing. 

 

In the weeks that followed, there has been a lot of confusion as 

to how cases currently incomplete before the board will 

eventually be settled. The government initially claimed that the 

outgoing members were instructed to continue on with their 

current cases but not to start any new ones. But there have been 

conflicting stories and opinions as to whether these members 

have any legal authority or obligation to do so. As of now I 

believe this matter is unresolved. We’ve tried to get answers 

from the minister in question period, and this minister is not 

forthcoming at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the day of the firings, the Minister of Labour wasn’t able to 

comment. The government’s executive director of 

communications denied any political moves for the firings. That 

person did confirm that the firings were without cause, and that 

person assured the public the following day, a new Chair would 

be announced. She went on to say that the new Chair would be, 

and I quote, “. . . someone with a great reputation who’s been 



April 22, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

around on both sides of the labour equation . . .” 

 

The following day the minister did reveal the name of the new 

Chair, a man by the name of Mr. Love. He’d been hired without 

an open selection process. And since 1997 it’s been the practice 

to hire Vice-Chairs based upon an open competition through the 

Public Service Commission — which I note this existing 

competition, that the minister referred to in question period, is 

not through the Public Service Commission; it’s through his 

department — and for the Chair position to be filled by 

promoting someone who served as the Vice-Chair when there’s 

a vacancy. 

 

The government news release regarding Mr. Love provided 

some information on his professional credentials. However the 

news release failed to mention that he was a long-time 

Saskatchewan Party and Conservative Party supporter and a 

lawyer. And in a media scrum, the minister admitted, and I 

quote, “that there has been a connection to the party.” 

 

Now government spokespeople have since confirmed that, 

contrary to the earlier statement, Mr. Love has almost 

exclusively been a management lawyer and that the only times 

he represented workers has been when they’re trying to 

decertify, Mr. Speaker. In the following days, it’s been noted 

that the new Chair will be earning a salary $60,000 higher than 

the outgoing Chair who’d been on the board for a number of 

years, and may I say, Mr. Speaker, had significant experience as 

a management or an employer lawyer before he was appointed 

as Vice-Chair of the board, and he went through a competitive 

process. 

 

The minister has consistently refused to answer why the firings 

took place, other than to point to renewal and the normal course 

of events following changes in government. The Premier has 

stated that he wants, and I quote, “. . . Labour Relations . . . 

members [who] will consider what the government has said 

publicly in opposition and in government, that . . . we seek a 

balance . . .” 

 

The Deputy Premier, who is the head of the government’s 

transition team, has similarly stated, and I quote, “We need to 

be assured that the objectives of the Saskatchewan Party 

government are going to be in line with the people that are 

working.” And I presume he means on tribunals. 

 

It’s later been revealed that Mr. Love had in fact done work for 

the Deputy Premier in relation to the government’s transition 

team. And the transition team was, of course, the body which 

interviewed the outgoing Labour Relations Chair and suggested 

his replacement. The Deputy Premier has claimed that Mr. 

Love, in his duties related to transition, had nothing to do with 

the Labour Relations Board or his own nomination as Chair. 

 

It’s been interesting to note that the transition team has been 

largely headed up by a man by the name of Doug Emsley. Mr. 

Emsley was the one who spoke to the three Labour Relations 

Board members prior to the termination. And it’s been revealed 

since that time that he had previous interaction with the Labour 

Relations Board as his company, Vision Security, had lost 

several cases before the board. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Association of Labour 

Lawyers has released an open letter to the minister claiming, 

among other statements that, and I quote: 

 

The recent actions of the government have not only called 

into question the independence and integrity of the Labour 

Relations Board, but [it’s] . . . raised the spectre [the 

spectre, Mr. Speaker] of political interference in the 

workings of the tribunal essential to maintaining legal 

rights in the workplace . . . 

 

The government . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Can you spell spectre? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, I can spell spectre. I absolutely can. And 

I can also spell stunningly incompetent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the government has now 

indicated that rather than hiring two Vice-Chairs, the size of the 

board is going to be reduced to one, Mr. Speaker. Now this was 

to cover their increase in the salary for Mr. Love by some 

$60,000. And the minister . . . [inaudible] . . . that, well we’re 

reducing the cost because we’re only going to have the Chair 

and the Vice-Chair; at the same time, we’re going to speed up 

work. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister is introducing an amendment to 

The Trade Union Act, which will now allow the Labour 

Relations Board to have up to two Vice-Chairs. And this is how 

he covers himself, I guess, in terms of his misspeaking in the 

last few months. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we note with interest that there is now an ad 

in the Regina Leader-Post calling for people to apply for this 

new Vice-Chair’s position. And what’s so curious about the ad 

is that it makes no reference to having any kind of experience in 

terms of labour relations. I mean, you should have some 

knowledge. But knowledge is different, as we all know, from 

experience, Mr. Speaker. And it also makes no reference to 

having any experience in terms of mediation and conciliation, 

understanding labour relations. There’s nothing like that. So we 

really do question whether the minister has someone in mind. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now in the past when these administrative tribunals ran 

advertisements, the Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board, 

resumés and letters were sent to the Public Service 

Commission. And I note this time that it’s being sent to the 

Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

And one really does need to understand whether or not this is a 

Public Service Commission process or is this going to be the 

minister deciding who’s going to be chosen for this new 

position, Mr. Speaker. I suspect the latter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a number of consultations that we want to undertake 

regarding this particular amendment to The Trade Union Act 

and so, Mr. Speaker, what I would ask is to adjourn this 

particular debate at the moment in order that the opposition can 

do its proper consultations. 

 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2008 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of the debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

accommodate the good work of the committees, I move that this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy House Leader has moved this 

House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

to facilitate the work of committees until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:46.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1045 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1045 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1045 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1045 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1045 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Earth Day Celebrations 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1045 

 A Memorable Earth Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1046 

 Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1046 

 Women in Politics 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1046 

 King George Community School’s Outstanding Reading Program 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1047 

 Celebrating Sexual Diversity 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1047 

 Drawing the Line Against Sexual Assault 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1047 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Sources of Electricity Generation 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1048 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1048 

 Personnel Changes in the Public Service 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1049 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1049 

 Measures to Assist Low-Income Workers 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1050 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1050 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1051 

 Government Appointments 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1051 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1051 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Commitment to the Environment 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1053 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1053 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1053 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 15 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1054 

 Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 

 Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1054 

 Bill No. 30 — The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1055 

 Bill No. 11 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1055 

 Bill No. 20 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi sur l’administration des successions 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1055 

 Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1056 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 35 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1056 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1057 

 Bill No. 38 — The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1057 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1057 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1058 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1058 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


