




















































Hansard: October 30, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1467 

 October 30, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to the other members of the Legislative 

Assembly, it is my pleasure to introduce a special guest seated 

in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, joining us today and spending the 

day with me here at the legislature is Rita Hallberg. Rita, can 

you give a wave and stand up? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Rita and her husband Dennis live in Weyburn, and 

they‟ve been married for 58 years. Rita is a very strong 

supporter, a great supporter during our campaigns, one of our 

best door knockers. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there is a funny story 

about Rita outrunning a dog that was chasing her one afternoon, 

Mr. Speaker. She‟s a shirttail relative actually, and a very 

humorous person. And I‟m looking forward to spending the day 

with her, and I would ask all members to welcome her to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you several leaders 

from Saskatchewan‟s business community who are in 

attendance today seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Mike 

Wainwright and Steve McLellan of the Saskatchewan Chamber 

of Commerce; Jenn Nelson of the Regina Regional Economic 

Development Association; Doug Folk of the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association; Marilyn Braun-Pollon, CFIB 

[Canadian Federation of Independent Business], Pam Schwann 

of the Saskatchewan Mining Association; Doug Simon, Brandt 

Industries; Gary Mearns and Larissa Dagnone from the 

Federated Co-Op. 

 

These individuals are symbolic of the thousands of employers 

across our great province who, like their employees, are at the 

forefront of the wave of economic momentum we see taking 

place across Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask all members to 

join me in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition, I would like to join with the minister in welcoming 

the representatives from various business sectors. I hope they 

have an enjoyable day in the legislature and that their meetings 

are productive. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the legislature this morning, I‟d 

like to introduce three individuals in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

who are here representing the Road Builders and Heavy 

Construction Association of Saskatchewan. Joining us today are 

Shantel Lipp who is the president of the Road Builders 

Association, first vice-chairman, Ron Smith, and with him is 

Jim Short, the past chairman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals are here to witness the 

announcement that we‟ll be making about the tender release 

that‟s coming up very shortly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Once again I rise in support of a petition for 

public safety and security in Saskatchewan. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders — including the 

policing community, the corrections community, 

community agencies, and organizations and educators that 

interface with gangs — so that he might understand the 

risks and challenges that gangs offer to our communities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of Station 20, an important project 

in Saskatoon. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition, some are 

from my constituency, Saskatoon Massey Place, and other 

individuals are from across Saskatoon, from both sides of the 



1468 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

river. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property taxes. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks in Regina and 

concerned citizens of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Autism Spectrum Disorder Services 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to be able to provide my fellow members with an 

update on what our government is doing to address autism 

spectrum disorder, or ASD. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one in every 166 children born in Saskatchewan is 

eventually diagnosed with ASD. For years parents have told us 

how difficult it is to get effective autism treatment. Mr. 

Speaker, these voices have been heard. Our government is 

taking action to improve autism services for children in the 

province. We commit to provide $3 million annually for autism 

services. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we have the framework and action plan 

for autism spectrum disorders services in Saskatchewan, 

coming from the work of the provincial autism advisory 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our action plan will see 15 ASD consultants 

throughout the province acting as the first point of contact for 

families seeking ASD services. These consultants will design 

individualized intervention programs for their clients and act as 

case managers. They will make sure that children with ASD get 

the right services from the right service providers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this plan is an ambitious undertaking. It‟s not a 

quick fix and we won‟t change the system overnight, but with 

the help of the committee — and we thank the members of the 

committee for their service — we are headed in the right 

direction. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Saskatoon Homeless Count 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve 

been hearing a lot in the news lately about homelessness in our 

communities, especially with winter knocking at our door. 

 

One group decided to find out more about this in Saskatoon. On 

May 22, Community-University Institute for Social Research, 

CUISR, conducted the first ever count of the homeless in our 

city. Tackling a very difficult issue with an even more difficult 

challenge, CUISR released its findings during National 

Anti-poverty Week. 

 

A total of 260 people — 228 adults and 32 children — were 

counted as being homeless on the night of May 22, 2008. Of 

those, 199 people — 169 adults and 30 children — were housed 

by service providers, emergency shelters, and transitional 

housing; and 48 people — 46 adults and 2 children — were 

counted outdoors. 

 

Most respondents wanted help finding housing and reported 

they were not currently receiving help from housing, health, or 

justice providers. Perceived housing affordability and 

availability were the key barriers to finding housing. Also of 

interest was that nearly 70 per cent of those in shelters were 

employed, with most working full-time. 

 

Many volunteers helped out on this survey, believing that 

knowledge is power and knowing the facts will help us all make 

better decisions. CUISR is planning further research in this 

area, particularly in the hidden homelessness area, which many 

think particularly relevant to Saskatchewan and our climate. 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s all renew our commitment and work towards 

the day no one is homeless in our community. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Housing Co-operative Celebrates 25 Years 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

recognize the residents of Crestview Manor who, along with 

their friends and families, celebrated 25 years of co-operative 

housing in Moose Jaw last Saturday. The celebration included 

greetings from dignitaries and entertainment by Brett Young, a 

grandson of one of the residents. Special tribute was made to 

Gladys McKenzie, Char Ayers, and Hazel Powell, who are 

original residents of Crestview Manor. 

 

The idea of co-operatives is a Saskatchewan tradition where 

people with common interests work toward a common 

objective. This was the concept in 1981 with an idea to 

construct an affordable housing development that would be 

available for superannuated teachers of Moose Jaw for 

retirement living. The Crestview Manor Housing Co-op was 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1469 

formed, and Crestview Manor opened its doors in 1983 with 63 

residents made up of superannuated teachers and other 

retirement area residents applying for quality housing in 

relaxing accommodations. 

 

Even after 25 years, Crestview Manor is a comfortable, modern 

residence overlooking the Hillcrest golf course where residents 

can enjoy the scenery of all four seasons of the year. The 

complex operates with a number of volunteers who take care of 

the maintenance, the social activities, finance, and membership 

under the board chairman of George Axon. Any of the residents 

would be pleased to tell you that the quality of life they enjoy is 

very well received in this well-situated and well-maintained 

facility. Congratulations to all of the residents of Crestview 

Manor and best wishes for many years of health and happiness. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Congratulations to Wapos Bay and Raven Brass 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 

the made-in-Saskatoon series Wapos Bay for winning a Gemini 

Award last week for its vocal talent. Winning Best Individual or 

Ensemble Performance in an Animated Program or Series were 

Gordon Tootoosis, Raven Brass, Trevor Cameron, Lorne 

Cardinal, Taylor Cook, Eric Jackson, Andrea Menard, and 

DerRic Starlight, for the episode “The Guardians.” Great talents 

all of them, Mr. Speaker, but I want to draw special attention to 

one Ms. Raven Brass. 

 

Raven Brass is 15 years old. She‟s in grade 10 at Tommy 

Douglas high school in Saskatoon and has been part of the cast 

of Wapos Bay since she was in grade 6. Raven went out to the 

auditions for Wapos and it‟s like it was meant to be. The name 

of the role she won was Raven. When she‟s not working on 

Wapos with the likes of Gordon Tootoosis and Andrea Menard, 

Raven is a very busy teenager. She‟s done some boxing, played 

football, and works at Mariposa. She‟s got an impressive arts 

resumé, having taken ballet at five, attending several theatre 

camps at the Saskatchewan Native Theatre Company, and has 

been a cast member of Saskatchewan Express for three seasons. 

 

And I know as well that Raven comes from a First Nations 

family that is very strong in First Nations tradition and culture. 

She‟s a good daughter. In a story from The StarPhoenix in the 

lead-up to the Gemini win, Raven‟s dad, Mervin Brass, had this 

to say, “„Raven is such a good kid . . . She helps me at home 

. . .‟” And on the Gemini he had this to say, “„This is a 

once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for my daughter. A lot of 

aboriginal kids don‟t get a chance like this . . .‟” 

 

Well Mervin and Raven‟s mom, Faye Whitequill, were on hand 

when Raven and the rest of the cast from Wapos won the 

Gemini, and I know they are very proud of their daughter. I 

know Raven‟s mushum and kokum are very proud, as is the 

whole family. 

 

And I want to let Raven know, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 

myself and her home MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], the member for Saskatoon Fairview, and for the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, that we are all very proud 

of her. Again congratulations, Raven. Ēkosi, megweech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Seniors’ Income Plan 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in replying to the 

Minister of Social Services‟ announcement concerning changes 

to the seniors‟ income plan, the member for Saskatoon Centre 

made some remarks that suggest he isn‟t really aware of how 

the program operates. And I thought it important to bring him 

up to speed. 

 

The member opposite might also have learned the details of the 

program by asking one of several NDP [New Democratic Party] 

former Social Services ministers, including the member from 

Riversdale. It is not surprising since they have ignored the 

program for 16 years. 

 

The member opposite suggested that the increase would be 

merely clawed back through rent increases within seniors‟ 

housing managed by the Sask Housing Corporation. Mr. 

Speaker, as the member opposite would have been able to know 

with a simple call or a look at relevant material, is that the 

benefit senior receives under seniors‟ income plan is not 

included in the income calculation used for setting the rental 

rates for seniors. Mr. Speaker, the member went on to suggest 

that the benefit be indexed to the cost of living. Had we done 

that, the increase would have been 40 per cent. We thought 111 

per cent would be better. 

 

The member yesterday said he wasn‟t sure that this was well 

thought out. Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that these changes 

have been thought out and, perhaps more importantly, seniors 

of the province thought of. Who is taking care of the citizens? 

Our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Saskatoon Young Men’s Christian Association Anniversary 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to stand today and 

extend my congratulations to the Saskatoon YMCA [Young 

Men‟s Christian Association] on its 100-year anniversary. Last 

Friday I, along with the member from Saskatoon Centre, had 

the opportunity to attend the YMCA‟s 100-year gala at TCU 

Place. The dress code was business attire, but the mood of the 

evening was kept light as attendees were invited to wear their 

running shoes — a hat tip I suppose to the influence the YMCA 

has had in helping people stay active over the past century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the YMCA plays a very important role in 

Saskatoon. Each year over 6,000 citizens access services 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

offered by the YMCA. These services range from child care, 

summer camp programs, and year-round fitness activities. But, 

Mr. Speaker, the YMCA is about so much more than simply 

keeping people fit and helping make the summers more 

enjoyable for youth. The YMCA is about building community. 

It‟s about making our city a better place to live. 

 

This invaluable role was evident to me through hearing from 

the people who attended the event. People genuinely spoke 

about how the Y helped them as a youth or how it provides the 

current friendships that make life enjoyable. Through stories 

and conversation, it was clear to me that friendships and 

community are central to everything that occurs at the YMCA. 

Members shared how they are encouraged by fellow members 

to not miss their regularly scheduled workouts. That‟s the type 

of encouragement we all need and appreciate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the Saskatoon YMCA for 100 years of making a 

difference in Saskatoon and also join me in wishing them all the 

best in the next 100. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Leadership Candidate 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see that the 

member for Regina Dewdney has fulfilled his duty. He has 

lined up the required number of supportive NDP MLAs that the 

Alberta oil executive, Dwain Lingenfelter, demanded. The 

member for Athabasca says that he supports Mr. Lingenfelter 

because he has experience diversifying the economy. He sure 

does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He diversified our economy with Channel Lake. That lost 

millions of taxpayers‟ dollars. He diversified our economy with 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company]. That lost millions of taxpayers‟ dollars. In the five 

years that Dwain Lingenfelter was deputy premier, 

Saskatchewan‟s economy was pretty much stagnant. We were 

losing jobs; we were losing people. In fact during his tenure, 

nearly 20,000 people left Saskatchewan. Dwain Lingenfelter‟s 

record is so bad that even he quit our province and moved to 

Alberta. 

 

And now that things are going great, the NDP are begging for 

him to come back. And why — so he can mess it up all over 

again? Mr. Speaker, the NDP is stuck in the past, and Dwain 

Lingenfelter is just more of the same. The people of 

Saskatchewan have seen this movie before. They didn‟t like it 

then, and they have no interest in the sequel. While we now 

have a province, a government, and a Premier all looking 

towards the future, the NDP is all lining up behind yesterday‟s 

man. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it seems there‟s an awful lot 

going on in Corrections, Public Safety and Policing that the 

minister doesn‟t know. We learned last week that he didn‟t 

know that dangerous criminals were being wrongfully released. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we have learned that the minister didn‟t 

know for 11 days that a prisoner has been wrongfully 

imprisoned for an additional 6 months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a very simple question to the minister: what 

exactly does he know about what‟s going on within his 

department? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the member opposite for that question. I‟ll get to that question 

in a moment. But before I begin I want to offer a very heartfelt, 

sincere apology to Mr. Dufresne on behalf of the province of 

Saskatchewan. This is a very unfortunate incident, situation that 

occurred with him and it‟s one that never should have 

happened, Mr. Speaker. The province of Saskatchewan will 

look into this through the review being conducted, and the 

ministry officials will provide answers, Mr. Speaker, to Mr. 

Dufresne and to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now on to the member from Regina Dewdney‟s question. 

When we have a situation like this, Mr. Speaker, the morning 

after Mr. Dufresne was released from the Saskatoon 

Correctional Centre, officials began an internal review, as is 

policy, Mr. Speaker. They are conducting a review, getting to 

the bottom of what happened. I was notified on Monday, Mr. 

Speaker, because this individual posed no risk to the public. 

That‟s the way that things are supposed to operate, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of bluster 

coming from over there. And we all know why people bluster 

— it‟s to cover up when they don‟t know something. Mr. 

Speaker, is this minister who didn‟t know that there was a gang 

problem in Saskatchewan jails despite numerous reports, his 

own job description from the Premier, and his own party‟s 

platform? Is this the minister who doesn‟t know why his own 

policy failed and doesn‟t know if it was ever communicated to 

front-line workers in his ministry? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when will he have answers to at 

least some of the questions we‟ve asked this week? Or is that 

yet another thing that he doesn‟t know? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the member opposite for that question. One thing I want to 

make perfectly clear is, this government inherited a system of 

problems, Mr. Speaker, that we now have to deal with — in 

various ministries as well as my own, Mr. Speaker, in 

Corrections. 

 

I will tell you the difference between this government and that 

government, Mr. Speaker, is we have no problem in being open 

and transparent in how we do our business, Mr. Speaker. 

Reviews are being conducted into all the serious situations since 

August, Mr. Speaker. I will await for the recommendations 

from those reviews and investigations before I make any 

comment at all, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Cost of Living 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

the Minister of Social Services announced an increase to the 

seniors‟ income plan and this of course was welcome news. But 

seniors know, Mr. Speaker, that the government often gives 

with one hand and picks their pockets with the other. Yesterday 

I asked if the benefit increases will be clawed back in the form 

of rent increases for seniors in Saskatchewan housing units, and 

the minister was unable to answer. Now a source in today‟s 

Leader-Post suggests they will not be — and of course we‟ve 

heard from the back bench on this — but I would like to get the 

minister officially on record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social Services: will she stand 

and guarantee that her increases to the seniors‟ income plan will 

not be clawed back for seniors living in Saskatchewan housing 

units? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I‟m more 

than happy to stand and answer that question. But first I would 

like to clarify, the member opposite did not ask the question 

yesterday, so I did not have the opportunity to answer it. 

However, no, it is not clawed back. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now yesterday a 

representative of the Saskatchewan Federation of Union 

Retirees put it best in a media scrum about this seniors‟ income 

plan when she asked, and I will quote, “Are people going to see 

real dollar increases in their pockets?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, rents in this province are skyrocketing. 

SaskEnergy rates are rising by 20 per cent. SaskPower rates are 

going up in the near future, and we have yet to see any action 

on the education property tax relief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: given the historic surplus this 

government now enjoys, will she guarantee seniors today will 

see real dollar increases in their pockets and not see this money 

swallowed up by the cost of living? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I have 

told this House and what I‟m very proud that our government‟s 

been able to do is to stop 16 years of neglect to the seniors of 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — For 16 years, inflation, the cost of 

living has gone up 40 per cent in those 16 years. And did that 

government or NDP when they were in government even look 

at it? They didn‟t give the seniors one red cent. Is this going to 

be in their pocket? Yes, Mr. Speaker, it will be in their pocket. 

It will be delivered in the same mechanism that it‟s been 

delivered in the past. They don‟t even have to apply. It will be a 

cheque that they will receive in the mail, and it will be $110 

over and above what they gave the seniors when they were 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course we could 

talk a lot about the things we‟ve done. The universal drug plan 

would be one example. But one way to guarantee that this 

money won‟t be eaten up by utility rate increases and rising 

house costs or the rising costs of prescription drug plans would 

be through indexation. Mr. Speaker, the federal government 

provides regular increases to the guaranteed income 

supplement, or GIS, intended to address the rising cost of 

living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will she commit here today to the 

indexing of the seniors‟ income plan, or SIP, to the cost of 

living? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sixteen 

years of neglect meant that the cost of living went up 40 per 

cent. We decided to give them 110 per cent, Mr. Speaker, which 

is quite considerably better than zero per cent, which is what 

they received for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what does that member 

not understand? We have indexed the shelter allowance for our 

clients. We have indexed the rental supplement. That is 

unprecedented in this country. The NDP, when they were 

government, indexed absolutely nothing for those that are most 

vulnerable in our society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course this 

government has used a small portion of its historic surplus to 

index certain benefits. We agree with that. But of course, 

considering the size of their surplus, that is as it should be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another group of Saskatchewan people who are 

struggling to keep pace with the rising costs of living are 

workers earning minimum wage. Those workers experience the 

same . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you. These workers are experiencing the 

same utility rate increases, the same rent increases, the same 

inflationary pressures as anyone else, and they deserve a 

government who will ensure that they are able to live their lives 

in security and with dignity. 

 

To the minister: will he commit today to indexing 

Saskatchewan‟s minimum wage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 

member opposite forgot, but earlier this year we substantially 

increased the Saskatchewan employment supplement, which 

goes to those individuals who are at a lower wage. And many of 

them, Mr. Speaker, are single parents. We also — because the 

working, low-income individuals qualify for the rental 

supplement — well gee, Mr. Speaker, we increased it and we 

indexed it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Political Advertising and Government Advertising 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party made a 

commitment in its 2007 election platform that government 

advertising would be, and I quote, “. . . have to be non-partisan 

and intended only to inform the public about programs and 

services for the public benefit of Saskatchewan people . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan citizens are now being mailed a 

leaflet extolling the virtues of the Sask Party government and 

directing people who want more information to the Government 

of Saskatchewan website. Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: who 

paid for the leaflet and how much did it cost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the hon. member is referring to a card 

that has been sent to every person in the province of 

Saskatchewan, highlighting some important information. 

Highlighting the fact that this government last week introduced 

the single largest tax cut in the history of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. Highlighting the fact that in our first year 40 per cent 

of the debt will be reduced in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

Highlighting the fact that there will be a half billion more in 

infrastructure in next year‟s budget, and then inviting people to 

respond to a website if they have questions about other 

government services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was paid for by MLA communications 

expenses. I would expect it‟s the same sort of budget that paid 

for a similar piece from members opposite that, Mr. Speaker, 

spends time running down what‟s the prosperity of the province 

of Saskatchewan. It‟s got a picture of a very sad baby on the 

front, and it says, “Boom times?” And those NDP MLAs spent 

their taxpayers‟ money telling people how bad Saskatchewan is. 

We‟re going to tell people something a little bit different and 

also inviting them to respond to this card if they need more 

information about government services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have said 

that they want clear lines between political advertising and 

government advertising, but here we have a leaflet that clearly 

blurs the line. The leaflet uses government language and directs 

people to the Government of Saskatchewan website which is 

paid for, Mr. Speaker, by all Saskatchewan taxpayers. Yet the 

leaflet is clearly partisan and was paid for by the Sask Party 

caucus dollars. Why are they wilfully attempting to blur the 

lines between the Sask Party and the Government of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what is blurring the lines in 

the province of Saskatchewan is the fact that those NDP MLAs 

opposite use their allowances, use their communications 

allowance not to invite people to request information about 

government services, not to phone their offices in the event that 

they needed their help to deal with government issues, but to 

run down the prosperity that‟s going on in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to minimize the great momentum that we have 

going on in Saskatchewan. 

 

This card did go out right across the province. MLAs from our 

side of the House decided it was important that Saskatchewan 

people knew about the priorities of their government for debt 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

reduction, for infrastructure investment, for historic tax cuts, 

and for important programs and initiatives such has been 

announced by the Minister of Social Services. And if they‟d 

like more information about that plan — our plan for 

Saskatchewan — they need only go to the website which is also 

listed on the card, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

were so interested in providing information to Saskatchewan 

citizens that they used Sask Party colours, Sask Party photo of 

the Premier‟s face used in the last election campaign. And 

nowhere is there Sask Party MLA phone numbers, which I do 

notice on the back of the NDP MLAs‟ leaflet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just days after their most recent Throne Speech, 

where they clearly said that they wanted to ensure that there 

were clear lines between government resources and partisan 

resources, we see a Government of Saskatchewan website on 

their clearly partisan leaflet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a big mess. Should we now assume the 

government website is the Sask Party website? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the colour, 

we used the colours of the flag of the province of Saskatchewan 

— green and yellow. They happen to be also the party colours 

certainly, but we used the colours of the province of 

Saskatchewan. I‟ve seen I guess similar steps taken by MLAs 

opposite with respect to their signage in their information. 

 

Later this session we‟re going to have some legislation 

introduced in this Legislative Assembly that seeks to ensure an 

end to what we saw from members opposite when they were the 

government, where in the dying days of their government, they 

spent $2 million of government taxpayer-funded advertising 

trying to burnish a tarnished image, trying to turn things around 

for what was at that time a very tired and old and lost 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Given the line of questioning here today, given the fact that 

they would want to run down Saskatchewan with their own 

MLA communications, I think the opposition is as tired and as 

rundown as the government, Mr. Speaker, was that we replaced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a very simple question to 

the Saskatchewan Premier: is the Government of Saskatchewan 

website, paid for by all Saskatchewan taxpayers, now the 

website for the Sask Party caucus and Sask Party membership? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government website, 

the website for the Government of Saskatchewan is a place 

where the people of the province can go to find out about 

programs and services that this government offers. It is a 

website that details the priorities of the government, where the 

government can be held accountable and people can see quite 

transparently the plan. 

 

And so is that the right place for a government to talk about 

historic tax cuts for the people of the province? The answer is 

yes. Is that the right place for a government to talk about the 

priority it‟s put on debt reduction, reducing it 40 per cent in its 

first full budget year? The answer‟s yes. Is that the place for a 

government to talk about, Mr. Speaker, record investment and 

infrastructure? The answer is yes. Is that the place to talk about 

reducing a wait time people with physical disabilities have had 

for services and a place to live? The answer is yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That website is full of the priorities of this government. We‟re 

going to do whatever we can to communicate it to the province 

of Saskatchewan and also to accept their input and to answer 

their questions. That exactly should be a priority of a 

Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Crown Corporations’ Utility Rates and Investment Policy 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a series of 

questions for the Premier around utility rates and our Crown 

corporations. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know 

today that their SaskEnergy rates are going up 20 per cent. They 

also know that their SaskPower rates or electrical bills are going 

to go up at least 5 per cent, and the minister responsible says 

perhaps more. 

 

They also know that our Crown utilities today are showing 

record profits of $696 million, and they also know that this 

government now has a rainy day fund, a bank account of $2 

billion. 

 

So my questions is to the Premier: why is he opposed to using a 

part of these record profits and this record surplus to help 

Saskatchewan families with their utility bills? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to have the lowest utility 

bundle in the country. Mr. Speaker, this government continues 

to strongly support our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

yes, we do continue to make investments in the Crown 

corporations in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier announced earlier this fall the largest 

tax cut in the history of Saskatchewan. Those tax cuts, Mr. 

Speaker, help every individual in this province. It helps them 

pay for those power bills, those energy bills, Mr. Speaker, 

should they rise. Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy does not make a 

profit on the sale of gas. It‟s a neutral exchange, Mr. Speaker, 

based on the cost of natural gas. So, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan‟s utilities are doing very well for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition, I just ask all members to be respectful of the person 

placing the question and the minister responding to the 

question. The Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again going to be 

directed to the Premier. Now the minister who responded just 

told us that SaskEnergy rates are tied to the price of natural gas. 

Well I think most of us see the price of natural gas falling; we 

see this government increasing the rate for natural gas 

consumers. I don‟t know how that works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we listened to the Minister Responsible 

for CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

commit again that the clean coal project will cost at least $1.2 

billion. We also have a guarantee from the federal government 

that they will not fund any cost overruns which can be 

predicted. We also heard the Minister of CIC inform the people 

of Saskatchewan he intends . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we also heard the Minister of 

CIC tell us that he intends to spend quote “$1 billion a year in 

SaskPower alone in coming years.” 

 

So my question to the Premier is this: these cost expenditures 

— clean coal, 1.2 billion and rising, 5 billion — how will these 

cost expenditures affect rates in utility bills for Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the cost of natural gas from SaskEnergy is set in the 

same manner as it was set under that administration when the 

person asking the question was the premier of this province. 

The gas cost is set every six months, Mr. Speaker, based on the 

average price of gas. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the former premier asks about the cost 

of SaskPower in the future, Mr. Speaker, there is a cost going to 

be associated with the necessity for increased generation in this 

province. Because over the last 16 years the former 

administration did not invest in increased generation because it 

was their belief, Mr. Speaker, there could be no growth in 

Saskatchewan. They were managing for a decline, Mr. Speaker, 

not the growth that we have seen happen in the province of 

Saskatchewan since the new government was elected last 

November 7. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, again the minister and 

government will not answer a very specific question about how 

these cost expenditures are going to affect Saskatchewan rates. 

And what the minister of course fails to report to this House this 

morning is when the former government faced this kind of a 

circumstance and saw what it was going to do to Saskatchewan 

families, we intervened. We used, we used some surplus to 

limit, limit the energy increases on Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now this question, Mr. Speaker, is directed to the Premier, and 

only the Premier can answer it. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

situation of rising energy costs, the situation of future energy 

increases in utility bills are facing the people of Saskatchewan. 

Will the Premier today do the right thing, guarantee to the 

people of Saskatchewan that they will enjoy down the road the 

lowest cost bundle of utilities of any people in Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will continue to enjoy the 

full benefits of the Crown sector in Saskatchewan into the 

future, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as this province grows, all of 

our utilities gain new customers. New customers, Mr. Speaker, 

mean that there are new revenues available to the province of 

Saskatchewan to the benefit of us all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be growing the new customers in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite who 

continued to invest outside of this province in foreign 

misadventures and gambling that lost hundreds of millions of 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, those investments, Mr. 

Speaker, would have benefited the people of Saskatchewan 

right here at home, Mr. Speaker. This government, Mr. Speaker, 

believes in our Crowns, and we‟re going to invest in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is not only 

busy raising the rates for Saskatchewan utility customers, not 

only are they finding new ways to spend the revenues for the 

Crowns, now they‟re finding ways to actually reduce the 

revenues for the Crowns. We‟ve heard this week this new 

policy called Saskatchewan-first policy, where our utilities are 

going to be prevented from earning profits outside the borders 

of Saskatchewan, and they‟re going to be prevented from 

competing with entities within this province. 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

Now we know what the reviews are. Read the headlines in The 

StarPhoenix this morning, Mr. Speaker. Headline: “Sask. First 

policy will hurt viability of public utilities.” Headline: 

“Restricting Crowns short-sighted.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Premier wants the people of Saskatchewan 

to believe this is a good policy, then he can do it this morning 

by standing in this House and guaranteeing that the people of 

Saskatchewan will enjoy — today and down the road into the 

future — the lowest cost bundle of utilities in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think it was one year ago 

this evening that the hon. member for Riversdale and myself 

were involved in a television debate in the last election 

campaign. And I think I ended that election debate by inviting 

viewers to consider the fact that there was a choice between, 

Mr. Speaker, those who were promoting and offering fear and 

those who are offering hope. And a year later nothing has 

changed, Mr. Speaker. A year later, and we‟ve seen it this week 

with respect to these questions on the Crowns, nothing has 

changed. 

 

The Crowns will be publicly owned in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, number one. Number two, we are going to focus their 

investment in Saskatchewan to the benefit of Saskatchewan. We 

believe that a growing province means there is great hope and 

reason for optimism for the Crowns to be able to expand by 

investing here. Moreover, we‟ve got to deal with an 

infrastructure deficit in the Crowns left behind by that member 

when he was sitting over here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while he wants to talk about the negativity all the time, 

why he‟s focused on gloom and doom and sending out pieces 

like this, Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post today headline says, 

“New data proves Sask. continues to boom”. We are leading the 

country, Mr. Speaker, in almost every economic category. It‟s 

good news for us. It‟s good news for the government. Most 

importantly, it‟s good news for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Expanded Graduate Retention Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the individuals I introduced 

earlier who have joined us in the gallery today are employers 

who represent many different business sectors. But they do 

share a common commonality, one that has brought them here 

today. While fuelling Saskatchewan‟s remarkable economic 

momentum, they and many others are feeling the pinch of our 

province‟s talent challenge. In fact our government has heard 

from employers and other stakeholders from across 

Saskatchewan who are embroiled in a highly competitive labour 

market, and we have responded with innovative, concrete, 

measurable ways to turn the tide in Saskatchewan‟s favour. 

Today I am delighted to announce a continuation of that 

response. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it was first introduced, Saskatchewan‟s 

graduate retention program was the most aggressive youth 

retention program in Canada and it remains so. Today we are 

announcing an expansion of this program. The Government of 

Saskatchewan will now provide a refundable income tax credit 

to rebate up to $20,000 in tuition fees to graduates of 

post-secondary institutions across Canada and beyond for those 

who choose to pursue their careers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — We‟re taking a strong retention tool and 

creating an equally strong and compelling recruitment tool for 

our province and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It‟s difficult for the Speaker to hear. It 

would seem to me members would want to hear as well, at least 

down one side of the House. I recognize the minister. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This expansion 

represents our government‟s commitment to the attraction and 

long-term retention of the best and brightest young people from 

across Canada and well beyond. We want to send the message 

loud and clear to graduates: Saskatchewan is the best place to 

establish your careers and the best place to make a life. We 

believe that the expanded graduate retention program makes our 

province an even more attractive destination for post-secondary 

graduates, and we are pleased to extend this support to young 

people and employers across Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to thank the 

minister for being kind enough to send his remarks across 

earlier so I had a chance to gather my thoughts. 

 

It‟s true, Mr. Speaker, as we‟ve been hearing in the last few 

days here in the House in the Throne Speech, that our province 

is doing well financially. And it‟s true that that‟s been going on 

for some time, and it‟s due to the hard work that the New 

Democrats have done on this side over the many years. It‟s also 

true that the government inherited a strong economy, and with 

that strong economy, Mr. Speaker, they inherited billions of 

dollars. 

 

An important part of the NDP program that was in place — that 

has been in place for some time — was the graduate tax 

exemption program, a program that provided $100,000 of 

tax-free income in the first five years of employment. The 

beautiful thing about that program . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote will come to order, and the member from Moose Jaw 

North will come to order and allow the member to respond. The 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The beautiful thing 

about the graduate tax exemption program was that it was 

available to students in Saskatchewan and students outside of 

the province, so for the Saskatchewan students that had to go to 

another province because of programs not offered here in 

Saskatchewan, they had the option of coming home. It made 

good sense. It also made good sense because for students who 

were studying outside of province or abroad and were looking 

at Saskatchewan as a good place to live. They were eligible to 

receive this grad tax exemption. 

 

So when the minister introduced the tuition rebate program that 

the Sask Party has put in place and is being gradually rolled out 

to students, our main criticism on this side of the House was 

that it was not available to students outside of the province, 

whether they were students that were forced to move for a 

program or students that wanted to move here. To us, Mr. 

Speaker, on this side of the House, it did not make sense to limit 

that type of program to students that are outside of the province, 

especially in a time when our economy is doing so well and we 

need people coming to the province. 

 

So I am hearing news of this change, Mr. Speaker, that the 

program will now be available to a broader range of people. I‟m 

glad that the Sask Party heard the criticism that came from this 

side of the House — and not from this side of the House, really 

the feedback that was received from people around the province 

and around the country. So this, as it stands now, it looks like 

this is good news, Mr. Speaker, that the program is available to 

more people. We‟ll see what the details are. And I‟m glad that 

the Sask Party on this one are starting to accomplish some of 

the things on the program that the NDP program was already 

accomplishing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Tender Release for 2009 Construction Season 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise today to 

inform the Legislative Assembly that this year‟s initial tender 

release for the 2009 construction season is worth $168.6 million 

— the largest tender release in the history of this ministry. 

Today‟s announcement proves our government‟s commitment 

to infrastructure in this province. Over the past five years, the 

phase 1 release has averaged about $84 million. Today‟s tender 

release is twice that amount. 

 

This initial tender program will improve 484 kilometres of 

provincial highways. Some highlights of the tender release 

include 165 kilometres of grade and paved projects to 

completely rebuild highways from the roadbed up; 284 

kilometres of resurfacing projects to maintain the quality of 

some of the province‟s most heavily travelled highways. 

There‟ll be three bridge replacement projects and 374 000 

tonnes of aggregate stockpiling. 

 

Today‟s release is being announced earlier than usual in order 

to mitigate industry capacity concerns and inflationary 

pressures through proactive measures. Some of these measures 

include introducing new delivery methods such as project 

bundling, partnerships, contract extensions, and the tendering of 

work earlier in order to secure contractors at more favourable 

prices. These are just some of the actions we are taking to deal 

with the predicted challenges associated with heavy 

construction in a very competitive environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been fortunate to date because we have 

not deferred nor delayed any projects due to inflationary 

pressures or capacity concerns. This has not always been the 

case with other jurisdictions or other levels of government. The 

timing of this tender is our response to our continual discussion 

and contact with the road building industry in order to best use 

industry capacity. An early tender release is a prudent move to 

provide the best value to the Saskatchewan taxpayer. 

Furthermore it allows the road building industry the time 

needed to plan their work for the upcoming construction season. 

Now is the time for us to improve provincial infrastructure, 

which has been neglected for too long. Today‟s release builds 

on the momentum that began in the last construction season and 

which is just now wrapping up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m very eager to share with the House that within 

a few days time this government in our first full construction 

season will have completed more than 1500 kilometres of 

highway improvements. This is a tremendous record of 

achievement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — This is a tremendous record of 

achievement on behalf of the Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure and the contractors with which we work. This 

government‟s commitment to economic growth is demonstrated 

today by this substantial infrastructure investment, and we‟re 

very proud of it, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to thank the minister for providing me a copy of his comments 

earlier this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s safe to say that any time there‟s an 

announcement of increased funding to our infrastructure 

capacity in this province, it‟s certainly good news and welcome 

news. As we believe that the infrastructure is a very important 

part of maintaining a strong and vibrant economy — and if we 

plan to continue to grow our economy and have a strong 

economy — we need the infrastructure. 

 

We need the infrastructure to ensure that we have safety 

capacities on our highway system for our motoring public. We 

need to ensure that we have the infrastructure to support our 

growing tourism industry. 

 

The industry and manufacturing in this great province needs the 

arteries of our infrastructure in order to move their products 

back and forth. Of course our traditional agricultural economy 

moves its products both to the farm and from the farm on our 

infrastructure system. So any time that there‟s an improvement 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

to our infrastructure system, I think it‟s welcomed. 

 

It pleasures me to see that the minister and his department 

continues to build on the foundation as set forward by the 

ministers of the previous government on this particular topic. 

 

There are some questions of course arise: will there be a 

continuum of the construction in the northern part of our 

province — as that‟s a very important part of our province as 

far as our industry and as far as our economy is concerned — 

will there be a continuum of that construction? Or will there be 

increased work up there? 

 

There‟s also concerns about the capacity within our system. 

Will the increased amount of work being done by the 

Department of Highways create a problem for our cities and our 

municipalities as far as their ability to attract contractors to do 

their work? 

 

But overall, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that today‟s 

announcement of increased funding to our infrastructure is 

something that‟d be welcomed by Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Trustee Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 52, 

The Trustee Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 52, The Trustee Act, 2008 be now introduced and read the 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 53, The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 53, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/ 

Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

The Vital Statistics Act, No. 54, 2008 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that Bill No. 54, The Vital Statistics Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Vital Statistics Consequential  

Amendments Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 55, The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 

2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that Bill No. 55, The Vital Statistics Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 

2008/Loi de 2008 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Trustee Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 56, 

The Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 56, The Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 

2008 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan have worked hard in preparing their 

homes for this winter to save on heating costs, but this 

government is grabbing the money they had hoped to save. The 

member from Saskatoon Silver Springs, when he was in 

opposition, would go on for days raving about how he was in 

favour of rebates to consumers. Now, Mr. Speaker, with a 

smile, he hands the people of Saskatchewan a 20 per cent 

energy rate increase and says he opposes rebates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side we watch in awe the transformation 

and the arrogance of this government. When the NDP made 

income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, we made cuts equalling $1,000 

with a surplus of 9.4 million — most of which we left them. 

The Sask Party has in excess of $3 billion, and most of which 

we left them. And they gave the people $1,300, and they tell us, 

look what we‟ve done for you. 

 

They sit on $1.9 million surplus which is exactly what we left 

them, and the other day I read in The StarPhoenix the article on 

homelessness, homelessness, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon. We 

have been raising this issue with the Sask Party for the last year, 

and the reply is a deafening silence and inaction. Mr. Speaker, 

in fairness to the Sask Party, they did act. But their action was 

to cut funding to Station 20 — cut funding to a community, cut 

funding to the hopes and aspirations of most of the vulnerable 

people in our city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, daily the Sask Party shows itself to be a party of 

meanspiritedness and a party quickly becoming completely out 

of the touch with the needs of the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about an article in The StarPhoenix 

October 28. The article talks about people working and having 

to stay at the YWCA [Young Women‟s Christian Association] 

Crisis Shelter in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, we have raised this 

issue of rent increases, and what do we get from the supposedly 

caring Sask Party government? As usual, Mr. Speaker, a 

deafening silence. But here‟s what Barb MacPherson, executive 

director of the YWCA Crisis Shelter had to say, and I quote: 

 

“Quite regularly, there is one person staying in the shelter 

who is working,” she said in an interview Monday. 

 

We‟re also seeing more families — so moms with their 

kids who had housing, but then the rent gets jacked up and 

they can‟t afford it so they buy groceries instead of paying 

rent, and then they get evicted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say, and I quote again: 

 

“Homelessness has been growing in this city in recent 

years and it has been further impacted by Saskatoon‟s 

economic boom that saw last year‟s rental increases 

reaching 13.7 per cent over the previous year.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government sits on $2 billion of 

money inherited from the NDP administration, and mothers and 

children live on the streets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see the members over there smiling, and I 

wonder. This is very serious — not funny at all. Mr. Speaker, 

the people from Weyburn are waiting for hospitals, schools, and 

roads and there are people in Saskatoon community groups who 

had funding cut to their project — a project to help the most 

vulnerable, and now there are homeless people in my city, the 

city of Saskatoon. And they sit there smiling and holding on to 

$2 billion which we left them. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think it is only the Minister of Health who 

is not listening. The entire Sask Party is frozen — frozen, Mr. 

Speaker, in inaction because they don‟t know how to run the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I at this time like to turn to the issues related to 

my critic duties. But I first want to start by giving you a few 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

memorable quotes and perhaps you can guess where these 

diamonds in the rough come from. 

 

(1) “We‟re working through a matrix, and that matrix 

isn‟t in place yet.” 

 

(2)  “So I hope what I‟ve done is offered a mutually 

reinforcing frame of reference, that is a frame of reference 

that allows us to see a horizon of significance.” 

 

(3)  “. . . going back to that metaphor or analogy or 

simile, these colours begin to fade.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, and this is one of my favourites, and I quote: 

 

When asked by the reporter whether the minister had 

consulted, he had this to say. “Did I consult? I‟ll have to 

get back to you on that.” 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, 

 

(5) “It has been my eye for the obvious that paid off 

here.” 

 

Amazing, Mr. Speaker. Amazing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this quite captures the Sask Party approach 

— the approach they are taking to the working people of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, the working people of this province 

create the wealth that is shared by many. And the phrases I 

quoted would be amusing, as I hear some members laughing, 

but when you think that these are answers to serious questions, 

this dismissive arrogance displayed to the working families of 

this province, these families who are concerned about paying 

their bills, paying the mortgage, buying the food, and having 

some extra money for the kids. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is beyond disrespectful. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Swift Current once told a radio interviewer that 

he was prepared to go to war with unions. And I think — in 

fact, I can see — that that is one promise that he has delivered 

on. And one part of that going to war with labour is appointing 

a Minister of Labour who has completely alienated himself 

from the working people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rational people have told me when I speak to them 

and tell them, they tell me, Mr. Speaker, that this minister 

simply is in over his head. I agree with that. I agree with that. 

He clearly does not understand the basic tenets of labour 

relations and in particular, Mr. Speaker, he does not understand 

collective bargaining and how that fits within a democratic 

society and how important that basic right is, the right of 

collective bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I‟ve seen is that this government, that this 

government feels that it is the right to infuriate labour leaders; 

by doing so, they somehow endeared themselves to the 

Saskatchewan public. Mr. Speaker, be they labour leaders or 

working people of this province, they are taxpaying members 

who create not only the wealth, as I have said, but make 

purchases of homes, cars, vacations. They pay tuitions, buy 

clothes. They too are part of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding Bill 5 and 6 passed in the last session, I 

have been talking to a number of people and they are starting to 

see some of the effects of this legislation. We are seeing these 

effects where negotiations are being stalled, the system of 

collective bargaining is being bogged down in constant 

negotiations, and people‟s high expectations are turning to 

resentment. All this is a result of unnecessary legislation 

brought in, Mr. Speaker, without consultation and with little or 

no understanding of the collective bargaining regime by a 

minister, Mr. Speaker, who people say is in over his head. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any clear-thinking person knows that you do not 

put forward a contentious issue in such a way that incenses your 

opponent when you‟re trying to begin a dialogue with the goal 

of mending fences. This is negotiations 101, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But unfortunately, but unfortunately that is exactly what the 

Minister of Labour did at a recent SFL [Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour] convention. He raised the issues of Bills 

5 and 6 in such . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ve obviously caught the attention of the minister 

there. He‟s singing. He‟s singing an answer here. Anyways, but 

just listen up a bit. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the Minister of 

Labour doesn‟t understand negotiations 101. And he comes to 

the Federation of Labour convention . . . And, Mr. Speaker, if 

you and I went to our neighbour‟s house and we raised an issue 

— perhaps it was the placing of a fence or something — that we 

knew would incense them, and if we started on that, would we 

expect a different treatment? I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. Any 

normal person would not expect different. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he provides fodder for all sorts of things. You 

know, at some point in time the laughter and the disbelief is 

okay. But, Mr. Speaker, these are serious issues. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what he provides fodder for is the 

newspapers. He provides fodder for the public. And we all 

discuss these things, and we spend time on the things that he 

does. But, Mr. Speaker, we all lose. We all lose. We all lose 

because of this minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is this type of approach, the type of approach 

which is completely unprofessional that is destructive to a 

relationship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the disrespect and outright hostility of this 

government to the working families of this province is 

unacceptable. Governments are elected to govern the people. 

There are responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, that come with this and, 

as the quotes I earlier said, I again say they would be laughable. 

They would be laughable except that we are dealing with very 

serious issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to personally thank the working families of 

this province for their dedication and commitment to our 

province. And I hope for them that the Workers‟ Compensation 

Board‟s Mission: Zero program is a success so that no more 

workers are injured or killed on the job. I hope that they can 

resolve their workplace disputes and I wish for them the wages 

they so highly, rightly deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are in serious times and we deal with serious 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

issues. The minister in charge of Labour has completely 

alienated a good portion of this province‟s residents that fall 

under his ministry, completely alienated them, Mr. Speaker. 

And I would still hope that the Premier would see fit to place 

someone in this Ministry of Labour who most rational people 

would say is not in over his head, not in over his head, Mr. 

Speaker. The minister is completely in over his head — no 

understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be supporting the amendment to the 

Throne Speech and voting against the government motion. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my honour to stand up and 

speak to the Throne Speech. I am honoured to be the MLA for 

Saskatoon Northwest. And it is a constituency that, well, I think 

comprises all facets of life in terms of socio-economic status of 

our population. It has business owners. It has blue-collar 

workers, university professors, stretches into the rural areas. 

 

It has union members that I‟ve been privileged to speak to at the 

doors, and it is a riding that the NDP put the most union money 

behind their candidate during the last election. And I had many 

of the people at the door who were union members apologizing 

on their own behalf that they didn‟t support the fact that their 

union dues were taken for political reasons without their 

permission. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased this morning. Last time I 

spoke to the Throne Speech, the leader, House Leader of the 

Opposition was up and down in his seat like a toilet seat in a . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 

just ask that members have a little more respect for other 

members in the Assembly and in their speeches. And it doesn‟t 

encourage the decorum in the Assembly to have negative 

comments towards other members. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — The performance, the pernicious performance 

of the opposition has brought this to a theatre of the absurd. It is 

a shameful performance and a stand against . . . And I‟m sorry 

if they don‟t understand the words. It‟s too bad they haven‟t 

expanded their vocabulary. 

 

But let me give a statement by the member from Saskatoon 

central, quite frankly, who was little more than a . . . [inaudible] 

. . . when he says that the Sask Party is calloused and a 

mean-spirited government neglecting Saskatchewan‟s most 

vulnerable and poor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a man who was born a product of rape in an 

abandoned building to a teenage girl, who grew up in the inner 

city of Toronto and was taken away from his mother at eight 

years old to be placed in the most violent and brutal training 

school in the history of Canada, to have spent my life as a social 

advocate in the last 20 years, beginning to deal with the social 

policies, and to have these members criticize us . . . In a 

previous government where the Leader of the Opposition stood 

there in making his speech that they were going to eradicate 

poverty, and to stand there in such an ingenuous manner to say 

that he hoped that we would eradicate global poverty, when in 

his government, under his policies, they grew the poverty level 

of this province to lead the nation, that established 

Saskatchewan as being the no. 1 province in Canada for child 

poverty; that established this province to have the largest 

number of children prostitutes with the youngest age level; to 

establish this province to incarcerate more children than any 

other jurisdiction in North America; to establish this province as 

the no. 1 incarcerator of men; to establish this province as the 

no. 1 province for youth gang recruitment; to establish this 

province as the no. 1 province for the most tragic inner cities in 

Canada rated by Maclean’s magazine; to perform a national 

disgrace in their policies, in their social policies. 

 

The ingenuous statements by the opposition as they stand 

forward for the most violent social policies of our country and 

the reactions and the outcome of it, in a province that has a First 

Nation young man having equal opportunity to commit suicide 

as to graduate from a post-secondary education, to stand there 

as a group of popinjays to criticize the most socially conscious 

Throne Speech ever given in the history of our province . . . We 

gave 1.1 million for transitional houses and sexual assault 

centres to strengthen in the service to women who are victims 

of domestic violence in a province that again, is no. 1 per capita 

for domestic violence. 

 

And yet the NDP history is that they did not increase in 15 

years social shelter rates. In a province that purchased two 

homes for Egadz to provide vulnerable youth stable and 

supportive places to live, and as a young man that lived on the 

streets beginning at the age of 12 and to see the services that 

Egadz performs and does, to be able to build houses that will 

take street youth and be able to move them from dependence to 

independence and have the opposition criticize that record 

makes me wonder what . . . [inaudible] . . . planet are they on 

that they don‟t understand the reality of the social policies 

within this Throne Speech. 

 

We increased to help lower income working families with the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement, to help families with 

the cost of children in a province that has the highest number of 

child poverty — with a 50 per cent divorce rate among the First 

Nation population — to help single mothers raise their children. 

This is a policy that the opposition stands against in our Throne 

Speech. We increased child care subsidy to ensure that licensed 

child care is affordable for all Saskatchewan parents. We 

created a task force on housing, on affordable housing. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And yet this is the opposition that would rather pork-barrel and 

earmark a project called Station 20 — that would spend five 

times the amount of money on a building while strong-arming 

the Westside Clinic to sell their property, to spend $75,000 a 

year on lease — so that they can have this pork-barrel situation 

that would staff by NDP ex-staffers rather than create a new 

inner-city school that had been delayed for eight years on the 

working paper and to fulfill and honour a deal that they made 

with the city of Saskatoon to build houses that the city had 

purchased from slum landlords. And they stand there to criticize 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

it. And yet Station 20 is now one-fifth of the cost and has 

partnerships moving into it to have a reality base rather than a 

pork-barrel service to our inner-city people. 

 

And you know, the interesting thing about it as the popinjays 

are over there just chattering away, none of them have 

understood the reality of the culture of poverty within our 

provinces. And when I met with the First Nation along with the 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and the File 

Hills justice committee, they advised me that in their history, 

and I‟ll quote Chief Joseph, that this is the first time that a 

politician has ever sat down with them and told them the things 

that they have been telling to the NDP politicians for years 

about the things that happen in their own community. 

 

Now it isn‟t because my mother was Cree that I understand this 

reality. It is the reality of anyone that gets away from the union 

rhetoric, that gets away from political rhetoric and actually 

begins to look at taking care of the folk of the province, to put 

in substantial services that will deal with the reality of what we 

are doing for low-income families and seniors within our 

province. A social reality that in our Throne Speech has done 

more for the people of this province in one short year than the 

16 years that it took the NDP to grow the social problems of our 

province. 

 

We‟ve increased the shelter rates for 6,500 households on the 

SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan] and the TEA [transitional 

employment allowance], and we‟ve increased it by 110 per 

cent. We‟ve increased the rental housing supplement from $36 

a month to 136. Twice a year adjustment for the above housing 

projects. Increased daily rates paid to CBOs [community-based 

organization]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I came here I was the founder and regional 

director of Teen Challenge. And I was shocked to see that a 

government that professed to have the heart of the people in 

mind in the things that they did would starve the workers of 

CBOs across this province, the lowest rate of any province in 

Canada. We have began to deal with that to make sure that 

workers that help with our most vulnerable people are paid 

accordingly to their skills and that we have the best people that 

can work with these, of the most vulnerable of our society. 

 

And what the previous government did under the NDP policies 

was grow government bureaucracy by 30 per cent in 16 years to 

the highest level of government bureaucracy per capita in all of 

Canada. Their idea of helping the vulnerable is to grow 

government bureaucracy, to grow union-base support for 

themselves, and yet it‟s the union members themselves that 

failed to support the ingenuous programs that the NDP has put 

forward. It is they who are apologizing on behalf of their union 

leaders who have lost their way and have become part of the 

NDP political process instead of taking care of the folk. 

 

We have put a half a million dollars towards school lunch and 

anti-hunger programs in community schools. And for the 

gentleman from Cumberland who‟s laughing over there, you 

might want to know that the kids that are in these schools are 

First Nation kids. This is a program that the NDP never did. 

You never did it. Five hundred thousand dollars within there to 

increase the mileage rate for social assistance clients moving 

from reserves into the cities to go to doctors appointments, to 

social appointments. This was a new project that was done 

under our government. 

 

We put $400,000, 320 000 kilograms of pork into our food 

banks so that the most vulnerable of our citizens in the inner 

city could have meat — not just carbohydrates, but actually 

have protein. 

 

We put $1.1 million in increased funding for transition homes 

and sexual assault homes. In a province that boasts the highest 

rates of sexual assaults and child prostitutes being victimized, 

we have increased the funding for mobile crisis units to roam 

those streets, to help the most indigent and the most vulnerable 

of our society. 

 

One of the things that I did as an executive in a CBO was to 

wonder why this government under the NDP failed to work 

with faith-based community organizations as they provided 

services throughout the population of our province. They never 

held a summit. They never talked to the people that were doing 

the work. They never supported them in the work that they were 

doing. For a government who calls themselves socialists, who 

are supposed to help in their social programs, the most 

vulnerable of our society, they did nothing to join in partnership 

with the community-based organizations of our province. 

 

And yet in the short period of time that we have been in 

government, we held three, four CBO summits, five CBO 

summits with over 800 representatives from community-based 

organizations across this province to listen to their needs, to 

begin to start a dialogue with them as to how we could support 

them in the most cost-effective manner, to help the most 

vulnerable and again those most in need in our society as we go 

forward so that we can bring everyone with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my lifetime I spent over 20 years of my life as a 

drug addict. When I came to this province, I was recruited to 

come to this province to start a long-term addictions program to 

help combat the addiction rate within the province which is in 

the highest of Canada. They in all their times did nothing in the 

16 years that they were running government to deal with the 

addiction problem, to install treatment beds within our . . . In 

fact the Leader of the Opposition, when he was the minister of 

Health, closed the most cutting-edge program in Canada to deal 

with young offenders with addictions problems called 

Whitespruce. 

 

We in the short period of time that we have been in government 

have earmarked 5.1 million for an additional 88 beds for 

addictions to help our children and to help the First Nation 

community deal with the no. 1 problem that is plaguing them. 

 

We have put $2 million increase to the employment supplement 

for over 6,000 low-income families. Eighty per cent of those are 

single-parent homes. This is new programming that the 

previous government never did. 

 

Three million dollar increase to the intensive support factor, 

providing programming for students with learning disabilities 

— disabilities and disadvantages. And part of the 

disadvantages, Mr. Speaker, is . . . The majority of my life, for 

40 years of my life, I had a grade 5 education. I had to try to 

combat in a world with an education that was functionally 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

illiterate. And yet we have begun to deal with this functional 

illiteracy by putting money so that the most disadvantaged 

children in our society can have an opportunity for a leg up, for 

a proper education to be able to make their way in life, to be 

able to combat or compete in everyday society. 

 

Five million dollars for 30 additional child protection care 

workers. Now, Mr. Speaker, when I was eight years old, I was 

taken away from my mother under a wrong-headed social 

policy, a social policy that said First Nation mothers were not 

equipped to deal with boy children in the inner city; a teenage 

mother who couldn‟t read and write — illiterate. And to have a 

system in our society and our province that didn‟t protect our 

children with proper foster care homes, with the proper amount 

of child protection caseworkers, was an abomination and 

something that the opposition should hang their head in shame, 

as any time that it is mentioned, that they try to assume the 

cloak of respectability as a socialist party. 

 

Fifteen per cent increase into the funding of foster care homes. 

Forty-one per cent increase for extended family caregivers; $5.5 

million for 80 extra out-of-home spaces that includes foster 

care, stabilization centres, therapeutic foster care, adolescent 

group homes, treatment group homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is only part list of what is involved with our 

agenda in the Throne Speech that has been outlined. With the 

most compassionate leader this province has ever had in our 

current Premier; who has come with a balanced heart and a high 

moral initiative to make sure that not only do we balance the 

protection of our society and the future by having a rock, a 

savings account, in this most turbulent of times; that will make 

sure that we will have the money there to protect the most 

vulnerable of our citizens, but also to have shown the 

compassion to begin to deal with the people that the party 

across the way has neglected for 16 years, with the audacity to 

call themselves socialists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me no greater honour today than to stand 

up to support this Throne Speech, to support this government, 

to support this Premier as we go forward in making 

Saskatchewan not only a better place for everyone to work and 

to live but to make this province a better place for the most 

vulnerable in our society to grow and to have life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Throne Speech. And I 

thoroughly condemn the NDP‟s proposition, this non-confident 

vote for the most moral, the most compassionate Throne Speech 

ever in the history of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from 

Athabasca, just reviewing Hansard yesterday, the member for 

Corrections and Public Safety had been asked to apologize and 

withdraw, and the member had actually withdrawn his 

comments. Unfortunately, as Speaker, I made the mistake of 

saying apologize rather than withdraw. So I just want to, for the 

sake of Hansard, indicate that I acknowledge the withdrawal of 

the comments by the minister responsible. Member responsible 

for Athabasca. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

just wanted to point out, Mr. Speaker, that as I listened to the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest — he‟s sputtering from his 

chair, Mr. Speaker — I want to point out the first statement that 

I heard him make in the Assembly was he came in from 

Ontario. And, Mr. Speaker, I think he should have stayed in 

Ontario, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the big things that I think is really important, Mr. 

Speaker, and I want to point out to the members opposite — 

and that member spouts from his chair again — is that, number 

one, is when the Tories across the way talk about what we 

haven‟t done for 16 years, I want to point out to the people of 

Saskatchewan, to every New Democrat that‟s listening, the 

bottom line is, number one, is that people like . . . And I hope I 

do this with all respect from the family. But people like the 

former Finance minister, Ed Tchorzewski, people like 

Romanow, they rebuilt this province from the mess they left, 

those guys left behind in the late ‟80s. 

 

And you‟ll notice, Mr. Speaker, they have never, ever spoke of 

pre-1991. They‟ve never spoke about that. They all of a sudden 

forgot. They all of a sudden forgot. And every New Democrat 

in Saskatchewan‟s going to say to those guys, and to the public 

out there, you left a big mess. It took us 16 years to clean up 

your mess, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re still cleaning up after you 

guys. 

 

And they have the audacity to get up and say, oh you guys 

never done this for 16 years. You never done this for 16 years. 

We were so busy cleaning up your mess we couldn‟t do the 

things we wanted to do, Mr. Speaker. And we still made 

progress, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And I‟ll point out as well that every New Democrat wants to 

say to these guys we have a booming economy. We have a 

booming economy, and they got 3 billion bucks in the bank. 

And they say, oh after 11 months in power, we‟ve got 3 billion 

bucks. Look at us now. Big, loud message. You guys had 

nothing to do with that. You guys had nothing to do with that. 

Mr. Speaker, they had nothing to do with the billions of dollars 

you‟ve got in the bank, the reduced debt, the booming 

economy. You had nothing to do with it so stop trying to fool 

the people because they‟re not buying it. 

 

And every little bit of announcement you make, people say, oh 

yes, whatever. Mr. Speaker, loud and clear — the Saskatchewan 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

Party had nothing to do with the inheritance they got today. 

And I want to make that very clear. The people of 

Saskatchewan, again I say with all due respect — 

Tchorzewskis, the Romanows, the Blakeneys — people that 

built this province and regained this province, those are the 

people who we should pay respect to, not the Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The selfish thing that they have done since they got into power 

was spend money, and they can‟t even do that right, Mr. 

Speaker. As we have pointed out, they give on one hand and 

say, oh we‟re going to help the seniors. We applaud that. We‟re 

going to help low-income people. We applaud that. But guess 

what? They‟re going to jack up the prices in power, insurance, 

heat, food. And at the end of the day, net effect is the people 

aren‟t getting any further ahead, Mr. Speaker. They‟re not 

getting any further ahead. 

 

And I want to point out as well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll point out that 

a lot of people brought this province back. And today I tell the 

people in my area, as well as the New Democrats out there and 

the people that have a progressive mind, number one is that 

when we assumed power from those guys, we had fifteen and a 

half, if not $16 billion, debt left by them, left by them, Mr. 

Speaker. And today you contrast to what they inherited. They 

had nothing to do except spend money because they inherited 

$3 billion from the people of Saskatchewan. That‟s what they 

got, Mr. Speaker. They had nothing to do with the good times 

right now that Saskatchewan enjoys. That was built on the 

backs of the people of Saskatchewan with the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker, of Romanow and Blakeney. 

 

And of course there‟s thousands of papers that will quote Mr. 

Calvert, and I‟ll use any of those papers. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

point out a quote from the Ile-a-la-Crosse Times where it said, 

“Calvert cares, Calvert delivers.” Mr. Speaker, the bottom line 

is we had leaders in the NDP that brought this province back 

from the depths of despair and debt from those guys, and they 

built a new economy. And guess what? Calvert left money in 

the bank. That is a true New Democrat, Mr. Speaker, because 

he‟s not going to break the province. He is going to make sure 

that things are going to move forward long after he may be 

gone. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s a sign of a true leader. Again I 

quote from the Ile-a-la-Crosse Times: “Calvert cares, Calvert 

delivers.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other point I would point out and I want to 

raise, I really want to raise, is that that party opposite, as far as 

I‟m concerned, misled the people of Saskatchewan. Because, 

Mr. Speaker, number one, they introduced Bills 5 and 6. They 

said they wouldn‟t do that before the election. They also are 

looking at selling the Crowns. They said they wouldn‟t do that 

before the election. They also talked about private nuclear 

power. They didn‟t say that before the election, Mr. Speaker. 

And the list goes on as to the things they said they would not do 

or they wouldn‟t say they did before an election. If they were so 

confident, Mr. Speaker, why didn‟t you say that before the 

election? You know why? Because they would have lost, Mr. 

Speaker. They would have lost. 

 

But they‟re still doing it. They‟re still doing it to the people of 

Saskatchewan. They introduced Bills 5 and 6, even though they 

said they wouldn‟t. They looked at selling the Crowns. They 

said they wouldn‟t. They‟re doing it. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The people of Saskatchewan 

have long memories. They have long memories, Mr. Speaker, 

and I‟m going to point out that they will not forget. The union 

movement will not forget nor will the people that want to 

protect the Crowns. And the people in the inner city, the North, 

east, west, south, they know that these guys misled them. And 

come next election, 2011, we‟re going to come back, and we‟re 

going to teach these guys a lesson, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I‟ll point out as I listen to the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest, you know, spouting out these $10 words, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to point out to him that his linguistic ability is 

somewhat discombobulating to me, so I‟m going to use plainer 

language. 

 

Number one is you can cry all you want about the issues that 

you think were caused by us. But the bottom line, when the 

NDP assumed government, we had a tough time even meeting 

payroll, Mr. Speaker, for our employees. That‟s how bad they 

left this province, Mr. Speaker. We had a tough time trying to 

reclaim this province from the banks and from Wall Street. Do 

they recognize that? No, the only response is 16 years, 16 years. 

And the member from Moose Jaw North, he wasn‟t even 

around then, and he‟s still going hey, 16 years. I don‟t know 

what school those guys went to, but I can tell there‟s not an 

advanced school of politics. That I know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the other point that‟s also important I think is the Crowns. 

The Crowns, you know, they said, oh we‟re not going to sell the 

Crowns. Now this new minister is saying, oh we‟re going to 

look at certain Crowns. 

 

It reminds me of that movie The Jerk. If you watch the movie, 

Mr. Speaker, you watch the movie The Jerk, he‟s actually 

acting as a carnival worker and then he‟s going to be . . . It‟s 

like the people of Saskatchewan go to this booth and say, okay 

what do I do here? Well you win a prize if you hit one of these 

targets. So the guy hits the target. You know, what do I win? So 

Steve Martin who acts as the jerk in the movie says, well 

everything this side of the erasers and everything that side of 

the pencils and below the note pads and above the little dolls. 

Well all there was in there was thimbles, Mr. Speaker, thimbles 

that the guy won. 

 

And so the guy who I think is the people of Saskatchewan is 

saying, well how does that work? We‟re selling our Crowns, 

but what do we get? Well everything below the note pad and 

everything on this side of the erasers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not an economist. I‟m not an economist. 

I‟m merely a hockey player. I am merely a hockey player. But I 

want to point out, I want to point out in terms of my experience, 

in my experience, one of the things that people have to know is 

that — in my assessment as a hockey player — that if you want 

to build a company, you don‟t strip out the retained earnings. 

You don‟t do that to a company. You don‟t reduce investment 

to that company because if you reduce investment, you‟re 

killing that company. You don‟t limit the customer base, as 

Steve Martin did in the movie The Jerk, you know. You don‟t 

fund the competing interests of your company. Mr. Speaker, 

you don‟t send negative messages out there, Mr. Speaker. You 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

don‟t send out negative messages out there about your 

company. And you don‟t limit growth potential of your 

company. 

 

Well guess what? These guys are using the guise of 

Saskatchewan-first to severely hamper our Crowns. There‟s no 

question about it, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what they‟re doing. 

That‟s what they‟re doing. And as they walk around telling 

people, how do we spend our inheritance? Well you know 

you‟re going to have a lot of friends when you have money. But 

when that money runs out, that‟s when the facts will come to 

bear as to whether you really truly had it or not, Mr. Speaker. 

And I would suggest to the people of Saskatchewan I have zero 

confidence in that government, and I have zero support for the 

Throne Speech because all they‟re doing is using the good 

deeds and the good intentions of Saskatchewan people for their 

own political agenda. 

 

Now I look across the way, Mr. Speaker, I look across the way 

and the Throne Speech . . . I look across the way and I see 

liberals and I see reformers and I see conservatives. I even see 

some progressive conservatives, Mr. Speaker. But you know 

what? I think there‟s reformers over there. That‟s all they are 

over there. 

 

And my poor former colleagues and liberals out there are 

saying, oh no, we‟re liberals. And what they don‟t realize is 

right behind them, they‟re the most right wing conservatives 

playing with them as puppets. You know, it‟s a puppet show. 

Those are not liberals over there. The liberals say, oh no, we‟re 

liberals. No, you‟re not liberals at all. 

 

You start selling the Crowns and you start doing things, 

dismantling what was built in terms of this province for private 

corporate interest. Mr. Speaker, you begin to realize there are 

no liberals over there. It‟s all reform or extreme right wing 

conservative, Mr. Speaker. That‟s all it is. And no matter how 

much they protest — oh no, I‟m a liberal — Mr. Speaker, there 

are no liberals over there, Mr. Speaker. They‟re pure right wing 

conservatives and that‟s what they are. So stop trying to fool the 

people of Saskatchewan. And there‟s no question in my mind 

that they‟re not fooling the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what I‟ll point out as well is, today now, the Saskatchewan 

Party is touting their new-found social plan, and it‟s all what the 

NDP put in place. So they are following what we did and 

they‟re saying, but we‟re going to put more money in there. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

that that so found new social plan, it‟s actually a smokescreen 

because what they want to do is they want to have private 

corporations developing nuclear power in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s what they want to do. 

 

And what happens, what happens when you bring a private 

power generator in this province? What happens to SaskPower? 

What happens to SaskPower? Is SaskPower gone? Mr. Speaker, 

they‟re not answering that question. 

 

Their member from Meadow Lake was spouting off of nuclear 

development or uranium development. I support uranium 

development. The New Democrats have supported that. But he 

said, I don‟t want to talk about nuclear waste. Well guess what? 

Guess what? The bottom line is nuclear storage. Waste storage 

is part of the nuclear cycle, and you better have that discussion 

as well as all the other discussions. And I think it‟s really 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would point out that the NDP in the mid-90s, through 

some of the fine work and some very fine people, rebuilt this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We rebuilt this province. And I was not 

a part of that till 1998. But I look back in that and some of the 

tremendous amount of work that was done was no thanks to 

those guys across the way. They tried to kill Saskatchewan in 

the ‟80s, and now they come under this other guise of the 

Saskatchewan Party to finish off the job, Mr. Speaker. They‟re 

here to finish off the job, put us back in debt, and oh, by the 

way, we‟re going to sell your Crowns. We‟ll do it very subtly. 

We‟ll do it very subtly. And we‟ll use the elders, we‟ll use the 

Aboriginal people, we‟ll use the low-income people as a 

smokescreen. And in the meantime, the advantage goes to those 

in the back rooms that are slowly but surely planning the 

demise of our Crowns. 

 

And what do you do? You use the most vulnerable people to 

achieve their political goals. And half of them don‟t even know 

what‟s happening, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the sad part. Half of 

them think, oh my goodness, we‟ve done all these wonderful 

things. Man, we must be good. Well 11 months in power — you 

don‟t have $3 billion in your account in 11 months. What 

government gets that? Absolutely no government except this 

government, and they inherit it from an NDP party. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll point out again, the attack on the Crowns, 

you know, and their 10 per cent decrease . . . or a commitment 

to the tax reduction and the reduction of debt, Mr. Speaker, we 

all applaud that. Support for low-income people, support for the 

middle-income people — we all applaud that. But I‟ll say to the 

people out there, watch very carefully what they do because 

they have a hidden agenda. They have a hidden agenda. I‟ll say 

it loud and clear. And all the great news that‟s out there, they 

had absolutely nothing to do with it. 

 

Now their biggest problem is, how do we spend this 3 billion 

bucks? And the first thing they do is they put 2 billion away for 

themselves. And then we get the member from Northwest 

saying, oh we got 125,000 going to this and 200,000 going to 

that. Well let‟s do a percentage analysis. I‟m not a 

mathematician and I‟m not an economist, but what is 125,000 

of 3.2 billion? How much is that? Anybody know? And that‟s 

the level of commitment that those members give the social 

agenda. 

 

And that same token, they all say, oh we‟re here to help. And 

the big issue right across the board is . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes, right. That‟s exactly what we say. Yes, right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll point out again in my closing remarks that 

these guys are off. They‟re back to finish off Saskatchewan. 

They are back to finish off Saskatchewan. And the problem is 

half of them don‟t even know, don‟t even know it. And the 

other problem is you get these rookies, like Moose Jaw North 

there, spouting off every five minutes. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

shouldn‟t he at least know what he‟s talking about before he 

spouts off? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

Mr. Belanger: — And his biggest comment is, 16 years. Oh 

my goodness. That guy‟s brilliant. That‟s what I say, you know, 

from a point of looking at politics. But what‟s behind that? 

What‟s behind that? 

 

And the member from Kindersley makes little comments from 

his chair, you know. He was gone, Mr. Speaker, when the tough 

times were being fought by this government. He went back 

home. And all of a sudden they come back and they‟re going to 

win government? Guess what? He‟s back. 

 

The bottom line is there were some tough things that we had to 

undertake, and we have done a lot of tremendous things that the 

NDP could be proud of. If anything, if anything, the NDP gave 

back this province to the people of Saskatchewan from Bay 

Street and from the banks. And when we had trouble even 

paying our payroll, Mr. Speaker, we had trouble paying our 

payroll, you contrast to what they got today. And you will 

know, you will notice, Mr. Speaker, every time they talk, they 

always forget about pre-1991. It‟s always 16 years. And the 

people of Saskatchewan are not that simple. So if I was you, I 

would stop insulting their intelligence. They know what went 

on in 1980s. The people of Saskatchewan know full well who 

we owe a lot of credit to, and it ain‟t a band of political 

mercenaries across the way. It is the NDP government working 

with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That‟s how that 

works. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And I would point out, my final comments, is you look at 

what‟s happening with the Throne Speech — the intent. There 

is 10 per cent of all this money going to tax breaks — 10 per 

cent, 10 per cent. Then you look at nothing for the Métis Nation 

area directors. The Métis Nation area directors aren‟t getting a 

penny from this government despite the Minister of Métis 

Relations saying, we‟re going to work with them. The area 

directors are thinking of going to the Social Services office for 

extra money because this is their new-found support for the 

First Nations and Métis people. Area directors aren‟t being 

paid. They‟re getting nothing for First Nations‟ budget needs — 

nothing at all. 

 

There‟s nothing for the teachers, Mr. Speaker. There‟s nothing 

for municipal governments. Municipal governments want to be 

partners, and they couldn‟t even deliver that, Mr. Speaker. So 

you go down the list. The civil servants, the civil servants, 

they‟re wondering what are they going to get. 

 

So as they sit on $2 billion, as they sit on $2 billion on their 

election slush fund . . . is what they the called it when they were 

in opposition; now they call it a stabilization effect. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we simply don‟t buy that. They had nothing to do with 

this money they have. They inherited the booming economy. 

Their biggest problem is getting money . . . is how to spend that 

money correctly. 

 

But I do have a favour to ask of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. I really do. And I‟m just going to ask them, please — 

and I say this with all honesty — please, please . . . You know 

I‟m not going to support the Throne Speech, obviously. But 

please, you only have 36 more months before we take over, so 

please don‟t mess things up, okay. Please don‟t mess things up. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Please don‟t put us into debt. Please don‟t 

give us back to Toronto, Bay Street, and the banks. Please just 

coast. And you‟ve only got 36 more months of coasting, and 

then we‟re back and then we‟ll show you what the NDP can do 

with real money. We‟ll show you what the NDP can do with 

some real, real support for the people instead of just using them. 

And we‟ll show you what we can do without the $16 billion 

debt hanging over our head. 

 

If we had $3 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟d do a heck of a 

lot more than those guys across the way. We‟d build that brave, 

brand new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s why we‟ve 

got 20 members on this side of the House. And it‟s our time out. 

It‟s our time out. But the only thing I would ask is, please don‟t 

ruin things, you guys. You‟ve got 36 more months. Enjoy it, 

then get the heck off the way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And I don‟t say this lightly, but I think that was probably the 

worst speech in any Chamber in any time that‟s ever been 

delivered. That was something else, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I‟ll tell you, I don‟t usually do this but I‟m going to 

comment on a rumour that‟s been going around this place and 

that is that the member for Athabasca is actually wanting to be 

the first member to ever be a member of every party in the 

Chamber, and that was actually paving his way into this caucus. 

Either that, or he‟s launching his leadership campaign. I don‟t 

know which one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I found it interesting too, the member for Athabasca saying 

he‟s interested in getting into a discussion on nuclear storage. 

I‟m sure there‟d be many of his constituents that would find that 

interesting. I haven‟t heard that from him before, but we‟ll note 

that and remember that he‟s interested in having that discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it really is a pleasure for me to be able to rise on 

behalf of the citizens of Meadow Lake — a fantastic 

community, fantastic riding which I grew up in. My hometown 

is Meadow Lake. I feel a great sense of honour and 

responsibility to be able to stand in this Chamber on those 

people‟s behalf, and a great sense of honour to be able to rise 

and speak on this Throne Speech which is truly an outstanding 

document, probably one of the best — I think the best — ever 

delivered in this Chamber and in this province. A Throne 

Speech that delivers on all manner of very positive things. 

 

One thing I wanted to comment on though before I get into 

some of the major highlights of the Throne Speech, and I think 

that the member for Athabasca really highlighted it, is the 

anger. What‟s wrong with the members opposite, Mr. Speaker? 

You would think listening to their speeches — the member for 

Athabasca, the member for Regina Walsh Acres, the member 

for Saskatoon Fairview who launched a bitter personal attack on 

the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy — you would think that 

they are living in the worst place, the worst place imaginable, 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

Mr. Speaker. Things are terrible. Listening to those members 

that‟s what you would think. 

 

Well I‟ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I think things are going pretty 

darn well, and I think the people of this province think things 

are going pretty darn well. But you know those members don‟t 

think so. And we just today had a document that was mailed out 

from that party opposite with a picture of a very sad little girl 

and talking about how the province is doing terrible and how 

things are awful. And I really think it speaks negatively of the 

members opposite that they would seek to run down our 

province, that they would seek to run down the economic 

activity in this province. I really think it‟s an unfortunate thing, 

Mr. Speaker, especially when you look at our Throne Speech, 

an incredibly upbeat document. 

 

We‟re paying down debt, Mr. Speaker. Nearly 40 per cent of 

the provincial debt has been paid down in the first year . . . 11 

months of our government — a truly incredible 

accomplishment which I think speaks very well for this 

government. And just to put that in perspective, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s $7 million a day paid down on the debt since we took 

office — 300,000 per hour, $5,000 per minute — which is 

basically the only thing that has kept any of us sane listening to 

some of the speeches opposite, knowing that every minute that 

those members are talking, we‟re paying down debt at the rate 

of $5,000 per hour. 

 

Other incredibly important things — cutting taxes. Mr. Speaker. 

We have put forward the biggest tax cut in the history of 

Saskatchewan, something which I think should be applauded, 

not run down. The members opposite are saying that it‟s terrible 

and it‟s no good. Well I‟ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker. Eighty 

thousand people have been taken off the tax rolls with this one 

move — 80,000 people off the tax rolls. You think that would 

be good news. Not to those guys — they think it‟s terrible. 

 

We‟re talking about infrastructure investment — $1.5 billion of 

investment in infrastructure this year on top of 1 billion which 

we put forward last year, having very, very real benefits and 

very real impacts in ridings right around the province, including 

NDP ridings. 

 

Just as an example, in my constituency of Meadow Lake, I‟ll 

make reference to a famous highway which I‟m sure those 

listening from St. Walburg or Loon Lake or even Meadow Lake 

would be very aware of, which is Highway 26, Mr. Speaker, 

which the NDP had ripped up in an almost impassable state for 

four years — four years. And the member for Athabasca who 

was minister of Highways, I‟m sure would be very aware of 

that particular goat trail. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? In 

one year we fixed it. We got it paved. We got it done. And not 

only that, but we‟re paving the next 13 kilometres on top of 

that, Mr. Speaker, and that‟ll be done next summer. We‟re 

getting the job done. They didn‟t get the job done and we are. 

 

You know and another major part of the Throne Speech was an 

insurance policy, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen in the last month or 

so significant instability in the global financial markets, 

particularly in the global capital markets. We felt that it would 

be a prudent move to have an insurance policy. What do they 

call it? They say it‟s a mountain of money. We should be 

spending it. That‟s what their solution is — spend it. We don‟t 

need an insurance policy. They call it a mountain of money, 

dismissively, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well you know what? We see that as being a very, very 

important rock to build our financial future on. And you know 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve heard very positive comments from 

people in my riding and from around the province about the 

very positive, prudent, thoughtful approach that our government 

has been taking towards the financial management of our 

province and on this particular issue, which they call a 

mountain of money, nothing but positive reviews, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know the other thing I want to talk about is, you know, the 

NDP, the NDP wants to take us backwards. They want to go 

back to the past. We saw it again this morning. They have 

yesterday‟s man — apparently the front-runner in their 

leadership race with the overwhelming support of the caucus 

apparently, including the member for Saskatoon Nutana, I 

guess. I mean that‟s fine. They can support who they will. But 

you know, apparently the member in question, Dwain 

Lingenfelter, said that you know, he wants to run on a platform 

of change. Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think 

people want a change to go back to 1978. 

 

I think people are happy with how things are going. It really is 

morning in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We‟re looking forward 

to a bright day, a bright future. We have an incredibly 

charismatic, forward-looking Premier. People are proud of this 

province. People are proud of this government. Anywhere you 

go in Canada, you tell them you‟re from Saskatchewan, what do 

you hear? You guys are really doing well. It‟s great to see. It‟s 

great to finally have Saskatchewan leading Canada, which we 

are for the first time in the history of our country. And what do 

we hear from the opposition? Doom, gloom, and I mean just a 

general attitude of negativity. I mean it‟s I think a very, a very 

negative thing when you have that coming from your 

opposition. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard some, I think 

some very disturbing messages coming from the opposition. As 

an example, on resource royalties, we‟ve been clear that we are 

not going to be hiking royalties in the foreseeable future. We 

believe that, you know, the regime that we have in place is 

fostering development in the province of our natural resource 

industry, whether it be in potash or uranium, oil and gas, or any 

of the other commodities and minerals that we‟ve been blessed 

with. 

 

What do we hear from the opposition, Mr. Speaker, including 

the Energy and Resources critic from the official opposition? 

We hear we should be hiking these royalties. That‟s what we 

hear from the opposition and the member for Battlefords, the 

bear-hunting, oil man from Battlefords, you know, has said in 

committee that he‟s committed to looking at reviewing the 

royalty structure. 

 

And frankly, Mr. Speaker, that party has formed government in 

the past and they aspire to do so again in the future, 

presumably. You know, talk like that from that opposition has 

an impact. I mean people are listening, industry is listening. 

And, you know, even in opposition, Mr. Speaker, the crew 

opposite are able to slow down the growth of this province and, 

you know, it speaks to kind of their attitude. 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — For leave for the introduction of guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave granted for introduction of 

guests? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy 

and Resources. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, seated in the west gallery there are three guests 

that are very important people here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Bill 

Doyle, the president and chief executive officer of Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan; Garth Moore, the president of 

PCS Potash of Saskatchewan; and I believe the other gentlemen 

is Wayne Brownlee, executive vice-president and chief 

financial officer for PCS [Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]. 

 

As all members of the legislature would know, the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan represents a very significant 

company in Saskatchewan, employing literally hundreds of 

people in our province. They have a tremendous amount of 

investment in Saskatchewan. They‟ve also indicated in recent 

months that there‟s going to be a huge amount of expansion in 

our province. This is obviously a very, very good news and 

success story about a company in Saskatchewan that‟s doing 

business and creating wealth, opportunity, and business 

interests in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So I would want all members to join with me this afternoon in 

about 30 seconds here to welcome them here this afternoon. 

And the Premier, along with the Finance minister and myself, 

will be meeting with them to talk about the interests of the 

potash industry which is extremely important to the people of 

our province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, by leave to also welcome the 

guests to the Chamber. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Granted. I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition I also want to recognize and welcome 

the guests in the Chamber today from Potash Corporation. Mr. 

Speaker, I want the members to know, and the members of the 

public to know, that the official opposition supports the 

arguments that have just been made by the Minister of Energy 

and Resources across the way. We have always valued the 

relationship between government and the potash industry in this 

province. We look forward to continued and successful 

investments by the corporation and by the sector in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And like the Minister of Energy and 

Resources, we wish the industry great success in this province 

for the benefit of all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would also 

like to join with the Minister of Energy and Resources and the 

official opposition critic in welcoming the gentlemen from 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to the Chamber. And I 

think it‟s actually timely — and it fits in with what I‟m talking 

about — to note that PCS was once a Crown corporation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That corporation was privatized, and we‟ve seen incredible, 

incredible results. PCS, which is a true success story in 

Saskatchewan, not too long ago was the biggest market cap 

company in Canada — a tremendous success story, expanding 

as we speak. I think that‟s something that speaks very well to 

the ingenuity and to the leadership of a Saskatchewan 

corporation, given the opportunity to compete in the 

marketplace and succeed. And I think that‟s an incredibly 

positive thing. 

 

And, you know, the other thing I was just talking about prior, 

Mr. Speaker, was resource royalties. And it is concerning when 

you hear the official opposition musing about instability in the 

royalty regime, potential increases in royalties down the road. 

Corporations are making decisions on capital investment based 

on factors like what they‟re hearing from the official 

opposition. And like I said, I think it‟s a very sad commentary 

on the official opposition that even in opposition — not even in 

government which they held back development — even in 

opposition they‟re playing their role and holding back 

development in this province. You know, really a sad day. 

 

Another issue, nuclear, where do they stand, Mr. Speaker? We 

don‟t know where they stand. We know that they have members 

like the former member, Peter Prebble, who was opposed to 

even uranium mining. I would suspect that there‟s members 

sitting in the caucus over there right now that are uncomfortable 

with uranium mining and very, very uncomfortable with any 

further developments in the nuclear cycle, you know. And 

we‟ve heard comments from members to that effect. 

 

It‟s interesting to note as well that one of their leadership 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

candidates who‟s taking quite a bullish position on nuclear, how 

that‟s going to play out when he has members — if he is to be 

the next leader — in his caucus who fundamentally disagree 

with him. An official opposition that can‟t get its act together 

frankly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, like I said, we know that they‟ve held back 

development on the nuclear file over the course of their 16 

years in government. We know that there were some very real 

opportunities that were missed, or that were not just missed, but 

deliberately blocked by that party opposite and by that 

government opposite. 

 

We know the member from Prince Albert across the way had 

talked negatively about a recent nuclear partnership agreement 

which we had announced. And I think it should be concerning 

to the people of Saskatchewan that they have an official 

opposition that really has no stated policy on any of these 

things. They have members going off in every direction on it. I 

think it‟s important that we get those members opposite on the 

record as to where they stand on the nuclear issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another issue where we don‟t know where they stand —oil 

sands development. We‟ve had some very negative comments 

from that party‟s federal leader. That party‟s federal leader 

actually, on the second day of the federal campaign, flew over 

the oil sands in Fort McMurray and said, I‟m going to shut it 

down, shut them all down. One of the engines of economic 

growth in Canada, a critical component of energy security for 

North America going forward, we had the NDP leader saying 

he‟s going to shut it down. And it‟s a concern. 

 

I mean we have opportunities here in Saskatchewan up for oil 

sands development, Mr. Speaker. And the Axe Lake project 

which most people are familiar with — 3-plus billion barrels of 

oil in a proven state resulting potentially in a 10 to $15 billion 

project, and what do we hear opposite? Doom and gloom and 

an attitude of, well we can‟t do this. We shouldn‟t do this. They 

are always looking to the past, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t want to 

move forward. They don‟t want to see development. They don‟t 

want to see economic activity. 

 

We‟re open to looking at these things. We‟re going to do them 

in an environmentally responsible manner. We insist on that. 

That‟s a critical component of anything that‟s going to be 

happening moving forward, is that they are going to be 

environmentally sustainable and friendly. 

 

But the members opposite, well their record speaks for itself, 

Mr. Speaker. Their federal leader‟s been very clear in saying 

that they want to shut it down. And we can only presume that 

that‟s the position of the members opposite as well because we 

haven‟t heard anything different. 

 

Another issue which I think is important is the issue of a gun 

registry. We don‟t know where that party stands. We know 

where their federal party stands and their federal leader, which 

is that they would like to spend even more billions of dollars on 

the gun registry. They want to make rural, average, law-abiding 

Canadians criminals. We don‟t agree with that, Mr. Speaker. 

We think that‟s a wrong-headed policy. Actually we would 

encourage those members opposite, if they actually believe that 

this policy is wrong-headed, why don‟t they call up their federal 

leader? Why don‟t they tell Jack Layton, the member for 

Toronto-Danforth, that, you know what; we don‟t agree with 

this; you should be supporting the Conservative government in 

eliminating the federal firearms registry. Will they do that? I‟ll 

tell you what, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not holding my breath. Because 

I think fundamentally those members agree with the gun 

registry. We haven‟t heard any different. We haven‟t heard any 

different. 

 

Biofuels. Biofuels. Where do the members opposite stand on 

biofuels? We know where their federal leader stands, again, and 

that‟s to say no, we don‟t want biofuels; we don‟t want an 

industry. This is an industry that offers great potential for our 

province, that offers great benefits for our agricultural 

community, that opens new markets and new opportunities for 

our agricultural producers. And what do we have from the 

members opposite? They say no. No, we‟re not interested in 

that; we don‟t want that to go forward. So again, something 

where the NDP are looking to the past, are out of touch with the 

reality of modern Saskatchewan. 

 

Even the NDP amendment, Mr. Speaker, calls for no 

confidence in the government. Frankly I think that‟s an 

irresponsible position to take. Let‟s just assume, Mr. Speaker, 

that that amendment actually was passed. What would that 

mean, Mr. Speaker? It would mean there‟d be a general election 

right now. Ask those members opposite, do they actually want 

to go into a general election right now? How many of them 

would be left, Mr. Speaker? I‟ll tell you. There‟d be about three 

of them. 

 

Irresponsible opposition. They‟re bitter. They‟re angry. They 

reflexively oppose anything that this government puts forward. 

They‟re not happy to see the tremendous development and 

growth that‟s happening in this province. They say, oh it was all 

because of us. Mr. Speaker, it was not all because of them. 

 

The number of people that have moved back to this province 

this year, a net growth of about sixteen-plus thousand people. I 

can tell you, the member for Athabasca said in his speech last 

session that, you know, do you think those people were just all 

standing there waiting to come back into the province? Well I‟ll 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, absolutely they were. Absolutely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harrison: — So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I obviously 

am going to be supporting the Throne Speech. I think it‟s a 

bright day for Saskatchewan. We have a bright future in front of 

us. We have a forward-looking government looking to the 

future and we have a backward-looking opposition looking to 

the past. So I will be supporting the Throne Speech and 

opposing the amendment. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland, who I understand is about to give his maiden 

speech in the House. Congratulations. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m very happy to be 

here today to talk about the Throne Speech and to introduce 

myself to the members that don‟t already know me. I was born 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

in Prince Albert, spent a lot of time as a kid in the Duck Lake 

area. My grandparents were Métis, and we‟re very proud of our 

Métis heritage. I also lived in the Prince Albert area, and many 

years my family has been involved in the forestry industry. In 

these three communities — and I‟m currently living in La 

Ronge — the three communities that I talk about for over 100 

years more have had a genuine interest and had an opportunity 

in the industry, in forestry, and a very, strong . . . Within my 

family‟s business, the communities, the forestry industry was an 

opportunity to take care of the family needs. 

 

At this time, I‟d like to go into thanking some of the people that 

got me here today and explain to you, I guess, the issues and 

some of the struggles we faced as, I guess, young people 

growing up and the values we were taught. And I truly mean 

this. My values I mean from my heart, I try to work with and 

will work with individuals. 

 

I‟d like to thank my grandfather who was a Métis veteran. He‟s 

not with us any more. He‟s passed on, but he instilled a lot of 

pride in us. We are a large family; 13 kids he had, many 

grandkids. And he was a farming person. He taught us the 

values back then about working together as a community on the 

farm. We didn‟t have a choice. You did the job you were asked 

to do. And at the end of the day, you know, when he would 

gather his harvest and work hard and do everything he did, he 

would make sure that part of what he gathered he shared with 

everyone else, those that needed stuff. That‟s where I believe 

and truly in my heart I get my values on a social, and being the 

social person that I am, we have to share our wealth. I believe 

that. 

 

I‟d like to acknowledge my grandmother, Lillian, and also my 

father for his guidance and help. He‟s not with us any more. He 

passed away four years ago, but I know he‟s here and watching 

me and proud. I‟d like to acknowledge my mother who still 

lives in the Prince Albert area, and my six brothers. 

 

I‟d like to especially acknowledge my brother Perry. He‟s a 

very proud entrepreneur. He works hard, and he tries to work 

with people in a positive way. He‟s inspired me, and I just want 

to acknowledge him. I‟d like to thank my wife and my kids for 

their support. It is not easy to get involved in this process and I 

guess to get elected here. I‟ve learned that and I commend all of 

you who have got here. In 1990 I moved to La Ronge where I 

had a blended family with my wife. We have five children; we 

have nine grandchildren. 

 

And I‟ve had an opportunity to understand some of the issues 

and the concerns of community members. I‟ve had an 

opportunity to serve on boards — some were elected, some I 

volunteered, some I guess I was asked to serve and do my part. 

I‟ve been elected as an alderman. I also was a Chair of Northern 

Lights board of education. I sat on the board of education for 

eight years and I just left recently as the board Chair. I also had 

an opportunity to serve Gabriel Dumont Institute as acting 

Chair for the last four years and that was an opportunity that . . . 

I am grateful that the people gave me an opportunity to learn 

more and to work with the Métis education and how we can 

work together through training. And that has given me a good 

opportunity to speak here today and bring their concerns 

forward. They have many challenges, but I know I can bring 

those issues forward and at least have the concerns surfaced 

here, and to meet with the ministers and bring information to 

those ministries that need to hear the issues working with them. 

I will do that. 

 

As a person who also has a disability, I was proud to serve as 

the Chair of the Gary Tinker Federation. I‟ve also served as the 

president of the Métis local in my community. I also currently 

serve as a board member for the Kikinahk Friendship Centre. 

This has given me an opportunity to get to meet many people, 

learn about the issues, sit at the tables, different communities. 

We‟re a large group when we come together. 

 

Some of the issues I want to share with you today that are 

facing my constituents . . . And I believe this, that there are 

some good things that were in the Throne Speech. But we have 

a lot of work to do. 

 

[12:15] 

 

We definitely need more affordable housing in the North in the 

constituency I represent. It‟s crucial that we have this. Going 

around visiting the community members, seeing some of the 

conditions, the crowding on the reserve, off reserve, some of the 

conditions of the housing, those issues have to be addressed. 

And maybe they got there for different reasons. I‟m not here to 

debate that; I‟m here to say we have to work together and move 

on. 

 

Highways and roads in my constituency are huge. You know, 

the highway to Cumberland House, definitely that road, I will 

lobby, work with the community members to bring those 

concerns to the minister‟s attention. I will do that as I‟ve been 

asked to represent the community. You know, Highway No. 2 

North to Southend needs to be addressed. Highway 165 West 

needs to be addressed. There‟s a number of the roads that 

actually have and need improvements immediately for safety, 

not the economic boom, but at the end of those roads are 

communities, a valuable resource to this government and this 

province. 

 

And the minister was up there, and I know he was flying around 

and checking out some of the highways and some of the 

communities. And you know it‟s good that he‟s doing that; he‟s 

flying into the North and having a look at some of the 

conditions. But I also say, drive into some of the communities 

that at the end of them is a community with valuable people. 

Not valuable resources, valuable people — they are our 

resource. 

 

Some of the other items we‟re faced with and the cost . . . And 

right now affordability is huge. For food, some people, you 

know, can go to the market and you can get the fresh 

vegetables. You can go to the grocery stores and you have an 

opportunity, there‟s so many of them in some of the bigger 

centres. But in some of our small, isolated communities there 

isn‟t a lot of opportunity for affordable vegetables. You want to 

talk about the foods like that. It‟s tough. And hopefully with the 

resources that the government has behind it, it can address some 

of those concerns. And I will work with my communities to 

bring those issues to the ministries again, and hopefully in good 

faith have some of those things addressed. 

 

I guess my reason for wanting to be here . . . You know you do 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

a lot of thinking when you have an opportunity to come and 

address you guys, and sometimes I have to admit it‟s very 

intimidating, but I know at the end of the day we have to work 

together. This province asks and demands that of me and of all 

of us to do what‟s best for Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan people. 

We have an obligation to them, and I truly . . . Being young, 

learning the process in this House I have seen some things, and 

the debate goes back and forth. But at the end of the day I know 

it‟s about the people and it has to be about the people. Yes, 

there are certain agendas and there‟s certain things go on. 

 

I‟m going to have an opportunity to debate and to get into the 

debates with the members opposite, and honestly I look up to 

that challenge. We‟ll work on the issues that have to be 

addressed. And I know that there‟s a lot of revenue out there. 

 

And I truly hope that we can continue to work with the First 

Nations and Métis. Duty to consult is a huge, huge issue, and it 

has to be addressed. It‟s not going away, and it won‟t go away. 

People are tired of hearing, yes, we hear you, yes, we hear you. 

I‟m new so there‟s a new flavour to me, and I‟m saying that we 

have to move forward today. So through the First Nations and 

Métis ministry, I hope those duty to consult and accommodate 

issues for Métis and First Nations will be addressed, and we can 

start on that today. 

 

I want to actually acknowledge a few people that I . . . I had a 

list of them. I just want to acknowledge them. They were very 

helpful. They‟re community members that care about our 

communities. Vickie Sanderson I‟d like to acknowledge, an 

elder in our community. Catherine Charles, you can go to this 

lady and you can get the advice you need. She has a heart of 

gold and she‟s caring. Doris Halkett, Angie Merasty, 

Norma-Jean Angus, Alf Wiens, Lyle Brooks, Bernice Custer — 

these are individuals that put a lot of work into what they 

believe, and I just want to thank them and acknowledge them at 

this time. I feel an obligation to help others. I want the 

economic prosperity to be for all of us, not just some of us — 

all of us. I definitely want to work for a better future for the 

province, for all of our residents. 

 

But when we talk about certain rates, I sometimes have to 

wonder about, you know, the boom and the big boom. And I 

look at the Aboriginal population and the percentage of 

unemployment that they‟re faced with in the North, the isolated 

communities. That has to be addressed and hopefully we can 

address that over the next 36 months, bringing those concerns 

forward to the ministries that have to hear those things. 

 

I guess I want to read something to you. Just thinking about it, 

and people have made comments about the resources and the 

natural resources we have and the abundance, but I‟ve been told 

from some of the Elders to be cautious. So I read this to you: 

 

Only after the Last Tree has been cut down, 

Only after the Last River has been poisoned, 

Only after the Last Fish has been caught, 

Only then will [we] . . . find that Money Cannot Be Eaten. 

 

I just wanted to read that to you and say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I‟m getting ready to close. And I just want to say to the 

members and all of you, thank you for allowing me to address 

you. And thank you for respecting it was my first speech, and to 

that I am grateful. And to the members, as I heard some of you 

talk about your speeches and your response to the Throne, and 

you welcomed me here. I mean that, truly, the ones that did it 

with respect. From the bottom of my heart, thank you for that, 

thanking you for making me feel welcome to this Assembly. 

 

And, I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to close with this. 

When the by-election was called, the member of Swift Current 

said he wanted a strong voice from the North. Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I want to assure him that the Cumberland constituency 

does have that strong voice and it is on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Before I begin I would like to welcome our newest member to 

this Assembly, the member for Cumberland. And I congratulate 

him on his recent election victory and for just delivering his 

maiden speech. It wasn‟t too long ago when I stood as a brand 

new elected member after a by-election and delivered my 

maiden speech, and I know that it‟s a bit of a daunting task. 

And he did a great job, and I want to congratulate him for that. 

 

I would also like to thank my staff, Whitney Friesen, in my 

constituency office. He has been serving MLAs for that 

constituency for 15 years. He‟s extraordinary. He‟s one of the 

hardest working, most dedicated people I know, and I would 

like to thank him again for his service — not just to me, Mr. 

Speaker, but to the constituents in Martensville. 

 

I‟d also like to thank my staff in my minister‟s officer here, 

Krista, Kelly, and I have two Drews — so I‟ll thank Drew one 

and Drew two, they know who they are — and thank them for 

their work over this past 11 months. It‟s been a big adjustment 

for all of us, and they‟ve been very helpful. 

 

It‟s my pleasure today to stand in support of my government‟s 

Throne Speech. I would like to thank our Premier for his 

leadership, and our ministers and MLAs for their input. But 

most importantly I would like to thank the residents of 

Saskatchewan who offered their suggestions on the issues that 

were most important to them, because, Mr. Speaker, this Throne 

Speech is their Throne Speech. The direction, programming, 

and funding outlined in last week‟s speech is for them. It 

reflects the values of Saskatchewan people and implements 

many of the ideas that we received. 

 

And the response to this fall‟s Throne Speech has been 

overwhelming. We have received positive feedback from all 

across this great province. We know that some within our 

province are facing challenges. It‟s the government‟s 

responsibility to address these and make sure that our policies 

reflect the needs of those residents, and that is what this Throne 

Speech has done. 

 

The NDP would know that challenges are facing the people in 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

this province. We know that over the summer NDP MLAs were 

out and about in our constituencies to see what challenges they 

are facing. I would like to commend the opposition members, 

not for taking these summer road trips, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

for actually being able to find our constituencies. After ignoring 

us for the last 16 years, I‟m surprised they could even find 

them. I‟m pretty sure that the NDP researchers were busy on 

Google maps trying to track us down. 

 

And I‟m sure we all know what the NDP heard over their 

summer travels. The NDP would have heard that roads need to 

be repaired. Why? Because the NDP neglected to fix them. 

After 16 years they are crumbling and many are unsafe. I know 

that many of the roads in my riding have suffered over the past 

few years. 

 

The Highways minister has a big job, and I want to thank him 

for the attention that he‟s given to the roads in my riding over 

this past year. While there is still work to be done, these roads 

are now better maintained than they have been in years. 

 

The NDP would have heard that schools need to be built. Why? 

Because the NDP refused to believe that our province would 

grow and ignored the growing population in my constituency 

and the need for additional capacity. Warman and Martensville 

are two thriving towns with populations of around 6,000 people 

each. Young families continue to move into these towns, and 

space in schools is cramped. 

 

The NDP turned a blind eye to the growth in my constituency 

and refused to plan ahead. The NDP would‟ve heard that 

hospitals need to be fixed. Why? Because the NDP failed to 

fund these capital repairs. They would have heard that seniors 

were having a hard time on fixed incomes. Why? Because the 

NDP failed to increase the seniors‟ income assistance program 

since 1992 — 1992, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If the NDP aren‟t 

embarrassed by this abysmal record, they certainly should be. 

 

They would‟ve heard that those with disabilities were facing 

waiting lists for services and shortages of housing. Why? 

Because the NDP allowed the growing lists, the waiting lists to 

grow, and refused to address this important issue. I‟m sure they 

heard an earful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They know that these and 

other issues are of a great priority for people in this province. 

 

And even after hearing all of these concerns and knowing that 

announcements by this government over the past two weeks 

addressed these issues, it would appear, Mr. Speaker, the only 

ones who are not pleased are the NDP. And I can‟t really blame 

them. Last week‟s Throne Speech, plus additional 

announcements by our Premier and Social Services minister, all 

pointed out the glaring shortfalls of the NDP over the last 16 

years. 

 

After committing a record $1 billion to infrastructure in this 

year‟s budget, we are committing additional dollars. This 

money is needed to address the massive capital infrastructure 

deficit left behind by the NDP. The NDP apparently weren‟t 

worried about keeping up to growth in this province because 

they never truly believed that growth would continue. The 

status quo was always good enough for them. Mr. Speaker, the 

status quo was not good enough for us. The people of this 

province expect and deserve more. 

Because of the personal income tax reductions we have 

introduced, 80,000 people will no longer be paying income tax. 

By increasing the personal exemption levels, people will have 

more money in their pockets. People in this province work hard 

for their money and they deserve to keep more of it. As a 

government, we committed that everyone in Saskatchewan 

would benefit from our new-found economic prosperity and, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are keeping that promise. 

 

Recent announcements by our Social Services minister also 

pointed to the NDP neglect of those who are often in the 

greatest need. The minister announced almost $80 million in 

additional funding for persons with disabilities. That will, 

among other things, eliminate the 440-person waiting list that 

grew unchecked under the NDP. 

 

I had the opportunity over this past weekend to go to a dinner 

for Sunshine Housing in my constituency. The great folks at 

Sunshine Housing provide homes and care and programming 

for those of intellectual disabilities. During the comments at the 

supper, one of the board members said that in her 10 years of 

working in this industry, she has never seen a commitment by 

government like she‟s seeing under our government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It is humbling to know that the decisions that we are making 

every day have a direct impact on the lives of people in this 

province. These are the right things to do, and they are long 

overdue. And we will continue to work hard to make sure that 

everyone in this province benefits. 

 

[12:30] 

 

And just this week the Social Services minister addressed the 

unbelievable neglect by the NDP of our seniors by increasing 

the seniors assistance program, something the NDP never did. 

The NDP failed to increase this assistance program. Hadn‟t 

touched it for 16 years — not while the cost of living increased, 

not while seniors were wondering how to pay their bills on a 

fixed income. I congratulate the minister for her dedication, for 

her time and energy, and all that she has put into this portfolio 

to ensure that our seniors are looked after. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an honour for me to represent the people of 

the constituency of Martensville. They work hard, raise their 

families, and contribute to their local communities. And even 

with the unprecedented growth in my constituency, people have 

been able to maintain a sense of community and keep their 

towns places where you know your neighbours and are willing 

to lend a helping hand. 

 

It is also an honour for me to serve this province as 

Environment minister. It is a challenging portfolio. It covers 

hunting and fishing, environmental permitting for exploration, 

water safety, forest fire fighting, conservation, recycling, and 

climate change, just to name a few. 

 

Over the past year I‟ve met with stakeholders, Saskatchewan 

residents, and business owners. There is something that all of 

these people have in common. They all wish to leave our 

province in better shape than what we found it. I want to 

commend them for their dedication to our province. We are 

better able to do our job because of the commitment of others. 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

I have now been in this position for almost a year, and while I 

have the opportunity to do so, I would like to publicly thank the 

amazing men and women who work within the Ministry of 

Environment. I cannot begin to say how much I appreciate their 

help, suggestions, and input over the last 11 months. 

 

We are undertaking some major projects within the ministry, 

and staff has stepped up to make sure that we achieve our goals. 

As outlined in the Throne Speech, we are working on a 

comprehensive water management plan. Water is our most vital 

resource. Without it we could not survive. Without it business 

and industry could not operate. We‟ll be working on identifying 

quality and quantity measurements to ensure that we have a 

secure, safe, long-term supply of fresh, clean water for 

Saskatchewan residents. We will also continue to promote 

water conservation. So much is wasted every day, and every 

one of us can make a difference by changing our behaviour in 

small ways. 

 

Also outlined in the Throne Speech is our commitment to 

delivering a real plan for addressing climate change. I know that 

the NDP and their Environment critic love to say they had a 

plan in place. But, Mr. Speaker, if they did have a plan, they 

certainly didn‟t leave it behind when they left. 

 

We know that former NDP cabinet ministers took home their 

correspondence files with them, and perhaps the last NDP 

Environment minister took home this plan as well. Maybe it‟s 

hidden in the basement between the potato bin and last year‟s 

Christmas ornaments. Or maybe, Mr. Speaker, the NDP‟s plan 

was to think happy thoughts, wish really, really hard and we‟ll 

reach our targets. Because, Mr. Speaker, the only thing they did 

leave behind was a glossy brochure with pretty pictures 

containing a greenhouse gas emissions target. What they failed 

to provide was a path forward. There was no plan to get from 

point A to point B. 

 

The NDP failed to have targets for industry, for oil or gas, or for 

SaskPower. And we know that SaskPower‟s one of the worst 

emitters in the entire country. According to a letter I received of 

August of last year while in opposition, from the former NDP 

Environment minister, the NDP plan was to simply to buy their 

way out of it. He estimated that SaskPower would purchase a 

minimum of $45 million in offset credits, a cost that he planned 

to pass on to ratepayers. There was not one word of actually 

reducing SaskPower‟s emissions. No emissions reductions, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, just higher rates for SaskPower subscribers. 

 

The NDP also failed to introduce any regulations or legislation. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. They set targets and walked away. We are 

now doing the heavy lifting that the NDP failed to do. We are 

working on regulations. We are working on how to get from 

point A to point B. And I can guarantee you this, Mr. Speaker. 

We are not working on glossy brochures with pretty pictures. 

We must do better and we will do better. 

 

The NDP lack any credibility on this file. Even though they did 

set targets, it didn‟t take them long before they abandoned 

those. Just this past spring during a media scrum, the NDP 

Environment critic was shilling for the Conservative 

government and demanding that we adopt the federal 

Conservative targets for emissions. They can‟t keep their story 

straight on so many things. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, just last year the opposition leader said, 

and I quote, “The further development of a biofuels industry is 

an extraordinary opportunity for Saskatchewan . . .” And then 

just this spring his leader, Jack Layton, voted in the federal 

House of Commons against Bill C-33 which legislates that fuels 

have to contain 5 per cent content from biofuels. 

 

And you know what we didn‟t hear, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We 

didn‟t hear this opposition party stand up to their federal leader 

and support Saskatchewan and support the biofuels industry in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last year the NDP were bragging about spending almost $2 

billion on a clean coal project. I actually have at home a fridge 

magnet that the NDP had printed on clean coal. I forgot it 

today, but I‟ll bring it along next week because I‟m sure the 

NDP would be interested in the paraphernalia that they were 

printing in promotion of their own clean coal project. And now 

suddenly, Mr. Speaker, they‟re not in favour of clean coal for 

Saskatchewan and SaskPower. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP are against clean coal. They are 

against nuclear energy. They had no intention of actually 

reducing emissions at SaskPower. They are now content to 

support dirty coal, I guess, and buy their way out through 

offsets. I‟m not sure how the environment actually benefits 

from that approach. 

 

Last year the former NDP Environment minister said that 

people were willing to pay for greenhouse gas emissions in this 

province. Now the NDP is complaining that reducing emissions 

might cost some money. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP Environment critic couldn‟t even 

keep her own story straight during the course of one media 

scrum. On April 22 of this year, the NDP Environment critic 

said that intensity targets don‟t work, but then demanded that 

we adopt the federal Conservative plan which is based on 

intensity targets. Just a short while ago, the NDP leader was 

praising the benefits to our province of oil sands exploration 

and development, and then this spring stood on the steps of this 

legislature to protest oil sands. Perhaps the NDP Environment 

critic should check with her favourite leadership candidate 

before she continues her attack on oil sands exploration 

because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while she was standing on the 

steps of this legislature protesting oil sands, the newest 

leadership candidate for the NDP was in his office tower in 

Calgary trying to figure out the best ways to promote oil sands 

in this country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a member of a government that 

understands that industry and business development can go 

hand in hand with environmental protection, and that is what we 

will do. We welcome new business to this province. We see 

new interest in investment every week. It is encouraging for us 

to know that others are seeing what we‟ve always believed — 

that Saskatchewan is a great place to be. Mr. Speaker, on this 

side of the House we recognize that is because of the hard work 

of the men and women of this province that Saskatchewan is 

leading the nation in growth.  

 

The NDP apparently have a very different view. The member 

for Saskatoon Fairview yesterday, and the member for 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

Saskatoon Massey Place today, said that the NDP is solely 

responsible for Saskatchewan‟s success. How absolutely 

arrogant. We don‟t believe that, Mr. Speaker. We believe that it 

is the people of this province who are helping to make sure that 

we have a prosperous future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP shows an absolute disregard for those 

who work tirelessly each and every day to put food on their 

tables, to build up their businesses, and to dream of successful 

futures for their children. 

 

We welcome the thousands of newcomers to our province, 

people who are moving here with hopes and dreams for the 

future. And as a government, we will continue to work hard to 

make sure that the policies and plans that we put in place are 

there to benefit all who call Saskatchewan home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that I will not be supporting 

the opposition‟s amendment. We‟ve had enough of their 

backward-looking ways and their doom and gloom. I am 

proudly supporting my government‟s Throne Speech because it 

is the path forward towards a stronger Saskatchewan. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m once 

again . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — With leave to make an introduction, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave granted for introduction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carry on. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

thank the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

It‟s my pleasure to introduce to this Hon. Assembly Mr. Dave 

Marit, the president of Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, SARM, and also very much appreciated board 

member on the Enterprise Saskatchewan board. I hope all 

members will extend a warm welcome to Mr. Marit. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, also with leave to join in 

introduction of our guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is that leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

want to join with the minister in welcoming Mr. Marit to our 

Legislative Assembly. Certainly he‟s no stranger to both sides 

of the House by virtue of his position with Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities. We welcome the work that 

Mr. Marit does on behalf of municipalities and we very much 

welcome the contribution that he continues to make to the 

development and good growth of this province. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

Mr. Furber: — I‟d like to thank the constituents of Prince 

Albert Northcote for their continued support, and as I travel 

through my constituency, they chat a little bit about the Throne 

Speech and a lot about this government. And it‟s my pleasure to 

represent their interests in this House and I‟ll continue to work 

hard to do that. 

 

I‟d like to also thank my partner, Michelle, for being so 

understanding and supportive — a better partner you could not 

find. I know that these jobs are difficult and the time that we 

spend apart is difficult on everybody. I‟d also like to thank her 

family for welcoming me into their family and treating me like 

one of their own. It‟s a great pleasure to spend time with them 

and I look forward to many years of doing that. 

 

I‟d like to thank my own family for being supportive, for 

providing me a place to stay and a home-cooked meal which I 

don‟t get when I‟m down here. Thanks to my constituency 

assistant, Rose. If there were rankings for constituency 

assistants, she‟d be right at the top — always works hard, 

extremely dedicated, and does her best to make me look as 

good as possible. It‟s a difficult task, but she does it as well as 

anybody could. 

 

I‟d also like to take this time to congratulate the member from 

Cumberland. I think people that go through an election and 

choose to let their name stand for public office know what it‟s 

like to take a chance to want to make a difference, and the 

member‟s done that on numerous occasions already throughout 

his life and I think he‟ll continue to move an agenda forward 

that helps his own constituents. And I appreciate an opportunity 

to watch him do that while he‟s elected in this legislature. 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

I‟d like to say hi to the folks in Prince Albert who I play soccer, 

slo-pitch, and football with. Soccer‟s a game that takes a lot of 

skill to play, and you should be in good shape to play it. And I 

thank them for accepting me even though I‟ve got none of those 

attributes and for carrying me while I do that. 

 

The most amazing part of the Throne Speech, I thought, was the 

part where the Lieutenant Governor read that this government 

wants to take credit for doing nothing. I found it interesting. 

They brag about how smart they are as business people, and all 

this acumen, this business intelligence leads them to the 

conclusion that when it comes to royalty rates, the NDP are the 

ones that got it right. 

 

Now during the election, the now Premier and the member from 

Kindersley went around the province talking about, we‟re going 

to do a review. It was their words — not, as the member for 

Meadow Lake would suggest, our words. It was their words 

when they said that they would do a review of royalty taxes as it 

pertains to this industry. Now shortly after they said it, they 

went and talked to the folks in Calgary, and the folks in Calgary 

said, whoa, guys, this isn‟t healthy for the industry. What you 

need to do is do what the NDP did. Keep them where they are. 

We like them where they are, and we appreciate the work that 

they did to get them there. 

 

Now apparently this business acumen is also true when it comes 

to setting royalty rates for uranium, potash, for corporate 

income taxes, the small-business threshold, the corporate capital 

taxes, and taxes for our manufacturing sector. Maybe they 

should signal how smart they really are and pledge that they are 

also going to keep these NDP policies in place to help the 

businesses in Saskatchewan grow. 

 

Now based on this policy of doing nothing as it pertains to the 

economy, I can‟t believe that they are not embarrassed when 

they take credit for the economy and where it is now. What 

changes have they made to business taxes in this province that 

leads them to believe that they should take any credit for this? 

Nothing. They‟ve done nothing. The only policy change 

they‟ve made is to beat up union brothers and sisters. 

 

Now they did create Enterprise Saskatchewan . . . well or so we 

think. What have they done? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s only been a year. 

 

Mr. Furber: — It‟s only been a year. The Premier has quotes 

to the North Saskatoon Business Association saying within a 

month of taking power, Enterprise Saskatchewan is going to be 

providing guidance to this government on business in 

Saskatchewan. It‟s been 11 months. What a failure from this 

government. They haven‟t even organized the boards in the 

regions yet. How is it that they can‟t organize a board in a year? 

Shocking. I‟m not surprised though because we‟re living by 

NDP policy as it pertains to business taxes and royalty taxes 

and royalty rates, and that‟s why we‟re doing as well as we are. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Now what is a Throne Speech? A Throne Speech signifies your 

intentions for the next year in office. And I listened intently 

throughout the Throne Speech. It was 50 minutes long and I 

think it was a drain on most of the people in here to listen that 

long to not much . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, well the 

room was essentially empty. But I‟d like to talk about what the 

Throne Speech means for the people of Prince Albert and many 

of the residents represented by the member for Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Now let‟s talk about the promises made to the people of Prince 

Albert by the Premier and by the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. The now Premier stood on a bridge with the then 

mayor, Jim Stiglitz, two years ago and said, by gosh, we need to 

win votes in Prince Albert here in the next election. I think I‟ve 

devised a plan. What am I going to do? I‟m going to promise 

the people of Prince Albert a second bridge if we‟re elected. 

Prince Albert‟s the size, it‟s got the economic activity that it 

should have a second bridge. 

 

So where are they on that promise? Nothing in the first year, 

nothing in this Throne Speech, nothing to signify that they‟ve 

done anything or are interested in doing anything on that file. 

 

Additionally, more scheming to try to get elected, and what is 

it? The Premier gets in a plane, schemes the whole way up to 

Prince Albert about how he‟s going to get elected in Prince 

Albert, get a member elected in Prince Albert, so what does he 

do? What does he do? They land in the airport there; they hold a 

press conference. They don‟t even call the mayor and talk to 

him; they just phone the media. Let‟s not talk to anybody in 

there. 

 

So who shows up? The media shows up and they say, Prince 

Albert needs huge upgrades to this airport and if we‟re elected, 

gosh darn if we‟re going to provide them for the people of 

Prince Albert. So we‟ve had a year in office. We‟ve had a 

Throne Speech that signifies their intention for the next year 

and what have we got on airport improvements for Prince 

Albert? Nothing. It‟s an embarrassment to this administration 

with $3 billion in the bank that they can‟t fulfill any of the 

promises they made to Prince Albert. 

 

During the campaign, the person that ran against me for the 

Saskatchewan Party promised the city a tertiary health care 

centre. Does the Premier stand behind the word of this 

candidate, or was it just another empty promise to get elected? 

 

I‟m thankful that everybody in Prince Albert remembers this 

quote, and I quote: “A vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill open 

and people working.” I don‟t go around Prince Albert any day 

without people talking to me about this quote. He took out an 

ad. Unsolicited, he took out an ad to say that a vote for him was 

a vote for the mill open and people working. 

 

And every day the member from Athabasca asks him about that 

quote and where he sits with that quote. And you know what his 

answer is? It worked. That‟s his answer — it worked. So there‟s 

no pulp mill open but it worked, because he‟s seated there. 

What an embarrassment for this government. What a mistake to 

have him seated there. 

 

And so where is that member from Prince Albert Carlton 

standing up for the people of Prince Albert in his cabinet? 

Where is he? He‟s nowhere to be found on a second bridge for 

Prince Albert. He‟s nowhere to be found on the forestry centre, 



October 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

diversifying forestry or standing up for the workers in Prince 

Albert that worked at that pulp mill, and some of whom helped 

elect him to this Chamber today. Where is he? You can‟t find 

him. He‟s at the lake with his phone shut off. 

 

Why doesn‟t he stand up for Prince Albert on the pulp mill 

where hundreds of families in Prince Albert want to be at home, 

working in the community? Instead, they‟re divided and 

working elsewhere. 

 

We have an Iogen plant in Birch Hills. Where‟s the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton? He built what is now a sarcophagus 

at a pulp mill in Prince Albert. Where is he to get that Iogen 

plant from Birch Hills to Prince Albert? He doesn‟t speak for 

Prince Albert when he‟s in cabinet. I don‟t know what he‟s 

doing there. 

 

The P.A. [Prince Albert] Herald said, is he going to be a voice 

of cabinet to Prince Albert or a voice of Prince Albert to 

cabinet? We know the answer already. 

 

Where is he on the Highway 11 twinning? The Highways 

minister comes in and says, geez, we can‟t stick to the NDP 

plan of having a timeline to get that thing done by 2011, no. 

Unless there‟s great weather, we‟re still going to be delayed by 

five years. Where is he to ensure that that‟s a safe highway to 

drive on, on every Friday and Sunday during the season when 

everybody is going to the lake? Where is he? 

 

Where is he to make sure that economic development is at the 

forethought of people in Prince Albert as it pertains to that 

highway? It‟s a huge highway. Where is he? He doesn‟t speak 

for Prince Albert to cabinet obviously. 

 

Where is he on federal funding for the soccer centre? He went 

around Prince Albert for weeks getting his picture taken 

regarding the soccer centre opening and the fundraising that the 

good people of Prince Albert did for that soccer centre. Oops, 

I‟m sorry. You‟d think he actually had something to do with it. 

Instead of having his picture taken, why wasn‟t he trying to 

procure more money from this government? 

 

It was the last government that funded the whole entire thing, 

including the Art Hauser Centre. Where is he? He‟s having his 

picture taken. Instead of having his picture taken, why isn‟t he 

trying to procure money from the federal government, their 

cousins, brothers, sisters, whatever you want to call them? 

Where is he trying to procure money for the soccer centre from 

the federal government? They haven‟t got a dollar in it. 

 

When we built the Art Hauser Centre and some of the other 

projects, there‟s federal dollars in there. He‟s headed up to 

donate money to the soccer centre, and where is he? Silence. 

 

I want to talk about now, if I could, the Premier and his 

relationship with Stephen Harper. On equalization, how is it 

that you can have all of their brethren promise during an 

election that equalization would be taken out of the formula? 

We stand to gain $800 million a year, every year. Why don‟t 

they stand up for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

When he should have been fighting for this province holding 

Conservative members — of which the member from Meadow 

Lake used to be — to account for their promise, he instead tries 

to fool the public into believing that he‟ll have it made up to us 

by the Prime Minister. Instead what do we get? Instead we‟re 

burdened as a province by another commitment for an 

experimental clean coal plant described by The StarPhoenix, 

September 20, this way, and I quote: 

 

. . . to suggest, as Mr. Wall has, that the offer by Mr. 

Harper to contribute a miniscule share in the expensive 

experiment to find a way to separate and sequester carbon 

dioxide is a gift to the province rather than what it is — a 

huge risk with associated costs — makes it appear the 

premier‟s political allegiances have blinded him to the 

welfare of the province he was sworn to represent. 

 

Also in The StarPhoenix that day, and I quote: Mr. Wall and his 

ministers turned their back on the province by dropping the 

challenge they promised over the federal Conservatives — are 

you listening, member from Meadow Lake? — breaking their 

promise on equalization. 

 

And in the Leader-Post, July 26, again I quote: 

 

. . . after Wall‟s handling of the equalization file, most 

Saskatchewan voters are . . . well aware that the 

Saskatchewan Party . . . independence from the . . . 

Conservatives is pretty much a façade. 

 

What an embarrassment that they can‟t get anything done on 

equalization or any other file as it pertains to the federal 

government. 

 

There‟s a community development trust fund, a $1 billion dollar 

fund put in place to help displaced forestry workers. And what 

happens? We get $36 million worth out of a billion, with a huge 

industry. They accept per capita funding instead of funding as it 

pertains to the amount of economic GDP [gross domestic 

product] of the forest industry in each province — an 

embarrassment. So the Prime Minister comes into 

Saskatchewan to announce what amounts to the death of the 

forestry sector in Saskatchewan because they refuse to support 

it, as does the provincial government, and the Premier can‟t 

stop kissing the feet of the Prime Minister when all that he turns 

over is $36.4 million to this province. 

 

Now what do workers get out of the $36.4 million? You‟d think 

they‟d get 36.4 for retraining and to help them move on with 

their lives in another industry and to join the workforce doing 

something else. What do they get? $2 million — $2 million, 

unbelievable — a slap in the face. And yet the Premier wants to 

make us think that it‟s a great deal just because the Prime 

Minister brought it here. 

 

In opposition the Premier stated that he‟d do something about 

gas taxes. After the election, some months later, he said that it 

was a gimmick. Now why would you trust him? He devises a 

plan in the middle of the night on what seems to be a cigarette 

carton or package or a napkin, and he says, this is what we‟d do 

if we were in government. Well they‟re in government. And 

what are they doing? I‟m sorry, it was a gimmick. Unfortunate. 

 

Well another gimmick was the promise that they‟d support 

schools when it came to closing. Now what‟s in this Throne 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard October 30, 2008 

Speech to support schools and support their promise to keep 

them open? Dead silence, dead silence, nothing — another 

gimmick. 

 

In opposition the Premier called the Fiscal Stabilization Fund a 

slush fund. Now this fund is supposed to be the foundation rock 

that we can use to build this province. Well apparently slush 

turns to stone. What was once a slush fund is now a rock. When 

it was a slush fund it had a couple of hundred million dollars in 

it, and now that it‟s got $2 billion in it, it‟s a foundation rock. 

Disingenuous. Is this a gimmick or not? 

 

They had a promise during the election to change the education 

portion of property taxes. Now there‟s been study after study 

done on this. They‟ve got them in their own ministries. Would 

they implement them? No. Instead they commission a study . . . 

[inaudible] . . . there‟s a real need now? They give you a pizza 

rebate two years ago. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Half a pizza. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Half a pizza rebate. And now they want to 

study it for another year. It smacks to me of electioneering and 

making promises that you never intend to keep. 

 

Now I do want to put the good things in the Throne Speech in 

context, and there were some good things. I think people 

appreciate income tax cuts, certainly appreciate paying down a 

debt. The paying down the debt, it‟s a great thing, wonderful. 

Forty per cent, they‟re paying down. I think that amounts to 

about 25 per cent of the debt that they built up while they were 

in government — so 40 per cent of the debt where it is now, but 

about 25 per cent of the debt that they accumulated while they 

were on this side. 

 

So to say, should I support this Throne Speech or not? We‟ve 

got no commitment for a tertiary health care centre in Prince 

Albert, no commitment to keep their promise on airport 

upgrades, no commitment for the pulp mill or the forestry 

workers in Prince Albert, no commitment for a second bridge in 

Prince Albert, no commitment from the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton to look after Prince Albert‟s interest in cabinet. 

Instead he reports from cabinet to Prince Albert. For those 

reasons I‟m going to support the amendment and not the 

motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With that I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote has moved to adjourn debate. Is the motion agreed 

to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The leader has made a motion that 

this House now stands adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. This House now stands 

adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1487 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1487 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1493 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1493 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1467 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Autism Spectrum Disorder Services 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

 Saskatoon Homeless Count 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1468 

 Moose Jaw Housing Co-operative Celebrates 25 Years 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1468 

 Congratulations to Wapos Bay and Raven Brass 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 

 Seniors’ Income Plan 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1469 

 Saskatoon Young Men’s Christian Association Anniversary 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 

 Leadership Candidate 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 

 Cost of Living 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1471 

 Political Advertising and Government Advertising 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1472 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1472 

 Crown Corporations’ Utility Rates and Investment Policy 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1473 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1473 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Expanded Graduate Retention Program 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 

 Tender Release for 2009 Construction Season 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 52 — The Trustee Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 

 Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1477 

 Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1477 

 Bill No. 55 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1477 

 Bill No. 56 — The Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Trustee Act, 2008 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1478 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1480 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1482 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1485 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1488 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1490 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1493 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1482 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


