


















































Hansard: November 12, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 11A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1623 

 November 12, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much. It’s always an honour 

and a pleasure for me to rise in the Assembly and introduce 

guests to the Legislative Assembly but never more so than 

today. Today I have the pleasure of introducing to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly a member of our 

reserve forces, a volunteer to and veteran of the Canadian 

mission in Afghanistan, my son Nathan Quennell. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I’m going to keep it short, Mr. Speaker, 

although my original temptation was not. Many members of the 

House — both sides of the House — have expressed concern 

while Nathan was in Afghanistan from the end of February to 

the end of September. I want to thank all members of the House 

who did so for that. Well I now know that as I expected that all 

members will wish to join me in welcoming him here today to 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 

the member opposite in the introduction of his son to the House. 

During this last weekend many of us attended Remembrance 

Day ceremonies, and we all felt a sense of pride and thanks to 

all the members who served. I also heard the member opposite’s 

statement last week about the strain that this puts on family 

members, so we’d like to thank him and his wife Cheryl and in 

particular thank Nathan for his contribution to our country and 

to freedom. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly I’d like to introduce some guests in the 

east gallery. They are members of the Service Employees 

International Union, SEIU West provincial locals. And seated 

up there are Al Chaisson; trustee Ron Flach; Russell Doell, 

business agent; Barb Cape, president; Janice Platzke, 

secretary-treasurer; Connie Jattansingh, board member; and 

Cori Deis, board member. 

 

These members are working hard at bargaining, and I ask all 

members to . . . And also seated up there is Tom Graham, 

president of CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] Sask 

division. So I ask all members to welcome these trade unionists 

to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I’d like to introduce a number of guests in 

your gallery. We have Joel Sopp who is the vice-president of 

the board of directors for the Regina Early Learning Centre, 

where his son is also a student. The Regina Early Learning 

Centre and KidsFirst have 35 employees serving children and 

family. With Joel is Anne Luke, founder and capital campaign 

manager of the Regina Early Learning Centre, and Mary Ann 

McGrath, current executive director of the Regina Early 

Learning Centre, and Dan Clifford from RBC Insurance. Please 

join me in welcoming these guests to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to join with my colleague across the floor to 

welcome the folks from the Regina Early Learning Centre. I 

don’t think there’s anyone in this House who would disagree 

with the work that they are doing, and we should all support it 

whenever we can. For children to have a very good start in life 

is so very important to their futures — not only their futures, 

but the futures of our community and the futures of our 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to add one point. Anne Luke has 

been attached to the early learning and child care for so long 

and worked so hard. She’s one of the most dedicated people I 

know in this province, and even though she is retired, she still 

has a vision for child care in this province and continues to 

work on it. So I would like to join with my colleagues in 

welcoming them here to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d 

like to introduce some further guests. Joining Tom Graham: 

Judy Henley, treasurer of CUPE Sask division; Debbie Hubick, 

secretary of Sask division; Gord Campbell, president of the 

health workers; and joining us today, the Canadian regional 

vice-president of CUPE, Kevin Rebeck. I ask all members to 

welcome these CUPE trade unionists to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

welcome two young people to the proceedings this afternoon. 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

They’re seated in the east gallery. They are two young people 

who have decided to make Saskatchewan their home. I would 

like to introduce to all members through you, Mr. Speaker, 

Curtis Calimente and Liz Merrigan. 

 

Curtis is the brother of one of our researchers in the caucus 

office, and Liz has recently moved to Saskatchewan from New 

York state, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome them both of course 

to the proceedings. I want to report to members of the House 

that it wasn’t particularly a job opportunity that drew Liz or an 

educational opportunity. I think it was Curtis. And that’s a great 

immigration policy, Curtis. I’d ask all members to welcome 

these two young people to the Chamber this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of families who are 

struggling to find adequate child care spaces or struggling to 

afford child care spaces that may be available. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of my constituents in Moose 

Jaw and the good citizens of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions to 

legislature about the cost of living in Saskatchewan, and the 

minimum wage increases are often sporadic and do not always 

reflect the rising costs of living. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents of Kamsack, Ituna, 

Yorkton, Regina, Langenburg, and Melville. Mr. Speaker, I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property taxes. This is strongly desired by 

Saskatchewan families and business people here across 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are signed by good folks, concerned citizens here in 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

2008 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to bring attention of the Assembly to the winners of the 

2008 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards. I had the pleasure of 

attending the awards gala, along with the members for Prince 

Albert Carlton, Regina Rosemont, and Saskatoon Centre. 

 

I can safely say, Mr. Speaker, that we were all impressed by the 

talent on display and by the tough choices that had to be made 

by judges John Noestheden, Barbara Keirnes-Young, and 

Lindsay “Eekwol” Knight. I thank them, Mr. Speaker, as well 

as the Saskatchewan Arts Board and especially Lieutenant 

Governor Gordon Barnhart for providing this important 

opportunity to shine a spotlight on the arts and artists in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Congratulations to all the individuals, groups, and organizations 

nominated. If I might use an analogy that perhaps favours the 

visual arts, Mr. Speaker, their contributions make the 

Saskatchewan tapestry all the more brilliant, but of course the 

winners were those judged to be the most brilliant of all. 

 

And so I want to say a special word of congratulations to the 

following: for the Lifetime Achievement Award, Joan Borsa, 

Saskatoon; for the 30 Below Award — and I’m talking age, Mr. 

Speaker, not temperature — Alice Kuipers, Saskatoon; for the 

Arts and Learning Award, Tyrone W. Tootoosis, Saskatoon; for 

the Innovation in the Arts Award, Charley Farrero, Meacham; 

for the Volunteer Award, Gursh Madhur, Regina; and for the 

Leadership Award, Sandra Butel, Regina. 

 

Congratulations to them all, Mr. Speaker, and I thank them for 

helping us to more fully realize the promise of Saskatchewan’s 

motto: “from many peoples, strength.” That is, to not just 

realize strength in the economy, but to know that from the 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

diversity and creativity of many peoples come culture, arts, and 

community that is strong, that is vibrant, that is vital. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

2008 First Nations Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 14th Annual 2008 

First Nations Awards on Thursday, November 6 were held here 

in Regina, honouring the excellence we see in our thriving First 

Nations community around the province. The gala event hosted 

by Women of the Dawn brought people together to share in a 

celebration of 14 awards in a far-reaching list of categories. 

 

Awards were given to high-mark achievements in areas from 

arts, entertainment, to business and journalism, medicine, 

health, and justice, to name a few. One of the evening’s high 

points came when William Thomson of Carry the Kettle First 

Nation proudly accepted the Veteran’s Award to mark the many 

hours he spent volunteering at the Legislative Assembly and 

powwows. His willingness to promote issues facing First 

Nation veterans at public events, this was particularly poignant 

as we were about to mark the significant contributions made by 

our country’s veterans yesterday, on Remembrance Day. 

 

First Nations veterans made a powerful statement by going to 

war on behalf of Canada, since they were exempt from serving 

in our war efforts, but they chose to go to war anyway. The 

First Nations awards also shone a bright light on the youth. The 

Youth Award went to Jenna Tanner of Cowessess First Nation. 

This award is sponsored by SaskPower. 

 

I was joined for this lovely evening of festivities by my 

colleagues — the Minister of Crowns, the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs, the Minister of Education, and the Minister 

of Enterprise and Innovation, and the Minister of First Nations 

and Métis Relations, and also the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. We want to wish the award participants 

all the best. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Salvation Army Red Shield Luncheon 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, October 

31, I had the privilege of attending the Salvation Army’s Red 

Shield luncheon in Saskatoon. Also in attendance was the 

Leader of the Opposition, the Premier, and several Saskatoon 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] from both sides 

of the House. 

 

In addition to the good conversation that was shared around the 

tables, attendees heard from guest speaker, Major David 

Dalberg, director of EDS [Emergency Disaster Services], 

Metropolitan Division, USA [United States of America]. Major 

Dalberg provided the audience with moving vignettes 

describing the many roles the Salvation Army assumes when 

disaster strikes. Mr. Speaker, while the examples provided were 

from all over North America, they reminded us of the important 

work done by the Salvation Army in our home communities. 

Whether it’s shelter programs, summer camps, emergency 

assistance, or any of the many other programs provided by the 

Salvation Army, I would like to say thank you to the Salvation 

Army for their dedicated and caring work that is conducted all 

year long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Salvation Army truly is an organization that is 

true to its motto. They truly do believe in the spirit of giving. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of the Salvation 

Army officers and volunteers for hosting another successful 

luncheon and wish them all the best as they continue their 

important work in our province and around the globe. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Regina Early Learning Centre Capital Campaign 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina Early 

Learning Centre has been serving children and families in the 

inner city since 1977. It has evolved and now offers a range of 

programming for children from prenatal to five years of age. 

This centre ensures that parents are involved in their children’s 

early learning, links the child’s home life with school, and 

supports parents in their crucial role. 

 

This spring the Early Learning Centre launched a 1.5 million 

capital campaign in order to expand the centre and further 

bolster programming. As part of the capital campaign, the Early 

Learning Centre board of directors held a Small Hands — Big 

Dreams celebrity charity poker tournament at Casino Regina on 

November 2. The $2,500 raised at the poker tournament 

bumped the capital campaign up over 1.1 million. This event 

was attended by my colleague, the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. These proceeds from the tournament will be 

used to support many facets of the project. One-third of the 

capital funds raised will go toward building an arts and science 

atrium which will encourage preschoolers to explore the world 

around them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we commend the work of the Regina Early 

Learning Centre and wish them well on their capital campaign. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

India-Canada Night 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On Saturday, November 8, I attended an 

India supper night sponsored by the India-Canada Cultural 

Association. Proceeds from the evening were donated to the 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

Saskatoon Food Bank and Learning Centre. The evening 

featured delicious Indian cuisine and a sparkling musical fusion 

trio including David Kaplan on piano, Robert Helgason on 

guitar, and Navdeep Sidhu on vocals. 

 

The highlight of the evening was guest speaker Dr. Arun 

Gandhi, grandson of eminent political leader Mahatma Gandhi, 

the father of modern India, the man who modelled to the world 

non-violent activism to achieve India’s independence from 

Britain. The audience was transfixed as Arun Gandhi shared 

memories of childhood lessons in non-violence learned from his 

eminent grandfather. 

 

Dr. Gandhi spoke about escalating violence in our times — both 

physical and social. He referred to poverty as a form of violence 

increasing as a result of unregulated economic forces which 

concentrate wealth in the hands of fewer and fewer people. He 

also referred to environmental damage as violent abuse of our 

natural home. 

 

During the evening Dr. Gandhi answered questions from the 

audience and shared many quotations from Mahatma Gandhi’s 

writing. The most stirring is the following: 

 

We want to create world peace. But peace is not merely 

the absence of war. We have to change ourselves if we 

want to change the world. Let us become the change we 

desire. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Aviation and Aerospace Week 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, being a commercial pilot, I am 

pleased to rise today to talk about a vital component to 

Saskatchewan’s transportation system. Aviation helps sustain 

Saskatchewan’s growing economy. This sector and the 

countless professionals within it help link communities, 

businesses, the resource sector, and tourism quickly with 

provincial, national, and international clients and destinations. 

Whether it’s the timely delivery of an important component to a 

facility because of an equipment breakdown or showcasing our 

beautiful province to visitors, aviation has a role to play in our 

economic growth. 

 

Our quality of life is also enhanced, thanks to aviation. Air 

ambulances provide quick access to health care facilities when 

we are ill. Farmers rely on timely aerial application to enhance 

crop production. Police rely on Saskatchewan’s airports to help 

carry out their duties and protect us from harm. 

 

Therefore to recognize these valuable contributions to our 

province, November 10 to 16 has been designated Aviation and 

Aerospace Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

In conjunction with the week, the Saskatchewan Aviation 

Council and the Saskatchewan Aerial Applicators Association 

are hosting their annual joint conference and trade show this 

week in Regina called Wings of Saskatchewan. The conference 

and trade show runs from November 12 to 14. The conference 

is a great opportunity for everyone in the aviation sector to 

share best practices and new ideas while discussing ways to 

improve the industry. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Remembrance Day Ceremonies Honour Veterans 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday marked 

the 90th anniversary of the end of the First World War. The war 

ended with a single sniper’s bullet that left a Moose Jaw man, 

George Lawrence Price, to die. Private Price paid the ultimate 

sacrifice a mere 2 minutes before armistice, and is recognized 

as the last soldier to perish in what was called the war to end all 

wars. 

 

Private George Price was born in Kings County, Nova Scotia, 

and it is believed he came to Moose Jaw to help with harvest 

work in the early 1900s. He enlisted in the 210th Infantry 

Battalion and the Canadian Expeditionary Force in Moose Jaw, 

October 15, 1917. After a few transfers, Private Price then 

served with the 28th Battalion. 

 

On November 11, 1918, on the outskirts of Mons, Belgium, 

Price stepped out into the street to try and locate a target and 

was shot directly in the chest by an enemy sniper. Price was 

posthumously awarded the British War Medal and the Victory 

Medal. These are the remembrances that bring home to each of 

us the horrors of war and the necessity to never forget the cost 

of our freedom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, across this province there were ceremonies that 

were held to honour Remembrance Day and mark the sacrifices 

made by veterans right across this country. I ask that all 

members join me in recognizing not only Private Price, but 

Canadian veterans in past and present conflicts and the families 

and friends of these soldiers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we shall remember them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Notification Policy 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go again. Four more 

people escaped from the Paul Dojack Centre on Friday, 

bringing the total number of people escaped or mistakenly 

released since late August to 15. One remains at large. 

 

On Saturday two inmates in Saskatoon tried to escape but were 

stopped. Media reports indicate that quote “The Minister of 

Justice was unavailable for comment.” People all across the 

country, Globe and Mail readers and CTV [Canadian 

Television Network Ltd.] viewers included, are confused about 

who speaks for the government on matters of public safety. 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: can he clarify which minister is 

responsible for this file — the Minister of Public Safety or the 

Minister of Justice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the member opposite for his question. Mr. Speaker, as was 

portrayed through the media on the escape of the four from 

Dojack on Friday, this minister and the Ministry of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing are in charge of all notifications 

when it comes to escapes, Mr. Speaker, of our correctional 

facilities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on that note, this case worked perfectly well. 

We had ministry officials notify myself within 20 minutes of 

the escape. Ministry of Justice officials to the deputy minister 

consulted with my ministry officials and the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police], Mr. Speaker. This time, this policy 

that takes public safety as a paramount concern in this 

government worked perfectly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t have to keep asking 

questions to clarify the minister’s policy if he would just make 

it public. Corrections staff, including his deputy minister, have 

been suspended for allegedly breaking rules that no one has 

seen. Four separate reviews are currently under way in the 

ministry. We have very few if any examples of his so-called 

new policy working as advertised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister could clear all this up by just coming 

clean. To the minister: will he table his new policy, yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And once 

again thank you to the member opposite for his question. Mr. 

Speaker, the senior officials of the ministry have the direction to 

notify to the deputy minister, to myself if there’s an escape, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’m going to say it again, Mr. Speaker. In this case this was 

perfectly integrated, how it worked with the ministry officials 

talking to the Ministry of Justice and the RCMP, Mr. Speaker, 

and myself. This was a case where the people of Saskatchewan, 

people of Regina, Mr. Speaker, were made aware of an escapee 

after the law was followed, Mr. Speaker. And the RCMP were 

allowed to release the information of the one inmate still 

outstanding. In this case, Mr. Speaker, public safety was 

paramount and it worked, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand why the 

minister won’t table this policy in the House. If he actually did 

what he says he did, if he actually communicated the policy 

properly to his staff, it shouldn’t be a problem. This is a serious 

matter, Mr. Speaker. Corrections staff have been suspended for 

their alleged failure to implement this policy. Saskatchewan 

people have a right to see for themselves what rules the ministry 

employees supposedly broke. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why 

won’t he table this policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

concerned about disclosure, and I can let him know that the 

difference between this government and the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] is that this government actually has a policy 

in place for disclosure to the public when dangerous offenders 

escape and to make sure that the public knows about that. 

 

The NDP is actually zero for 21 when it comes to openness and 

transparency. Actually, Mr. Speaker, they’re zero and 22 when 

it comes to openness and transparency. We asked last year 

during a freedom of information request for the settlement with 

Murdoch Carriere. Justice officials said it could be released. 

Environment officials told the NDP it could be released. The 

only person who said it couldn’t be released is the member for 

Regina Lakeview. Perhaps the NDP could explain to us why 

they engaged in this complete political interference in the 

release of information that their own officials said could be 

released. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Investment Strategy for the Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] is imposing 

his ideological view on the Crowns. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of CIC is 

imposing his ideological view on the Crowns, but the experts 

see through this minister and the backdoor privatization of the 

Crowns, and they’re weighing in. 

 

We’ve already seen the minister attacking SaskEnergy and 

SaskPower, but he’s also going after SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance]. Let me quote from The StarPhoenix 

article from October 23. Quote: 

 

Earlier this year, SGI Canada’s out-of-province 

investment revenue was $9 million out of $35 million 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

total and was credited with helping cushion the drop in 

Saskatchewan revenue because of summer storms. 

 

To the Minister of CIC: why is he attacking SGI’s ability to, 

quote, to stop the cushion of drop? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

the hon. member for the question. The announcement was made 

some two weeks ago but obviously he’s forgotten some of the 

details, because we have done anything but an ideologically 

bent when it comes to this. We have done what’s businesslike 

and what’s sound. We have said on out-of-province investments 

that have lost money to the tune of a goal of 22 per cent to a 

return of minus 15 per cent, no more of that. No more of that 

red ink, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we will do, where it does make sense to have 

out-of-province investments, such as the case with SGI where it 

does spread the risk, we have said that it will continue business 

as usual to make the core Crown a stronger operation. And 

that’s what we intend to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we raised the very profitable 

examples of Heritage Gas and MRM [Muskeg River mine] 

cogen plant. And when the Minister of Government Services 

was giving totally incorrect answers, the Minister Responsible 

for CIC wasn’t doing much better. 

 

Don’t take my word for it. Here is what the Leader-Post 

business commentator has to say about this issue. Quote: 

 

Not kosher under the new policy are SaskEnergy’s 

Heritage Gas business in Nova Scotia, SaskPower’s MRM 

Cogen partnership in Alberta or SGI’s Cooke Group 

insurance brokerage business in the Maritimes. 

 

All of these investments, by the way, met or exceeded the 

Crowns’ targeted return on investment, according to a 

KPMG study. 

 

To the minister: he wouldn’t answer the question for Heritage 

Gas or for MRM cogen, and growing numbers of Saskatchewan 

people are telling me their concern about the Sask Party’s plan 

for privatization. Why is the Sask Party selling profitable 

Crown investments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, 

which side is the member on? I quote from Hansard, October 

28, from the hon. member opposite: “Mr. Deputy Speaker, [and 

I’m quoting] today’s reannouncement of a now five-year-old 

policy, the Sask-first policy, is just that — it’s five years old.” 

It’s a reannouncement. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he wants to take credit for our Sask-first 

announcement on one hand, and then he comes in here and 

criticizes it on the other. Which one is it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re trying to get the for 

sale sign removed. Business commentators in this province are 

attacking the minister’s decisions. From November 1 

Leader-Post, quote: 

 

Even some of the $200 million in out-of-province 

investments earmarked for divesture don’t seem to fit the 

Saskatchewan First policy. 

 

For example, SaskPower’s investments in the MRM 

co-generation facility near Fort McMurray and the Cooke 

Group brokerages in Atlantic Canada . . . 

 

So to the minister: can he explain to the business people of 

Saskatchewan — the ones asking these questions — why is he 

selling SGI’s profitable investment in Cooke Group insurance 

when it doesn’t even seem to fit the minister’s very own 

publicly released criteria? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been very clear 

when I made the announcement; we were very clear during the 

last election. Our commitment is to the core operations of the 

Crown corporations. 

 

Over the history of the NDP, 16 years of mismanagement, 16 

years of red ink, 16 years of 22 per cent targets and delivering 

minus 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker — how does that make our 

Crown corporations any stronger? 

 

The people of Saskatchewan want us to invest in the hottest 

economy in the country, in the hottest economy in North 

America that’s right here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I will 

take Herbert over Halifax every day of the week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the business community 

rejects outright the arguments that this minister is making. The 

Leader-Post, November 1 quote: “Like putting lipstick on a pig, 

or trying to fit a round peg into a square hole, the result isn’t 

pretty and promises to get messy.” 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

Paul Martin, editor of the Sask Business Magazine quote: 

“Historically the Crowns have had success when they invested 

abroad.” 

 

The StarPhoenix editorial October 30 quote: “[When] Mr. 

Cheveldayoff ordered this week seemed . . . like ordering 

Crown executives to employ meat tenderizer mallets on the 

companies until they’re soft enough to be sold . . .” 

 

To the minister: are you telling us these business commentators 

are wrong, or will you reverse your decision to hold fire sale of 

our Crown investments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the 

member opposite that investments that support in-province 

operations of Crown corporations will be maintained in 

Saskatchewan. Investments such as the Swan Valley part of 

SaskEnergy’s operations, SecurTek, and as he refers to SGI, 

SCI Alberta, SCI Manitoba, Coachman, and ICPEI [Insurance 

Company of Prince Edward Island] will all be maintained 

because in fact they do pass the test. They do enhance the 

operation here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very shortly members opposite will get a chance 

to see what this government has planned for Crown 

corporations as far as investment in Saskatchewan. They will 

have a chance to then look at what those investments are doing 

for Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan people, and comment on 

them at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for New School Construction 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Public 

Schools board is considering private-public partnerships or P3s 

to build new schools. In November 5 article in The StarPhoenix 

reports, I quote, “School boards are strapped for cash but under 

pressure to provide schools to the city’s new neighbourhoods.” 

 

And the March 27 StarPhoenix reported that the Minister of 

Finance told the Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce that 

the Sask Party government is open to public-private 

partnerships, P3s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are asking why, at a time of 

big surpluses, this government would be interested in P3s. To 

the Minister of Education: does the government believe that P3s 

are an efficient use of taxpayers’ money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s great to finally have a question about capital construction in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And we can talk about the 

former government, the NDP’s record. Mr. Speaker, we have 

had an infrastructure deficit facing boards of education in this 

province that’s staggering, Mr. Speaker. We need $1.2 billion 

worth of school construction, according to the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that last year for the first 

time in five years, Mr. Speaker, first time in five years that this 

new government was able to announce new school projects — 

new school projects. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the 

record of this government. We have added over $100 million to 

the spending of new schools. Boards of education, Mr. Speaker, 

are very happy with the fact that we’re moving forward, that 

we’re unlike the NDP who allowed the physical structures in 

this province to deteriorate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government likes to 

trumpet their so-called historic investment in infrastructure, but 

the fact is that they have a historic surplus too. I hear 3 billion 

reasons why they should be investing. They can afford to invest 

more in new schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the available research suggests that instead of 

saving taxpayers’ money, P3s cost taxpayers more in the long 

run — far more. A 2007 case study in Alberta suggests that 

three schools could be built by the public for every two schools 

build under P3s. And Nova Scotia experimented with P3s 

earlier this decade but went back to the public sector 

construction because it would cost less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the minister considering 

lining a select few pockets instead of getting value for our 

money and ensuring sound fiscal policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

what we’re very happy to do as a government, as was the case 

this spring after our budget where we announced a number of 

brand new projects based on the budget that was delivered here 

in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we reintroduced 

something called the approval in principle — AIPs. AIPs allow 

boards of education to begin planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we announced over $60 million worth of AIPs for 

this coming budget, Mr. Speaker. What this is allowing 

communities and boards of education to do, it allows them to 

begin work. It allows them to begin planning to build a school, 

Mr. Speaker, to build a school that’s going to have a number of 

different components in it. We’re going to see components, Mr. 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

Speaker, that are going to involve urban municipalities; they’re 

going to involve the particular communities in the school. 

Those are the kind of partnerships, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

happy to ensure succeed in this province, unlike the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s completely 

dodging the question here. One of the biggest problems with 

P3s is that governments pay far more to compensate the private 

sector for the higher . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It seems to me that we have more than 

one person attempting to ask questions and more than one 

attempting to answer, so I would just like to ask the members to 

be mindful of the person recognized who has the floor. Member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d just appreciate it if the 

minister would answer the question. But with P3s the 

government pays far more to compensate the private sector for 

the higher interest rates they have to pay to borrow money at, 

compared with government lending rates. Given the current 

credit crunch, one can only imagine how much this might add 

to the cost of building new schools. At the same time, 

experience in the United Kingdom suggests that many of these 

schools are poorly built and poorly maintained. Mr. Speaker, 

the minister is considering a plan to pay more and get less. This 

is not the best use of taxpayers’ money. 

 

To the minister: why is he squandering the surplus on what 

amounts to privatization? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

hope to make many announcements in this Legislative 

Assembly over the next year or two or three or five. I hope to 

make announcements that’s going to catch up, that’s going to 

catch up to the fact, Mr. Speaker, that within the current major 

capital listing of inventory — these are projects to do — we 

have 97 projects, Mr. Speaker, that are on our list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that former NDP government was working on 

projects that they approved in 2003. That’s what we inherited, 

Mr. Speaker. We inherited the situation where we had to pay for 

projects that that government had announced in 2003. This was 

done in 2008. Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report we have caught 

up to the expenditures that that government have made. Now 

we’re going to be announcing new projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many projects. There are projects all 

around the province because, you know what, Mr. Speaker? A 

problem that we have that that government never had was the 

fact that we are growing and we will need more schools. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are these. This 

government has a historic surplus. It has the money to invest 

now in building good new schools, responding to the needs of 

our dynamic economy. This government claims that it’s making 

a historic investment in infrastructure, yet the Sask Party is 

planning to put taxpayers in debt and on the hook for extra costs 

to build new schools through this plan to privatize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why will Saskatchewan people 

have to pay such a steep price to build needed schools? Is it just 

so this government can line the pockets of their friends or 

because they just can’t manage this dynamic economy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member has one thing 

right: this is a dynamic province, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

province that has tremendous . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — For the benefit of the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, okay, Mr. Speaker, what she left, what she 

left was a legacy of the fact that over 70 per cent of our schools, 

Mr. Speaker, 70 per cent of our schools have been built before 

1969, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, next year those buildings will 

be 40 years old. 

 

The Speaker: — The member was allowed to place the 

question. Allow the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this is a historic 

announcement. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have already 

committed to the expenditure of $1.5 billion worth of money for 

infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. That’s a historic announcement. 

 

I do hope, and in discussions with the Minister of Finance and 

Treasury Board officials, that a significant amount of that 

money will find its way into the construction of new schools, 

Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, we need new schools. We 

need new schools in Warman. We need new schools in 

Martensville, in White City, in Balgonie, in Lloydminster. We 

need new schools across this province because this province is 

growing, Mr. Speaker, unlike that NDP who planned for 

decline. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Patient-First Review 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Education refuses to answer a very direct question about the 

role of P3s in the construction in the schools. I am hoping that 

when I put a question to the Minister of Health, he’ll be a little 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

bit more forthcoming with information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

About a week ago, the Minister of Health announced the 

patient-first review. Other than some pretty vague comments 

that this patient-first review was going to involve patients — 

which by the way, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health now 

describes patients of our health care system as customers of the 

system — very little is known. It was a very vague 

announcement. 

 

So I have a question or two today for the Minister of Health. 

The first is this. The Saskatchewan public have not yet been 

informed of how they might be engaged in this patient-first 

review. So my question to the Minister of Health: how will the 

Saskatchewan public be engaged in this review? And if he can’t 

answer the question today, then my question would be, why in 

the world would you announce the review without knowing the 

answer to that very fundamental question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday I was 

very proud to stand at the Pasqua Hospital and announce the 

patient-first review. It was a campaign promise made and a 

campaign promise kept. Mr. Speaker, that is almost 80 

campaign promises that have been kept in the first eleven and a 

half months of this new government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — At the announcement, Mr. Speaker, 

there were members from the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, there were members from Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses, there were members from the Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses’ Association. There were CEOs [chief executive officer] 

from around the province, Mr. Speaker. There were patient 

groups represented and there was the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons represented, Mr. Speaker. It was a positive 

announcement, and all these groups were really looking forward 

to this patient-first review doing its work. 

 

There might have been one dissenting word, Mr. Speaker, and 

unfortunately it was that opposition. Doom and gloom, that’s all 

they have to say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the patient-first review will be doing its work over 

the next number of months, and I think the whole province is 

looking forward to those results. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the Minister of Health 

how the public of Saskatchewan were going to be involved in 

this. He refuses to answer. Let me ask him another question 

then. Will he guarantee today that the front-line workers in the 

health care system and their representatives will be involved in 

this consultation? Would he guarantee that today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward 

to . . . The commissioner of this review, Mr. Tony Dagnone, 

who I don’t think anybody can discredit his credentials . . . He’s 

a well respected person not only nationally but internationally, 

Mr. Speaker. He formerly ran the University Hospital in 

Saskatoon. He will be leading the commission which will 

consult broadly with not only patients but with all service 

providers. Absolutely they’re going to have an input into this 

review. 

 

But the review is going to look at this health care system like no 

other review has looked at a health care system, through the 

patients’ eyes. And that is one thing, Mr. Speaker, that I can 

say: sitting on those benches for far too long, I would say, but 

for far too long that we brought in patient after patient that was 

seeing the system much different than that former government 

did. We want to see the system through the patients’ eyes, and 

that’s what this review will do. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, for reasons unknown to us, the 

minister decided to go with a one-person review as opposed to a 

committee which once he discussed, and the person he has 

chosen, correctly as identified by the minister, is Mr. Tony 

Dagnone. I am glad he raised the subject because I read in The 

London Free Press some time ago Mr. Dagnone saying quote 

“We’re not scared of the use of the private sector.” 

 

Now the minister himself has said that he can see a further role 

for private sector involvement in the health care delivery in this 

province. My question to the Minister of Health: between he 

and Mr. Dagnone, what new private sector investment in the 

health care delivery in this province are they planning? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a very interesting 

question coming from that member opposite. Mr. Speaker, so 

what he is saying that a one-member commission cannot do the 

work that a Ken Fyke Commission did, that the predecessor 

Roy Romanow did, that Senator Kirby did. So all that work is 

no good because it was a one-member commission — is that 

what that member’s saying? Tony Dagnone is well respected 

not only in this province but across Canada and internationally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it strikingly interesting that he would bring 

up the privatization issue that under their government had no 

problem using private ambulance services within the system, 

that had no problem privatizing some lab services within the 

public system. Mr. Speaker, it must be tough to be talking out 

of one side of your mouth and accusing us of something totally 

different, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ll let the review do its 

work, and I think that the health system of this province will be 

better for it. 

 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, it is my pleasure to submit supplementary 

estimates accompanied by a message from His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Would the members please rise for the 

message from the Lieutenant Governor. Order. The message is 

as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31, 2009, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. The 

Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor, 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You may be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 42 — The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

once again enter into a debate about the amendment to The 

Securities Act as I’ve done many years in the past. 

 

I noted that when the minister gave his second reading speech 

that a couple of members, I think, well certainly the Premier 

was gently mocking his minister for the dryness of the subject 

— and not, I think, the dryness of the speech, but dryness of the 

briefing that had been given to cabinet on this subject. The 

Premier claims it wasn’t him and if it wasn’t, I apologize. But 

I’m pretty sure that it was actually, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m glad to know that at least some things haven’t 

changed. Justice ministers who are charged with federal 

regulation, a financial regulation in this province, and dealing 

with this Act and other matters still receive very little respect 

from their colleagues. And that has not changed at all, as far as I 

could tell. 

 

The other thing that hasn’t changed very much is the second 

reading speech . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member 

from Kindersley has a question for me which may be relevant to 

me, but isn’t relevant to the Act. So, Mr. Speaker, out of respect 

to you and the rules of the House, I won’t answer that member’s 

question today. But I will return to the legislation in question, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing that hasn’t changed very much was the 

minister’s speech. I recognized a little bit of it, Mr. Speaker, 

particularly in the background — not so much in the detail 

around the Act, but in the background to the legislation. The 

Securities Act regulates the instruments that are dealt with in the 

public stock market, Mr. Speaker, and how we invest in, well, 

what used to be just shares but are now dividends and all types 

of creatures in publicly traded companies. The jurisdiction for 

such comes under property and civil rights which is the 

jurisdiction of the provinces of Canada. And this gives rise to 

regulators that exist in every province and in every territory 

and, as people point out, 13 regulators of the national securities 

system in our country. 

 

What has come into development and which requires these 

amendments on a sessional basis, Mr. Speaker — I think I 

moved similar legislation every session while I was minister of 

Justice —is the passport system. And the principal idea behind 

the passport system is that if one receives registration in one 

jurisdiction, one is entitled to be registered in effect in every 

jurisdiction in the country, not to have to register 13 times to 

carry on business across the country and not to try to figure out 

what rules are in 13 different jurisdictions — 10 provinces and 

3 territories — across the country. 

 

The passport system has received wide support but not 

universal support across the country. Back in 2004 when I first 

became minister responsible for Securities in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Ontario was still involved in the passport 

system, still at the meetings setting it up. Ontario is now not 

onside. In principle at least, Mr. Speaker, Ontario supports the 

national government in its view that there should be one single 

regulator, one national regulator, that the passport system 

results in a balkanization of security regulation and — more 

importantly I suppose for the national government —

enforcement, as it should be, of security regulations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But Ontario still is co-operating with other provinces in making 

the system work. And the way that this has developed over time 

is that the stripe of the federal government has changed, but the 

position of the federal government has not. The new 

Conservative government — I guess we can stop calling it new 

soon, Mr. Speaker — the Conservative government in Ottawa, 

like the Liberal government before it, does not think that the 

passport system is the way to go and wants a single, national 

regulator. 

 

It’s interesting sometimes to see, and I expect that some of my 

colleagues who now sit on the government side have noted this, 

that the political divide in this country is not always on partisan 

basis but is sometimes on a geographic basis: that the concerns 

of the West sometimes trump the concerns of the NDP or the 

Conservative or the Liberal government of a particular Western 

province, and that interestingly enough, I suppose, sometimes 

alliances cross party lines at federal provincial discussions on 

different issues in different areas. And the conflict which has 

been ongoing for a number of years now on the passport system 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

is certainly an example of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Liberal government of Ontario was not quite sure which 

way they wanted to go when there was a Liberal government in 

Ottawa is now onside with the Conservative government in 

Ottawa, in respect to believing that there should be a single 

regulator, a national regulator, probably coincidentally located, 

Mr. Speaker, in Toronto. The Liberal governments in Quebec 

and British Columbia demur, Mr. Speaker, and agree 

wholeheartedly with the Conservative government of Alberta 

and the NDP governments of Saskatchewan at the time and 

Manitoba still, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It has been the case, and I will come back to this in a moment, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been the case that the federal government has 

been looking for allies in its campaign to move towards a single 

regulator, move away from the passport system — which most 

provinces and territories, as I’ve said, support — and have been 

looking for allies beyond Ontario in this move, looking for 

provincial governments that might abandon their colleagues in 

support of the passport system and move to support the national 

single regulator that the federal government would like to see in 

place, and which the federal government cannot impose, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I believe the constitution would be clear. I mean, I guess they 

could attempt it, and I might be proven wrong that they might 

find some powers within the constitution to impose federal 

jurisdiction over the regulation securities. But discretion being 

the better part of valour, I don’t think either federal government 

— the Conservative one that’s now in place or the Liberal one 

that preceded them — really wanted to test whether they in fact 

had such an argument that would be successful, and would 

rather have a political success than the likely legal failure, Mr. 

Speaker. So they’re always looking for allies to dismantle the 

passport system by getting more provinces offside. The 

ministers of the government maybe have been talked to about 

maybe changing the position on securities regulation, and that 

may be one reason why this is late coming to us, Mr. Speaker, 

but I’ll come back to that. 

 

When the Liberals were in power in Ottawa, and there were 

suggestions made that what the provinces have put together — 

and we were led at the time, our Chair at the securities 

ministers’ meetings was the Minister of Finance from Alberta, 

so a Conservative minister — but the argument was made at the 

time that well, you know, if we could agree on a decentralized 

national system, maybe we could agree on a single regulator. 

 

Passions and commitments on various issues vary across the 

country, Mr. Speaker. And at the time I said, well if the Liberals 

in Ottawa and the Liberals in Victoria and the Liberals in 

Quebec City could agree, then I think there could be change. 

But it was those three governments that probably were most 

adverse to each other, most opposed to each other. It was not a, 

obviously, a political partisan disagreement; it was a 

geographical disagreement, and in the case of the provinces, a 

defence of our constitutional rights to be the regulator in this 

area and given the opportunity to prove that it works. 

 

I think we have, across the country, proven that it works. And 

the naysayers have little to point to to suggest the passport 

system does not work. National governments and national 

governments of Liberal stripe and national governments of 

Conservative stripe have said the Americans have a single 

regulator. And the Americans are able to enforce the 

regulations, make the regulations. They have national 

regulations. And Canada . . . and I think some Finance ministers 

went so far as to say Canada in this area is a bit of a joke 

because of having all these regulators across the country trying 

to co-operate with each other and coordinate a system, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that stays the position of the federal government. After 

WorldCom, after Enron, after the stock market collapses in the 

United States, it’s still the position of the national government 

in Ottawa that a single regulator like they have in the United 

States would be a good thing for Canada. And that what Canada 

has done, without having such glaring examples of failure of 

regulation, what Canada has done does not work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What Canada is doing seems to work. And I know that we have 

a government that is very prone to being as much of assistance 

to Ottawa as possible and representing Ottawa to the people of 

Saskatchewan — perhaps more than representing the people of 

Saskatchewan to Ottawa — and we have been critical of that 

and we’ll continue to be so. Equalization’s clearly an example, 

clean coal is another example, and I wonder if the passport 

system wasn’t perhaps going to be another example, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I think there’s two reasons why the Minister of Justice was put 

in the position that he was put in on second reading to say, well 

we’ve been doing this for years. Mr. Speaker, year after year, 

the minister of Justice of the day brings an amendment to The 

Securities Regulations, The Securities Act, so as we can work 

within the passport system, hold up our end, make sure that you 

can register in Regina, register in Winnipeg, or register in 

Quebec City. It doesn’t matter; you can do business across the 

country. 

 

And so we have to keep up by changing the rules, changing the 

regulations, changing the legislation so that we’re all working 

in tandem, in lock-step together to make the system work. And 

if we don’t rush this Bill through the House, through this 

House, without a lot of consideration, Saskatchewan will be 

behind. We will not be holding up our end. Everybody else is 

ready or almost ready, and we are tagging behind and we’re not 

ready. 

 

Now Saskatchewan back in 2003 had a membership on the 

steering committee of the ministers responsible for securities. 

We’ve always been at the forefront of this file, despite the fact 

that we have relatively small capital markets. Westerners have 

always been at the forefront of this file. And one wonders why 

this kind of got past the new government here in Saskatchewan, 

why now there’s such a rush, why this wasn’t done in the last 

session when other provinces were clearly doing it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And there’s two possible reasons. One was that by this 

government’s definition of co-operative federalism, this 

government was considered going offside the passport system. 

The members opposite, the Government of Saskatchewan, the 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

Saskatchewan Party government was going to desert its 

colleagues and move away from the passport system and 

support the federal government’s, Ottawa’s call for a single 

regulator. And now they’re not doing that, or at least they’re not 

doing it yet. But if they were considering doing it, Mr. Speaker, 

that would explain why this was allowed to fall by the wayside 

while perhaps some less important legislation was given 

priority in the last session. That’s one possibility. 

 

The other possibility is there’s nothing so nefarious as that, that 

the Saskatchewan government has never had any second 

thoughts about the passport system, it’s just that they can’t 

manage the legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker, that . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I’m not quite sure I caught the Premier’s 

reference there, but I’ll carry on. 

 

It’s just possible that they could not manage the legislative 

system, the legislative agenda. We saw that in the last session, 

Mr. Speaker. The government had to change the rules in order 

to get its legislation through the House. And the member from 

Regina Dewdney park and I were compelled, compelled to 

speak at length about the importance of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition and the traditions of this legislature, and the rules 

that the members opposite, when they were in opposition, so 

strongly endorsed but so quickly abandoned once they were in 

government. 

 

And that may be as simple as that, Mr. Speaker, it may be as 

simple as the Minister of Justice is overwhelmed by his 

portfolio, and now he’s taken on a portfolio of Corrections and 

Public Safety as well, and so things are going to fall by the 

wayside. It may be nothing more nefarious than that. 

 

Now that said, I don’t know why we would want necessarily 

visit upon our colleagues who’ve been working in this system 

so well all these years, why we would want to visit upon them 

the sins of this government in not holding up its end. The 

minister suggests that this matter might proceed more quickly. I 

know that there are members who want to talk about the 

change-in-trade trigger to that broader in-business-of trigger, 

but perhaps they don’t need to do that in the second reading 

debate, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps they can do that in committee, 

and I would suggest that it may be appropriate for this Bill to 

proceed there.  

 

Unless I hear calls from my colleagues for the ability to speak 

upon it in the legislature, and I certainly don’t have much more 

to say, Mr. Speaker, this may very well be a Bill that should 

move to committee now. And I certainly don’t have anything 

else to say about it today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the committee, the motion 

that Bill No. 42, The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Ready for the question? Is the Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — To the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 48 — The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes. Maybe the Minister of Finance will have as astute a 

questions for me as the Premier did on the last Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to rise today on the Bill to amend 

The Financial Administration Act, 1993 only because when I 

was speaking about securities legislation a moment ago, I heard 

so many members of the legislature — both sides of the House 

— call out for more. Perhaps it wasn’t both sides of the House. 

Perhaps it was only an echo from this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Bill is, I think, a worthy one, Mr. Speaker, and the member 

for The Battlefords said as much when he spoke to it 

immediately following the minister’s second reading speech. 

The Bill increases the automatic interim funding at the start of 

the fiscal year from one-twelfth of the previous year’s estimates 

to two-twelfths, in other words allows for interim funding, not 

for one month but for two months, and will therefore take the 

main appropriation Act to the normal completion date of the 

legislative session, which is usually on or around . . . well the 

week before Victoria Day in May. 

 

And when the old fiscal year has expired — which it does on 

March 31, the day aptly before April Fool’s Day — and before 

the main appropriation Act is appropriated for the new fiscal 

year, the government requires funding to operate. Previously 

this has been available for, as it’s been said, one month. And it 

is the proposal of the government that this be done for two 

months. 

 

And the minister highlighted the requirement in particular for 

Education for additional funding to pay for schools. And the 

inability to provide funding for a two-month period has meant 

that the legislature’s had to deal with interim supply Bill at the 

same time as dealing with other estimates. 

 

And as the member from The Battlefords said when he spoke 

immediately following the minister’s speech, we are inclined to 

support the legislation. It seems to make perfect sense. And the 

minister provided strong arguments in his second reading 

speech. 

 

There are matters that do require some clarification for us. I am 

not — as the minister I think pointed out relatively kindly — 

the Finance critic for the opposition, although being minister of 

Justice for four years, one did spend a bit of time on financial 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

regulation. Which as my remarks demonstrated, in respect to 

the securities legislation that immediately proceeded this in the 

debate, it would be I think inappropriate to proceed to 

committee without having other members on our side of the 

House — and members on the other side of the House if they 

are so inclined — speak to this matter. But I’m thinking 

particularly of the Finance critic for Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, that he should have an opportunity to address this 

matter in the House in principle before this matter moves to 

committee. And so, Mr. Speaker, on this matter I will adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

adjourned debate on Bill No. 48. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased this afternoon to rise and speak on Bill No. 43, The 

Trespass to Property Act. Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of 

questions that arise when we first look at this piece of 

legislation. And it is a piece of legislation that we’ve never had 

in the history of our province. 

 

The first question obviously would be, is why do we need it and 

why do we need it now? What particular reason are we wanting 

to implement this piece of legislation today, and what are the 

implications of bringing in this legislation on the people of the 

province, Mr. Speaker? Was it to fix a particular problem or a 

series of particular problems? If it is, it’d be nice to know what 

those problems are, who’s been consulted, and what we’re 

actually trying to fix, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who will benefit from the passage of this Act is 

another very important question. Is there stakeholder groups 

that feel they need this in order to carry out either their business 

operations or to protect in some way their private property? It 

would be nice to know if those issues have been raised and by 

who, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Are there specific activities or problems this Act is intended to 

address? And if so, what might they be? What is this Act 

intended to be used for? It has a very broad application. 

 

If you look at this Act and its potential application on the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, it is very significant. It 

could in fact affect how businesses operate, Mr. Speaker. It 

could affect how private landowners operate, Mr. Speaker. It 

could affect a number of things. And unless we’re sure why this 

Bill is being put in place, Mr. Speaker, it does raise significant 

concerns. 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at the definitions in the Act as put 

forward, Mr. Speaker, there is no definition under interpretation 

of Crown land, Mr. Speaker. So what is the actual application 

on Crown land, Mr. Speaker? They do list a number of 

exclusions to Crown land. They say, “(a) vacant Crown 

agricultural land.” All right. It says: 

 

Crown resource land; 

park land as defined in The Parks Act; 

any other Crown land or any category of other Crown land 

that is prescribed in the regulations . . . [Mr. Speaker] 

 

Mr. Speaker, but as the members opposite would know, Mr. 

Speaker, there are various definitions of Crown land and 

various pieces of legislation. And without it being defined, Mr. 

Speaker, what particular definition for Crown land is going to 

be applied to this Bill? Because it says what’s excluded, but it 

doesn’t say what is included, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for example, are city sidewalks considered Crown 

land, Mr. Speaker? Are city roads and highways considered 

Crown land, Mr. Speaker? And if they are, Mr. Speaker, does 

this prohibit activities on those pieces of Crown land that would 

normally be carried out by individuals, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Is the legislative grounds Crown land, Mr. Speaker? Is the steps 

and the roads in front of the legislative grounds Crown land, 

Mr. Speaker? Without the definition being clear what is in fact 

Crown land, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation could be used 

to prohibit individuals and groups from lawful assembly, 

individuals or groups from protesting against their government 

if they chose to do so, Mr. Speaker. It could in fact be used to 

prohibit individuals from showing their dissatisfaction of their 

government, Mr. Speaker — rights that are actually enshrined 

in our constitution, Mr. Speaker, rights that every citizen in our 

country should have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, without the definitions being clear so we know 

what is excluded, so that we know what is intended by this 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it could have far-reaching 

implications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are talking about an issue 

such as skateboarding on the legislative grounds. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that may be something that they may wish to prohibit, 

Mr. Speaker. But do they wish to prohibit other forms of lawful 

assembly, Mr. Speaker, using this legislation as a back door to 

carry out something that they can not do now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And without clear intention on the Act and without clear 

definitions, this piece of legislation could be used to prohibit 

citizens’ rights in many, many ways. And the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan have the right to peaceful, lawful 

assembly to protest against their governments, to protest against 

the number of issues that they choose to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation could prohibit even 

peaceful demonstrations, peaceful protest, Mr. Speaker, because 

it could in fact prohibit somebody from protesting on the steps 

of the legislature, or it could prohibit somebody from protesting 

on a city sidewalk or on a city street, Mr. Speaker, or on a 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

public highway, Mr. Speaker. And it could prevent individuals 

from exercising their rights that are guaranteed, Mr. Speaker. 

So is this a backdoor way to impose upon people things that it 

isn’t clear, it’s not intended, Mr. Speaker? No. We need to 

clearly understand what is intended by this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just to talk a little bit about the broad, potential 

implications of this piece of legislation, it says: 

 

Trespass prohibited 

3(1) Without the consent of the occupier of a premises, 

no person who is not acting under the right or authority 

conferred by law shall: 

 

(a) enter in or on the premises when entry is 

prohibited pursuant to this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then it goes on to say that they can make 

something prohibited simply by posting or telling somebody, 

Mr. Speaker. And without a clear definition of Crown land, Mr. 

Speaker, it can be interpreted, based on definitions of Crown 

land in other pieces of legislation, to be all public land, Mr. 

Speaker, that isn’t prohibited in their exclusion list, Mr. 

Speaker. And if that is their intent, it could be a backdoor way 

to do something that maybe they don’t even want to or intend to 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there’s a great deal of clarification required on this Bill as 

to what the intent is. Now, Mr. Speaker, it may be that the intent 

of this is just a simple process in which to make it more difficult 

for individuals who are — for lack of a better word — not, Mr. 

Speaker, acting appropriately on private land, Mr. Speaker, or 

perhaps not acting appropriately on public land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If that is the intent, Mr. Speaker, it needs to be clarified. We 

need to actually clarify what the intent of the definition of 

Crown land is and what their intent is in putting the legislation 

in place. Mr. Speaker, without that clarification, this Act is very 

broad and could have very, very broad implications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that “after being requested either 

orally or in writing by the occupier to leave the premises, fail to 

leave the premises as soon as practicable,” is an offence, Mr. 

Speaker. An offence that you can be fined quite significantly 

for, Mr. Speaker, and you can actually, Mr. Speaker, pay a very 

significant consequence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without clear definitions this could be all the land 

in the province of Saskatchewan with a very few exclusions that 

they put under the title of Crown land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I like to point out once again, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

simple ways to make this legislation much clearer would simply 

have been to define Crown land under the definitions for 

interpretation purposes. We don’t have that definition here in 

this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, so we don’t know what 

definition the government is intending to put in place, Mr. 

Speaker, and because of that the implications are unclear. 

 

It says, Mr. Speaker, that prohibition of entry, under section 

8(1): “Entry in or on premises may be prohibited by a notice 

given in accordance with section 11.” 

 

Section 11 goes on to say: 

 

A notice pursuant to this Act may be given: 

 

orally or in writing; 

 

by means of signs posted so that a sign is clearly visible 

in daylight under normal conditions from the approach 

to each ordinary point of access to the premises to 

which the notice applies . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, so you can simply put a notice up saying that you 

cannot enter or perform that activity on those premises, Mr. 

Speaker, and then it’s prohibited, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But without knowing what the intent is and without knowing 

the definition of Crown land, Mr. Speaker, this creates a 

situation where individuals may in fact lose rights that have 

been guaranteed to them. It may in fact take away the right to 

lawful assembly, Mr. Speaker. It may take away the . . . 

[inaudible] . . . of the right to lawful protest, Mr. Speaker. And 

those are fundamental rights of Canadian citizens, fundamental 

rights of Saskatchewan residents that we must be concerned 

about protecting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I’d like to just say very clearly that they 

could clear this up by putting in a clear definition of Crown 

land, Mr. Speaker. And when they use in section 15, talk about 

Crown land, they talk about what’s excluded from Crown land 

definition, but never actually define what Crown land is, Mr. 

Speaker, or what their intent is. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, it allows a great deal of 

authority within the regulatory component, the 

regulatory-making authority, Mr. Speaker, to define those types 

of issues, Mr. Speaker. It says under regulations, Mr. Speaker, 

section 18: “The Lieutenant Governor in Council may make 

regulations . . .” Mr. Speaker, and for those that don’t 

understand, the Lieutenant Governor in Council is in fact the 

Executive Council, the cabinet. And “for the purposes of clause 

2(a), prescribing land or categories of land as enclosed land . . .” 

Mr. Speaker, so the cabinet can, after we pass this legislation, 

go away and through regulation, Mr. Speaker, prohibit 

additional utilization of lands for means that aren’t clear or 

identified in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to clearly understand first of all 

what the intent is before we proceed with looking at this 

legislation in great detail. And it goes on to say, “for the 

purpose of clause 15(d), prescribing Crown land or categories 

of Crown land to which this Act does not apply,” Mr. Speaker. 

So another way, Mr. Speaker, another way they could fix this 

Act, Mr. Speaker, make it more clear, is to clearly define what 

Crown land means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, I think, are catching on, 

and by the time we get there, they may actually have their own 

amendment defining what Crown land is in the interpretation 

section so that the Act itself could not be used in a way that it 

was never intended, Mr. Speaker. And because we don’t know 

what their intention is in putting this legislation forward, Mr. 

Speaker, we can’t say that they have necessarily intent that is 

negative in nature, but we can’t say they don’t either, Mr. 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

Speaker, because we don’t have enough information to make 

that determination. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who was consulted before this Act was put in 

place? That may give some framework or some background to 

why this piece of legislation was actually put in place, Mr. 

Speaker, and why we’re dealing with this piece of legislation 

today. But we don’t have that information, and we won’t have 

that information for some time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I watched very carefully the minister’s 

second reading speech, I listened very carefully to what he said 

to us, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t alleviate some of those concerns 

because in no way did he confine or define in any way the 

definition of Crown land in his second reading speech. Had he 

done that, we may have had a great deal more comfort in where 

this piece of legislation was actually heading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This piece of legislation could be used to prohibit individuals 

from entering malls, Mr. Speaker. It could be used to prohibit 

individuals from entering public lands or Crown lands, Mr. 

Speaker, that aren’t used for the purposes that are excluded, Mr. 

Speaker. And why would we do that? That’s clear we would 

need to understand why they would want to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, and we don’t have that. 

 

Now this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, requires a 

great deal of further review to determine whether its passage is 

to meet unintended consequences that aren’t clear or in fact it’s 

simply a straightforward piece of legislation to deal with a 

simple problem, Mr. Speaker. That wasn’t clear so, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to have to ask many, many questions 

before we’re able to pass this legislation on second reading. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the minister in his second reading speech 

could have clarified some of the concerns we have. We didn’t 

see that in the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker. We clearly 

don’t have a definition for what Crown land means, Mr. 

Speaker. Without that definition, Mr. Speaker, it becomes 

potentially a very broad piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, when 

we actually get to a point where we’re talking about clause by 

clause in this particular piece of legislation, it might be prudent 

to have the minister to bring forward a definition of Crown land 

in his interpretation section so that we’re clear as to what the 

intent is in this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this is to deal with simple situations like 

individuals entering a neighbour’s property, Mr. Speaker, if this 

is to prevent individuals that are causing damage or trouble to 

private property from being prohibited to go on that land, well 

then, Mr. Speaker, we’d all actually support that type of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. But we don’t have that level of 

definition in the legislation to define it to those types of 

problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact today as this legislation is now written, it could be very 

broad and very wide in its application, Mr. Speaker, and that 

may affect many people in ways that aren’t clear. And the 

people of Saskatchewan have a right to fully understand what 

the implications are of legislation prior to it being passed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again I’d like to say if we had some 

background as to why this was being implemented, why this 

Bill was being put forward at this time, Mr. Speaker, and what 

problems it is intended to fix, it would help clarify a great deal. 

 

And most significantly, Mr. Speaker, if we had Crown land 

defined in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, it would help to limit the 

potential for negative use of this legislation in a manner that 

might take away Saskatchewan citizens’ rights, Mr. Speaker. 

That would go a long way to deal with some of our concerns 

and worries of this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many, many groups of people each year 

who want to express to their government their dissatisfaction 

with something. Mr. Speaker, there are groups who come to this 

legislature on a regular basis to indicate to a government that 

they’re unhappy or dissatisfied with the actions of the 

government. Mr. Speaker, we’d hate to see this piece of 

legislation, with no definition of Crown land, be used to stifle or 

stop those peaceful demonstrations and peaceful assembly that 

citizens have a right to participate in. 

 

They have right in our democracy to both vote for a government 

and to show displeasure with a government, Mr. Speaker, and 

those are rights we should all cherish and preserve for our 

children and for future generations, Mr. Speaker. We shouldn’t 

be putting in place, directly or indirectly, provisions, Mr. 

Speaker, that would in fact limit the right of peaceful assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, or peaceful demonstration, Mr. Speaker, 

regardless of what the reason for that demonstration is, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation may have nothing but 

good intentions. When it was drafted and drawn up, it may have 

been for nothing but admirable intentions, Mr. Speaker, but 

that’s not clear. Nor was it made clear in the minister’s second 

reading speech. Mr. Speaker, a couple of simple changes would 

make this legislation much clearer, make it much more able to 

be supported by the opposition. And the members opposite 

already understand that one of them is a clear definition of 

Crown land. Mr. Speaker, that would make this piece of 

legislation much clearer and much more acceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all, I think on all sides of the Assembly, do in 

fact support a concept of, if this is to prevent individuals going 

on somebody else’s land and doing damage to private property 

or creating problems for individuals, for that we’d all support, 

Mr. Speaker. But we’re not certain that that’s the full and total 

intent of this because of some omissions in definition, Mr. 

Speaker, some lack of clarity and intent and, Mr. Speaker, who 

this Bill was actually put in place to actually help, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And because, Mr. Speaker, without that clear intent we at this 

time are not in a position to move this Bill, Mr. Speaker . . . We 

need to go out and first of all discover, Mr. Speaker, talk to 

individuals and stakeholders about why this particular piece of 

legislation was brought forward; to seek perhaps an opportunity 

to speak to the minister as to why he brought this legislation 

forward and why he brought it forward in this manner, Mr. 

Speaker; and, Mr. Speaker, perhaps convince the minister that 

he should define Crown land in the Bill to make it easier. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are clearly 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

understanding that there should be a definition of Crown land 

now because they’re telling me it should be there. And I happen 

to agree with them, Mr. Speaker. So that is what our legislative 

process is about, Mr. Speaker. It’s about trying to pass laws and 

legislation that are meaningful to the people of Saskatchewan 

and accomplish the goals that we all wish to do, which is to 

have legislation that meets the needs of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re now, Mr. Speaker, at a point where 

without further clarification, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to 

adjourn debate on this Bill at this time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 43, The Trespass to 

Property Act. Is the Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 49 — The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure again to rise in the House this afternoon to speak to 

legislation that’s before us. In this case, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, 2008 which, as the Minister of Health pointed 

out, is in large part housekeeping from the government’s point 

of view, Mr. Speaker, because of other legislation that’s now 

been proclaimed — legislation, I believe, of the NDP 

government in respect to paramedics and other changes in the 

health care system that require updating at some point of The 

Ambulance Act. 

 

The question, I guess, Mr. Speaker, is since these changes are 

required — or desirable in any case, Mr. Speaker, if not 

absolutely required — has the government taken a full look at 

the emergency services system when considering changes to 

this Act? I expect that if this Bill becomes law, Mr. Speaker, 

that the government may not again during this term of 

government look at these issues, and this is the opportunity for 

them to do so. 

 

Have they done so, Mr. Speaker? Should the legislature be 

taking a look at the opportunities that arise when one looks at 

the emergency and trauma care system within the province, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And particularly a province like Saskatchewan which is, as we 

know, a beautiful province with a relatively small population 

compared to some of our provincial sisters, is spread over a 

very wide area. A province that probably has more per capita 

paved road; if not the most miles of telephone wire at one time 

and electrical wire still today in the country — pretty close, Mr. 

Speaker. A province where we try to provide a similar if not 

identical quality of services to people no matter where they live, 

Mr. Speaker — and power to people at the same price no matter 

where they live — so that the quality of one’s life, to the extent 

that it’s possible, Mr. Speaker, the quality of one’s life does not 

depend upon what municipality you live in or the size of that 

municipality. 

 

And when it comes to access to health care and to expeditious 

transport to health care and to qualified first responders at the 

scene of a heart attack or a stroke or an accident, this is more 

important in the province of Saskatchewan, to the million 

people who live in the province of Saskatchewan, in many 

ways, to it is to the 3 or 4 million people who live in the city of 

Toronto who live very close to all the services that they require, 

including their health care services — although sometimes you 

can get between municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan 

quicker than you can get across the city of Toronto. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, you would take my point. 

 

What health care is delivered in our hospitals and even in the 

emergency rooms of our hospitals of course is vitally important, 

but in many cases and particularly for trauma and particularly 

for heart attacks and strokes, Mr. Speaker, the care one receives 

either at the site or in transit can be as important, or even more 

vitally important than the care that one receives after one arrives 

at the hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have a constituent who I spoke to during the last provincial 

election — happened to have a reporter with me at the time — 

and he spoke glowingly of the health care system in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And he’d recently suffered a heart 

attack and gone to City Hospital and was very pleased with his 

treatment and very pleased with the outcome. And he was out 

raking leaves in his yard, and I suppose evidence that there had 

been a very good outcome, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But he lives about two or three blocks from City Hospital, 

which is just on the other side of the southern border of my 

constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. It wasn’t very far for him 

to go to City Hospital. I think even though that was the case, it 

may very well have been the case that those who attended on 

him at his home, prepared him for transit, perhaps even 

provided some treatment in transit, were important to him. But 

certainly all the more important to him if he had lived at some 

distance from the hospital, a further distance than he lived. 

 

Recently there was a study done in the United States comparing 

your chance of surviving a heart attack in different communities 

across the United States. And the article that I read that talked 

about the study, Mr. Speaker, was entitled, “If you’re going to 

have a heart attack, have it in Seattle.” 

 

And it wasn’t because the hospitals are necessarily better in 

Seattle; it isn’t necessarily the case that drinking lattes make the 

heart surgeons better in Seattle than in municipalities less 

known for their coffee, Mr. Speaker. The study, I believe, 

placed the survival rate in Seattle the highest in the country of 

the United States based upon the paramedic and ambulance care 

that people received before they arrived at the hospital. Because 

heart attacks, like strokes, like car accidents — what’s done 

immediately can be far more important and more indicative of 

the chance for survival or recovery than what is done perhaps 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

two or three hours later or even half an hour later, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So these services provided by ambulances, delivered by 

ambulances, provided by paramedics and others in our 

province, are of vital importance in our health care system, 

particularly of vital importance in a province which wants to 

provide a quality or near quality of services across a wide area. 

And those of us who have had an opportunity to travel 

immediately south of our border to the Dakotas, to Montana, I 

think appreciate how much better — and maybe there’s a bit a 

chauvinism and patriotism involved here, Mr. Speaker — but 

how better I think in a number of areas, particularly health care, 

but not only health care, education, and other areas. 

 

We have been able in the Canadian Prairie provinces, and I 

would hold Saskatchewan as high as any of the three, we have 

been able to deliver quality services to rural areas and people 

who are distributed across a wide area I think much better than 

our American neighbours have been able to do. I think they 

have particular problems with the way that they have decided to 

deliver health care or not deliver health care, but it’s not limited 

to health care, Mr. Speaker. I think we may have an issue about 

rural schools; no doubt we do. But I wouldn’t want to have the 

situation here that we have in the Dakotas or in Montana or a 

number of the Midwestern states. 

 

A commitment has been made by successive governments in 

the province of Saskatchewan to ensure that electricity costs the 

same in Saskatoon as it does in Nipawin or further north, that 

the lights are on everywhere, and that the trip on the school bus 

is as short as possible. And I know that the members opposite 

feel strongly about this, and the members who sat in 

government and sit in opposition now feel strongly about this. 

And that is the case for ambulance services as well as any other 

part of the health care system or any other public service that’s 

provided to the people of Saskatchewan. That has been our 

commitment. 

 

And it’s not been an inexpensive commitment. But it’s a 

commitment that the people of Saskatchewan have made to 

each other and that I don’t think people in larger centres 

begrudge their neighbours. Nobody — including myself, Mr. 

Speaker — is much more than a generation from the farm in 

this province. And I don’t know how long this will continue in 

our history, but it’s a commitment that we have and that we 

continue to have, and I know is shared on both sides of this 

House. And the Minister of Health needs to know that I’m 

talking about one of his Bills. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we have an opportunity to look at, 

as we now do, as the government thought it was desirable do, to 

look at the ambulance system, then questions arise as to if this 

might be the only look at it that we make in this term of 

government. If we’re not going to have an ambulance 

amendment Act every session, then are we doing everything 

that we can do to make sure that the system is as good as it can 

be, that we deal with issues of immediacy like trauma and heart 

attack and stroke as well as we can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t want to diminish the suffering that’s caused by heart 

disease or cancer in old age, Mr. Speaker, but the real tragedies 

are those who die young. And most people die young, Mr. 

Speaker, as a result of some trauma or accident — a fire, car 

accident is a common reason. When, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It’s kind of difficult when the 

Speaker’s actually hearing voices from the farthest end of the 

room rather than the person speaking. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try not to be so soft-spoken. 

 

The true tragedies are of course when people die young, and 

personally if I never attend another funeral of a person under 

30, I’ll be quite happy, Mr. Speaker. And to our economy to 

lose young people in the prime of life who have another 30 — 

or now that we’ve done away with mandatory retirement — 35, 

40 years to contribute to their society, to their economy, to their 

neighbours, to their clients, to their employers, to their 

customers, the loss is beyond the merely personal. But the 

personal loss of course is very great. 

 

And the ability to save a person from death or long-term 

disability from a trauma, it doesn’t exist in the recovery room or 

even in the operating room to the extent that it occurs at the site 

of the trauma and with the people who arrive in the ambulance 

and what they can do then and what they can do quickly and 

what they can do soon after the trauma and what they can do 

even prior to transporting and during transport of that person to 

the hospital. And that’s why this is such an important issue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And if those issues are best dealt with in other legislation or in 

other ways or in other policies, that’s fair, Mr. Speaker. But I 

suspect that the opening up of this legislation provides some 

opportunities for us to look at how we can ensure that what we 

do in the ambulance system is as good as it can be, and as suited 

to the particular needs of the Saskatchewan people and how we 

continue to live in this province as possible. 

 

And I think other members of the legislature who know more 

about the health care system than I do may have comments to 

make in that respect, Mr. Speaker, and I would certainly like 

them to have the opportunity to do that, whatever side of the 

House that they are on. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 

propose now to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 45 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

[15:15] 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be able to rise and add a few 

comments to this Act, The Credit Union Amendment Act. 

 

I have to say, Mr. Speaker, there was some questions in my 

mind when I first looked at the Bill and seen the acronym 

CUDGC [Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation]. I had a 

bit of debate as to what exactly it stood for, and I’m sure, Mr. 

Speaker, there is a number of folks at home that are wondering 

just exactly what it stands for if they happened to miss the 

minister’s second reading speech that really laid it out a little 

more clearly, but it’s the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 

Corporation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, CUDGC was formed in 1953 as Canada’s 

first deposit protection agency. And I think by anyone’s 

standards here in the province of Saskatchewan, anyone who 

has dealt with credit unions, anyone that has a credit union in 

their community, I think we would all agree that it has been 

successful and that it has successfully really delivered on its 

mandate of protecting depositors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I went through the minister’s second reading 

speech to get an idea of exactly what the changes being 

proposed are, had a look at the Bill. It seems to be just the 

number of board members and the makeup of the board that is 

changing. But I’ve had a look through the second reading 

speech. And I guess one of the issues that popped to mind for 

me was when it talked about CUDGC, how successful it has 

been, its many years of protecting the deposits of people right 

across the province and guaranteeing credit union depositors, 

and he made some comments about, “. . . Saskatchewan credit 

unions are strong, stable, and well capitalized.” 

 

And I think that was comforting for many folks in 

Saskatchewan to hear. While we have a great deal of faith in the 

credit union system and a regulatory regime that supports that 

system and has been successful in this province, I think to hear 

the minister say that offered a certain amount of comfort to 

people in Saskatchewan when we have heard the reports from 

around the globe, concern over financial institutions and others 

that are having some pretty difficult times. And a number of 

people that I have spoken to have talked about the deregulation 

of the industry and how it has really led us to where we are 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so when we see a piece of legislation that is 

coming forward, I guess the first question is, what does it do? 

What are the changes that are being proposed? Does it improve 

the system? Does it improve the safeguards that are in place? 

And does it allow for better operation of the organization, and 

the opportunity for the operation to reach its stated goals and 

mandates? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at this though, I believe as near as I 

can tell, it really just lays out the changes in the structure of the 

board. We’re moving from a five-person board to a 

seven-person board, changing some of where the board 

members are appointed from, and looking at more of 

independent board members to be put on the board and 

enhance, hopefully, the governance structure. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have an awful lot of comments on this. 

There was just one line that really jumped out at me from the 

minister’s speech. When he talked about: 

 

The current structure of the CUDGC board is not in 

keeping with similar deposit guarantee corporations in 

other jurisdictions where the majority of board members 

are government appointees or are otherwise independent 

of the regulated entities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I haven’t heard of any examples where that would 

give me some concrete examples of what happens in other 

jurisdictions, what other jurisdictions the minister is referring 

to, or in fact what research has been done to support that 

comment. 

 

So what I have to say, Mr. Speaker, is that while we’re always 

pleased to see improvements made in the credit union system, 

CUDGC I think is one of those that we would look forward to 

seeing this improvement made to if in fact it is an improvement. 

 

I would like some time to be able to do some research, talk to 

people within the field, and also look at other jurisdictions that 

the minister referred to, to see what the norm is in other 

jurisdictions, if in fact this is unusual. 

 

And there is a number of concerns, or one particular concern, 

that if we have a strong system in place currently which has 

served the province of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Saskatchewan well since 1953, does this in fact improve or is it 

just a change for change’s sake? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think there needs to be a bit more research 

done, a look at other jurisdictions to see what is commonplace 

there, and why it’s commonplace. We don’t need to do things 

and make changes just because they are in other provinces. If 

it’s working well, maybe we need to maintain what is in place 

already. But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to be able to have a little 

more time to talk to some people in the industry and do a little 

more research on other jurisdictions. So with that, I would 

adjourn debate on Bill 45. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 45, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased once again to stand and speak on Bill No. 9, An Act to 

Amend the Superannuation Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation does a number 

of things, some of which I see as positive and some of which I 

think are significantly negative in the public interest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill that I . . . In my last opportunity to speak 

to the Bill, I referred to it often as the double-dipping Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. And the reason I referred to it as the double-dipping 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, is this. Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation 

now makes it legal for an individual to retire and to maintain 

employment in the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

without ever leaving his employment, Mr. Speaker. So one day, 

one day, Mr. Speaker, an individual could be making his normal 

salary, whatever that amount is, Mr. Speaker. Let’s use, for 

purposes of articulating legislation, $100,000, Mr. Speaker. The 

next day, Mr. Speaker, he could come and in fact be making his 

$100,000 salary and collecting a pension at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, as the member said, so could I. And that’s 

correct, Mr. Speaker. It could apply to somebody like myself or 

it could apply to other members. And it does in fact apply to 

many, many people who move from one employer to another 

employer, Mr. Speaker. But in most circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker, it doesn’t apply. And I cannot find a single 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker, where it would actually apply to 

somebody being able to work full-time, Mr. Speaker, and 

collect his pension, Mr. Speaker. Today, working for the same 

employer, Mr. Speaker, I can’t find an employer that allows 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now if you want to retire from one employer, Mr. 

Speaker, and seek employment with somebody else and collect 

your pension and work, that, I agree, happens on a very regular 

basis, Mr. Speaker. But the difficulty of working for the same 

employer, collecting your pension and working full time for 

that employer, Mr. Speaker, is in fact double-dipping. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I could have just a few minutes just to 

explain why that’s double-dipping . . . If you look at pension 

provisions historically, Mr. Speaker, pension provisions are 

there as income or salary replacement when an individual quits 

working for that employer, Mr. Speaker, after having worked 

many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Normally, Mr. Speaker, most pension plans, defined benefit 

pension plans, Mr. Speaker, you have to work anywhere from 

25 to 35 years before you’re eligible to in fact collect pension. 

You have to be age 50 as a minimum. You have to be age 50 as 

a minimum, Mr. Speaker. And they say I could collect pension, 

Mr. Speaker. They well know I’m not 50 yet, so I couldn’t 

collect pension yet, Mr. Speaker. No, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite a 

ways yet from 50, so I couldn’t actually collect the pension 

right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not common for an employer to pay the 

full salary of an individual and pay the pension from the same 

employer. As I said, it is quite common from people to retire 

from one occupation, collect the pension, and move on to a 

secondary occupation, Mr. Speaker. That’s common in both the 

private and public sector, Mr. Speaker, but to work for the exact 

same employer, Mr. Speaker, is not common. And, Mr. 

Speaker, pension provisions were put in place as salary 

replacement when an individual retires. Mr. Speaker, in this 

case the person hasn’t actually retired. They’d still be working 

for the same employer full time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this has become a problem for public 

accounting in the province of Saskatchewan because we’ve 

allowed individuals to come back on contract basis. We’ve 

allowed individuals to come back part time, Mr. Speaker, but 

nobody’s been allowed to come back full time. Mr. Speaker, 

this would make it legal for somebody to actually work full 

time and collect the full pension, Mr. Speaker, and that is why I 

define it as double-dipping. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the taxpayers of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because we have — at least in the 

public service, Mr. Speaker — a pension plan that’s not funded, 

it’s not fully funded, Mr. Speaker, so that money comes each 

and every year out of the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

So the taxpayers are paying, through their tax dollars, the full 

amount of the pension and the full amount of the salary. So that 

individual, Mr. Speaker, is collecting, it could be up to 170 per 

cent of his full-time salary, Mr. Speaker, and doing the same 

job he was doing the day before. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, deserve better. Mr. 

Speaker, they have a right to know that their government’s 

acting in their best interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I can understand that this provision is allowed between 

two employers, two different employers. That happens on a 

regular basis. It’s not uncommon for individuals to retire from 

one employer and go to work for another — that’s very 

common, Mr. Speaker — and while they’re doing that, collect 

that pension from the first employer and collect a salary from a 

second employer. But, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty here is it’s 

the same employer, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the same payer, Mr. 

Speaker. And when that’s occurring, Mr. Speaker, we are 

paying as taxpayers more than we need to pay to get that job 

performed. We are paying more than we need to pay, Mr. 

Speaker, and when we pay more than we need to pay, Mr. 

Speaker, I would say, Mr. Speaker, we’re not getting value for 

our dollar then, Mr. Speaker. The taxpayers of this province are 

not getting value for their dollar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend a few minutes talking 

about some of the other provisions in this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and some of it is appropriate and very good changes, 

Mr. Speaker — changes that I think we’d all like to see, Mr. 

Speaker. It clarifies how a pension is divided and how a new 

spouse would be entitled to benefit, Mr. Speaker, under the 

pension Act, something that I think is appropriate. I think that’s 

something that’s been unclear for some time and left a second 

spouse perhaps in less than adequate compensation or adequate 

ability to live after an individual deceased, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, those provisions we all agree with. Those 

provisions are good, Mr. Speaker, and those provisions help 

make this legislation better. Mr. Speaker, nobody would 

disagree with those particular provisions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read into the record the provisions 

of section 27 in the original Act which is being, Mr. Speaker, 

repealed and removed from the legislation. And it says, 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

“Suspension of allowance upon re-employment.” Today, Mr. 

Speaker, and until this legislation is passed, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Where a person who is in receipt of a superannuation 

allowance under this Act or any other superannuation Act 

hereafter becomes entitled to receive a salary from the 

government, then the superannuation allowance shall be 

suspended from the day on which this section comes into 

force or from the day on which such salary entitlement 

commences, whichever is later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so today you cannot collect your pension from the 

same employer at the same time as you’re being paid to perform 

a service on behalf of that employer, a salary, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the norm. That is the norm throughout 

pensions across North America, Mr. Speaker. It’s the norm 

across pensions throughout, Mr. Speaker, largely the world 

where pensions exist, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand the member from Swift Current is 

absolutely thrilled to listen to this one more time, Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker, for some time he’ll have the opportunity to 

hear what is actually going on in this legislation. It goes on to 

say, Mr. Speaker, in section 27: 

 

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person who is in 

receipt of a superannuation allowance may be employed 

by the government as a temporary, casual or provisional 

employee for any period or periods, not exceeding in the 

aggregate six months in any fiscal year, without 

suspension of the superannuation allowance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so it does allow employees to come back on a 

contractual basis or to come back part-time to fill in where there 

are needs for speciality skills, Mr. Speaker, or an individual 

who is there to assist in providing potential additional 

workforce, Mr. Speaker, in any one of our government 

agencies. So it does allow somebody to come back on a 

part-time basis, Mr. Speaker, but the current legislation does not 

allow somebody to come back on a permanent basis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And: 

 

Subsection (1) does not apply where the person in receipt 

of a superannuation allowance is the spouse of a person 

who at the time of death was an employee or a 

superannuate and where the person in receipt of the 

allowance is not personally a superannuate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so if you’re in fact receiving benefits from a 

spouse that passed on, Mr. Speaker, and you are still employed 

by the government by virtue you were a government employee, 

or get employed as a government employee, Mr. Speaker, it 

does not cut off that superannuation situation, Mr. Speaker, 

because it is that of a spouse, Mr. Speaker. And that’s also 

common in legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the primary problem with this piece of 

legislation is simple. It allows individuals to actually collect 

more than 100 per cent of their salary while performing the 

duties to which they are already being paid 100 per cent of the 

allowable salary for. And, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan would be paying that additional, up to 70 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, if the person had 35 years of employment in 

and, Mr. Speaker, the pension allows for 2 per cent of salary for 

each year of service to a maximum of 35, or 70 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. So that individual could collect 170 per cent of salary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a concern not just of myself, but it should be 

a concern of the members opposite as well. Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite I hope take the opportunity to think about 

this before deciding to proceed with it, Mr. Speaker, because of 

course they have the numbers at the end of the day to pass this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. But they need to think about whose 

interest is it in and is it in the best interest of the taxpayers of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are clearly people who would like this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I can see many government 

employees who’d like to see this legislation in place — many, 

many people who would have the opportunity to continue 

employment and make, Mr. Speaker, 170 per cent of their 

salary potential. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that is not what was intended when pensions 

were put in place. As I stated earlier, when pensions were put in 

place it was put in place as a salary replacement when an 

individual retired or left employment, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if somebody chose then to go to another employer and 

work and collect pension but a different employer, that was 

permissible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a situation where the 

one employer would be paying twice, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 

questionable practice, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, why would we 

want to institute a practice, Mr. Speaker, that would allow or 

see the taxpayers of Saskatchewan paying significantly more 

money? And yes, Mr. Speaker, I can understand many people 

would be asking for this. Anybody who would financially 

benefit from it, Mr. Speaker, would be asking for it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have to make public policy not based on 

what an individual lobby group asks us for. We need to make 

public policy based on what’s best for the entirety of the 

population of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, what’s in the best 

interests of all the taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. So in doing so, we need to take those things into 

consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can clearly see the benefit to those individuals 

who could collect, Mr. Speaker. I could clearly see the benefit 

to those who could collect, Mr. Speaker, a pension and work 

full-time, Mr. Speaker, and I could see why individuals would 

like to have that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. I can also see 

rationally why individuals would make the argument, if I can do 

it with a different employer, why can’t I do it with the same 

employer? I can see why those arguments would be made, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we in the Legislative Assembly here are 

tasked with acting in the best interests of the public of 

Saskatchewan, safeguarding public funds, and spending those 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

funds in the best interest of all the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we need to consider when we’re 

making decisions like this what is in the best interests of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Is it in 

the best interest to have individuals continue in employment 

beyond 35 years collecting their full salary and their 70 per cent 

salary, not making opportunity for advancement for younger 

people? That needs to be taken into consideration, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s part of the equation. It’s part of what we need to look at, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now today in our current situation, Mr. Speaker, with near zero 

unemployment, Mr. Speaker, the job market would maybe 

perhaps warrant one thing, Mr. Speaker. But we also can’t make 

public policy just on a short-term examination of a problem, 

Mr. Speaker. We need to understand what the implications are 

long term. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also need to understand that, is it in the 

public interest? Is it in the public interest, Mr. Speaker, for a 

government to pay the 100 per cent of a salary and 70 per cent 

of pension — both coming out of the General Revenue Fund — 

when they can get the same work done for simply paying 100 

per cent of the salary, Mr. Speaker? You can get the same work 

done paying 100 per cent of the salary, Mr. Speaker, without 

paying that 70 per cent out to pensions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I hear members saying, who does the pension belong to, Mr. 

Speaker. I will agree wholeheartedly with the concept that 

pensions belong to the employee, to the individual, Mr. 

Speaker. The difficulty becomes, when pension laws were 

created in this country, and what was intended was this, Mr. 

Speaker, is that pension income was there to be salary 

replacement when an individual retired, Mr. Speaker, when they 

chose to move on, Mr. Speaker, and retire, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and if you move to another 

employer and work for another employer, Mr. Speaker, it is 

very common to collect a pension and collect a salary, but it’s 

not with the same employer, Mr. Speaker. The situation we’re 

dealing with is, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan could pay up to 

170 per cent of that salary to get what they could actually only 

pay 100 per cent for and get the work done. So they are paying 

70 per cent more, Mr. Speaker. And is that appropriate? Is that 

good stewardship of public dollars, Mr. Speaker? And is that 

what we want to actually do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, employees in the private sector who work for 

private companies don’t have that option, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, employees in private pension plans working for 

companies don’t have those options, Mr. Speaker. So why 

should we have one set of options for one group of people in 

our province and other sets of options for others, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I challenge the members opposite to find me a private sector 

pension plan that allows an individual to remain working at 100 

per cent of their salary and collecting their pension, Mr. 

Speaker, from the same employer. Mr. Speaker, I challenge 

them to find me examples of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can see why people want this, Mr. Speaker, but 

we are here to act in the interest of the general public of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And as I said a year ago when this 

legislation came forward, Mr. Speaker, my concern is that in the 

interest of proper stewardship of public dollars, Mr. Speaker, 

this could potentially impact not just a few government 

employees, Mr. Speaker, or Crown employees, but maybe 

thousands and thousands of employees over time, Mr. Speaker. 

And then you start paying more than 100 per cent of salary to a 

large number of . . . [inaudible] . . . employees, Mr. Speaker, 

that has a significant cost to the public purse, Mr. Speaker. And 

that significant cost, that significant cost, Mr. Speaker, has an 

implication on what services a government can deliver, Mr. 

Speaker, and what is appropriate for that government to deliver, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they say if you hire somebody else you’re 

still paying. I say, yes you are, Mr. Speaker. Yes you are, Mr. 

Speaker. You’re paying 100 per cent for that salary, Mr. 

Speaker, and you’d still be paying the 70 per cent for the 

individual who’s retired. I agree with that, Mr. Speaker. But it’s 

not to the same person making 170 per cent to do this very job 

he would be willing to do — and has done for many years — 

for 100 per cent of his salary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite are saying, you know, ask me 

all types of questions. I can only deal with one issue at a time. 

Ask one question at a time and I’ll try to address it, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, 

although I can see many people who would like the provisions, 

Mr. Speaker, many people who would want the provisions, Mr. 

Speaker, and you know, Mr. Speaker, members often say I 

potentially would be one of the benefactors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? That is potentially true, Mr. 

Speaker. But I have to make decisions not based on what’s in 

my own best interest, Mr. Speaker, but in the best interest of the 

public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And in the best interest 

of the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is it in the best 

interest of the public to pay for 170 per cent potentially of a 

salary where the individual today would be doing it for 100 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those have long-lasting and far-reaching 

implications, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that has long-reaching 

and far-reaching implications, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite seem to be disturbed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has the floor. You’d 

think we were in committee the way the questions are being 

fired across the floor. I will recognize the member that . . . 

Respect the member that has the floor. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Members 

are drawing comparisons from various pension plans and 

various retirement situations, Mr. Speaker, and trying to put 

them on a par with this particular situation, Mr. Speaker. There 

are differences. 

 

The point I’m trying to make, Mr. Speaker, is this particular 

piece of legislation has been in place for some time, restricting 

the ability to do what they are actually putting forward today. 

And it was put forward restricting that ability for a reason, Mr. 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was put there in the interests of 

protecting the public funds, Mr. Speaker, and in fact ensuring 

that value for dollar was obtained, Mr. Speaker, through the 

employment and through the retirement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if we allow individuals to 

retire and collect their pension in the same job, Mr. Speaker, as 

I said earlier, somebody could actually on a Friday be making 

$100,000 a year and on Monday making $170,000 a year — not 

moved his desk, not changed anything else in his employment, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the previous legislation prevented 

that. 

 

The removal of those clauses would allow that, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, that wouldn’t be prohibited under this legislation. 

If this Bill is in fact passed, Mr. Speaker, it would allow that to 

happen. And that isn’t pension fraud, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t what 

it’s being perceived to be. Under the current legislation that was 

not permissible. Under this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it would be 

permissible. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to safeguard the public 

funds. 

 

It’s the responsibility of the opposition to ask tough questions, 

to make sure that the public interest is protected as we’re 

looking at how public dollars are expended, Mr. Speaker. So we 

need to ensure that as we examine these pieces of legislation 

and as we pass public policy, it is in the best interests of all the 

people of Saskatchewan, not just those who may benefit 

directly from the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are asking various 

questions. I can only answer one question at a time. I didn’t 

hear some of the comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This may have very narrow application today, Mr. Speaker, a 

very small application to very few people today, Mr. Speaker. 

But like many pieces of legislation, you have to look at what the 

implications are long term, what the financial implications are 

on the public purse and what impact it will have in the 

long-term stability of the pension plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this particular case, it will not change the stability of the 

pension plan because this pension plan is not funded, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s fully funded out of the General Revenue Fund 

on an annual basis. So, Mr. Speaker, each year the government 

has to set aside a portion of money in order to pay the pensions 

of employees that fall under this pension plan because it’s an 

unfunded liability, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, it won’t even 

change the unfunded liability by paying this out, Mr. Speaker. 

But what it does do is see us paying out the same person 170 

per cent of what they would earn, Mr. Speaker, if they stayed 

employed in their job and didn’t retire and remain employed, 

Mr. Speaker. And those are concerns, though some members 

may not like, I think that they’re tough questions that need to be 

asked. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many people would like this legislation, as 

I’ve pointed out. But when we’re making public policy 

decisions, when we’re making public policy decisions we have 

to make the best decisions, Mr. Speaker. And if we have the 

opportunity to debate them and look at them fully, Mr. Speaker, 

then we perhaps should make better decisions, Mr. Speaker. At 

the end of the day, what I’m trying to do and what members of 

the opposition try to do is get the government to examine the 

legislation to see if this is really what they think should be done 

in the public interest of Saskatchewan. 

 

We all know that the government has the majority of members 

and can and will eventually, if they so choose, pass this 

legislation. But what we’re doing, what we’re doing is simply 

asking the questions if this is what they really want to do. Is this 

really the public policy interest that they have or is this a piece 

of legislation that was brought forward by some stakeholders 

who want this because they will potentially benefit from it 

directly? Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the answers to those 

questions and at some point later in the future as we go into 

committee, we will ask those questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This piece of legislation has been brought forward several 

times. It had been brought forward when we were the 

government, Mr. Speaker. We would not proceed with that 

legislation for our concerns in the public interest, Mr. Speaker, 

and public accountability of public dollars, Mr. Speaker. This 

government has chosen to bring forward the legislation. A year 

ago, to their credit, when questions were asked they took a step 

back, didn’t proceed with the Bill at that time — I imagine 

sought some input and further examination of the issues. Maybe 

some of the concerns I have when we get to committee and that 

I’ve expressed, they’ll be able to satisfy my answers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But in the interest, Mr. Speaker, of ensuring that a close and 

careful examination of this piece of legislation is done, Mr. 

Speaker — and as the members are well aware, we have some 

time left to go this afternoon and this is the last piece of 

legislation we have to deal with this afternoon, Mr. Speaker — 

we’re going to discuss this Bill for some time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if we were proceeding with this legislation 

as is, Mr. Speaker, today, there’s a number of questions that we 

would be asking the minister responsible, including what are 

the projections for utilization of these provisions and what are 

the costs to the public purse, Mr. Speaker. What are their 

projections or implications for possible promotional 

opportunities for more junior employees as a result of this 

legislation and people potentially staying longer in their jobs, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will be asking questions about what does 

this do to . . . How does this affect new people coming into the 

civil service as individuals choose to stay much longer because 

they can collect upwards of 170 per cent of their salary, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Those are all important questions. They are important questions 

that we need to consider as we examine this piece of legislation. 

As I had stated earlier, there is more than one aspect to this 

piece of legislation. The changes that have been made in 

regards to improving the rights of second spouses, Mr. Speaker, 

are changes that all members of the Assembly I think can agree 

with. They are clearly changes that are beneficial. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we legalize the concept of double-dipping 

today, Mr. Speaker, and the ability to collect a pension and 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

work 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in the same job for the same 

employer for the government, Mr. Speaker, does that have any 

long-term implications on other private sector pension plans? 

Does it set precedents that could potentially have impact on 

other employers, Mr. Speaker? These are all things that we need 

to be concerned about as a legislature as we set precedent that 

affects individuals under our direct control, Mr. Speaker, 

because those precedents often get used then as examples for 

other individuals for changes to their pension plans, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So before we pass any particular piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to understand what those implications are in a 

broader context to other employers in the province of 

Saskatchewan potentially as their employees bring up these 

implications and desire these changes as well, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t know what those implications are today, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t fully understand them. I think we need to examine that in 

more detail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say I can understand it. 

Well yes, I can understand that there will be potential 

implications, Mr. Speaker. Just as you bargain with one group it 

sets an expectation or a pattern for other groups that do similar 

things or do like work, Mr. Speaker. I would expect nothing 

different from changes to pension legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in all fairness I should point out that today, 

today if you had your retirement savings in RRSPs [registered 

retirement saving plan], Mr. Speaker, and you needed at any 

time to access that money, you have the ability to access that 

money, Mr. Speaker. It’s not locked in; you could cash them in. 

Of course you’d pay income tax on cashing in those RRSPs, but 

that is money that’s readily utilized at any period of time if you 

have additional need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now traditionally defined benefit pension plans haven’t had any 

of those types of provisions, Mr. Speaker. This would be not 

moving to anywhere near the lucrative type of provisions that 

you would see in self-directed RRSP plans, Mr. Speaker, but it 

would be an opening to make the pension plan more flexible 

and allowing employees to do things, Mr. Speaker, that they 

can’t currently do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s with no ill intent or malice or anything 

towards any of the employees who may benefit from this, Mr. 

Speaker, because I understand why they would desire it, Mr. 

Speaker. I as an individual would desire that as well, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

But we, Mr. Speaker, have a responsibility in setting precedent, 

Mr. Speaker, and ensuring that what we do is in the broader 

public interest, Mr. Speaker. It accomplishes the goals of not 

just what is immediately in front of us, but that we understand 

what implications it has to other employers, Mr. Speaker, what 

implications it has in other public sector employers, Mr. 

Speaker. And not necessarily just in Saskatchewan either, Mr. 

Speaker, because provinces and that compare to one another as 

well, Mr. Speaker. So we always have to be concerned about 

what precedents we’re setting and are they really in the public 

interest. 

 

We can’t afford to experiment with things like pensions without 

understanding what those implications are, Mr. Speaker, 

because today, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many pension 

plans who have difficulty, Mr. Speaker, remaining solvent, Mr. 

Speaker, and having adequate funding, Mr. Speaker, to deliver 

the benefit which was once intended, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we can’t — just because we didn’t fund this and we didn’t 

set aside the money, Mr. Speaker — decide that we can change 

things and provide any amount of money at any time. And 

that’s what this change really would allow to happen as well, 

Mr. Speaker. It would allow us to say that we would be able to 

provide any amount at any time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, is that in the public interest? I would 

question it being in the public interest, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would ask members opposite to consider whether or not they 

believe it’s in the public interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t know what analysis the members of the government 

have done in whether this is good public policy or not, whether 

they’ve had a round table discussion, Mr. Speaker, if they’ve 

asked other private sector employers whether they think this is a 

good precedent to be set — I know none of that, Mr. Speaker. 

But when we get to actual . . . Mr. Speaker, in committee on 

this particular piece of legislation, those are questions that we’ll 

have the opportunity to ask. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know why the Bill is originally brought forward 

because it was brought forward when I was in the government, 

Mr. Speaker. We had the opportunity to examine it, and we 

decided not to proceed at this time with this change in 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point out that this particular change was not driven by 

the previous NDP government internally; it was a change driven 

within the bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker. And most of our 

legislation is in fact driven by changes in the bureaucracy, 

things that need to be updated and renewed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the question is, is this particular change what we want to 

do? And I think that’s a fair question, Mr. Speaker. And we will 

hear from members opposite that they think it’s the right thing 

to do or at least some members opposite have said that from 

their seats, Mr. Speaker, and that’s fair ball that they think it is. 

 

But our role as the official opposition is to ensure that there’s 

due diligence done in consideration of changes in public policy, 

and that those changes in public policy in fact benefit the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We would not be 

doing our jobs if we didn’t ask the very difficult questions, we 

didn’t bring up the issues that may not be as pleasant as some of 

the others, in order to ensure a full examination of the impact 

and implications of each and every piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this particular piece of legislation has significant 

implications. And those implications, Mr. Speaker, can affect, 

Mr. Speaker, a number of aspects of employment within the 

public service. It can also affect total overall cost dollars to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It can change 

promotional opportunities for others, Mr. Speaker. And all 

those things need to be taken into consideration as you look at 

having a viable, long-term civil service with the ability to 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

entertain changes, Mr. Speaker, and entertain changes in a way 

that looks for stability, looks for the opportunity for individuals 

to advance, Mr. Speaker, and to plan that advancement within 

the civil service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things all employers need to do today is to plan, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that they can keep their workforce, Mr. 

Speaker. And one of the ways is to ensure that there are 

advancement opportunities for employees, Mr. Speaker. And 

this potentially could impact that. 

 

My questions to the members opposite would be, has that been 

examined? Has it been examined as to its implications in the 

civil service, Mr. Speaker? I’d also like to point out to the 

people of Saskatchewan who may not be aware, we have a civil 

service that is growing, Mr. Speaker, in . . . or growing is the 

incorrect word, but is becoming older each year, Mr. Speaker, 

in the sense that the average age is increasing, Mr. Speaker. So 

we need to understand those implications. 

 

If two-thirds or one-third of the workforce, Mr. Speaker, five 

years from now are in fact collecting pension on this fund and 

collecting their salaries, what are the financial implications, Mr. 

Speaker, but what also are the human resource implications and 

the ability to attract younger people into those jobs in a timely 

manner in order for them to learn the skills and the abilities to 

advance within the organization, Mr. Speaker? Those are all 

things that need to be considered. They’re all things that we 

need to look at and examine, Mr. Speaker, and we need to talk 

about. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite have examined all 

those things, then we’ll have the opportunity later to talk about 

those things. We’ll have the opportunity later to see whether or 

not there’s been a close scrutiny of the implications of this, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll have the opportunity to see whether or not 

they’ve consulted other employers as to whether they see this as 

a precedent being good in the overall community of 

Saskatchewan. Many, many employers out there provide 

pension opportunities, Mr. Speaker, and does this potentially 

have any implications, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It certainly doesn’t have implications if people have RRSP 

plans or those types of pension plans, Mr. Speaker, because as 

members opposite would know, an employee that has an RRSP 

pension plan or buys personal RRSPs can cash those in when 

they need to or when they want to, Mr. Speaker. They in fact 

can have access to that money at any time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, nothing in the operations of government 

pensions in the past or today would prevent an individual from 

buying additional RRSPs as well as their funded pension plan, 

Mr. Speaker. Most people in the province would be aware, until 

just most recently it was matched at 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

The employee put in 5 per cent — the government put in 5 per 

cent — and there was a sliding scale based on the age in which 

you entered the civil service with slightly more being paid if 

you enter at a later age, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that before we proceed 

with this legislation, to have a full examination, Mr. Speaker. 

And I have had some time to talk about the things I think need 

to be examined in detail, Mr. Speaker. I hope that we will have 

the opportunity at a later date, Mr. Speaker, to have some 

detailed examination of this potential legislation in committee, 

Mr. Speaker, where we’ll have the opportunity to question 

whether or not individuals actually have — individuals on the 

other side, Mr. Speaker — have actually looked at any of the 

implications, and what those implications are on the overall 

public policy of the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

I at this time think I will conclude my remarks for today. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity today as well to rise on Bill No. 9, 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 

Act, 2008. I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, that the thousands of 

people who had tuned in knowing that the member from Regina 

Dewdney was going to speak on this Bill again will hang in 

there for a short while longer as I add some additional 

information, Mr. Speaker, to what the member from Regina 

Dewdney raised. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very important that members of 

this House, members of the public who are watching, staff 

members of the government opposite who are reviewing this 

legislation also take some time, Mr. Speaker, to review not only 

the member of Regina Dewdney’s comments from today, but 

also his comments back on March 17, 2008 when this piece of 

legislation was first brought in. And, Mr. Speaker, for those 

who don’t have access to the March 17 debate, I think in a few 

minutes I would like to put a few of those comments back on 

the record so that those who are watching today will be able to 

catch up entirely on where this debate is at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by saying that, March 17, 2008, members of the 

public today and in the future should be aware that this 

legislation was introduced in the spring. And why in the fall 

now are we currently debating it again, Mr. Speaker, is because 

when this Bill was first introduced — and it was introduced for 

second reading on March 17, 2008 — the government opposite 

introduced the Bill, and it would appear that the government, 

the newly elected government was bringing forward legislation 

that they hadn’t fully understood. Because, Mr. Speaker, within 

minutes of the member of Regina Dewdney speaking on March 

17, 2008, the Bill disappeared. Within minutes, Mr. Speaker, of 

the member from Regina Dewdney speaking, the Bill 

disappeared. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, April, May, June, July, August, 

September, October, Mr. Speaker, eight months later — if it’s 

November now, which it is, nine months later — Mr. Speaker, 

the Bill suddenly reappears. But it hasn’t been changed. Mr. 

Speaker, the government members opposite took a time out to 

review the Bill and apparently, Mr. Speaker, didn’t find 

anything wanting to provide any changes which could have 

been done over that period of time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the comments made by the member from Regina Dewdney, 

which I will refer to shortly, Mr. Speaker, the comments about 

this Bill establishes the legal provision for government 

employees to double-dip, Mr. Speaker, seem to have fallen on 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

deaf ears across the way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the goals that we have to engage 

in today and over the next few weeks, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure 

that while this Bill is in front of the public for debate and before 

the majority members that sit on the government side vote to 

pass this legislation, that the public firmly understands that the 

members opposite, the new government, Mr. Speaker, supports 

the idea of double-dipping within government. That’s the 

essence of the argument here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think we should take a minute to simply review the Bill in 

front of us, Mr. Speaker, because it helps to put it all into 

context. And the member from Regina Dewdney’s comments 

about public policy are critically important — critically 

important, Mr. Speaker — to a firm understanding of what it is 

that’s in front of us here. 

 

But let’s go back to the second reading speech of the minister, 

Mr. Speaker, so that we get some context of what it is that 

we’re talking about, because of course it’s very easy for 

members of the public to focus on one thing and lose the overall 

context because, Mr. Speaker, there are provisions inside this 

legislation that we’re reviewing today, provisions that are 

entirely supportable. And, Mr. Speaker, I know provisions that 

were in the process of being brought forward for legislation 

prior to the election of November 2007, so there are some 

provisions here that are entirely supportable. 

 

What we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is ensure that the context is 

understood before we carry on with our raising concerns about 

this provision of double-dipping. So, Mr. Speaker, what is this 

Bill No. 9? Back in March when the minister provided the 

second reading speech, he indicated, Mr. Speaker, that the 

legislation pertains to defined benefit plans, not defined 

contribution plans, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps we should define 

that a little bit further now, Mr. Speaker. Defined benefit plans 

means that you have employees that are contributing to a plan 

today through their payroll deduction or whatever, but the 

benefit that you get on retirement is defined. The benefit, Mr. 

Speaker, is defined. So you know, you know, Mr. Speaker, that 

your pension when you retire will be X number of dollars or it 

would be a percentage of your final salary or it would be a 

combination of things. 

 

But the benefit is defined, Mr. Speaker. It means that before 

retirement you know exactly, as a potential retiree, you know 

exactly what you’re going to get in retirement. That means, Mr. 

Speaker, that a defined benefit plan gave individuals an 

opportunity to know what was going to happen with their 

incomes into the future, and they could make plans otherwise, 

Mr. Speaker. Did they need to seek income elsewhere before 

they retire? They can make that decision. Could they live on 

that without indexing? Because a lot of these plans, Mr. 

Speaker, were not indexed, and of course, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

subject as well that hasn’t been addressed by this government. 

 

And perhaps we should remind members of the public that 

members of these plans, which I’m going to describe even 

further later, did have pensions, Mr. Speaker; that because they 

were defined and not indexed, have become subject to concerns 

by people who did retire 10 years ago, 15 years ago, and who 

have felt that their pensions have not kept up with the cost of 

living and, Mr. Speaker, who are asking government to provide 

that full indexing and other benefits, Mr. Speaker, to this closed 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of the now government that were in 

opposition not that long ago indicated to the superannuates, Mr. 

Speaker, that if they got into government, everything would be 

fixed overnight. Here we are, Mr. Speaker, a year later. The 

election was more than a year ago now, Mr. Speaker, so it’s 

more than a year and they still have not addressed this issue. 

And to my understanding, Mr. Speaker, the minister who has 

some responsibility in this regard has not even answered the 

letters of the superannuates who have been asking these 

questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we’re on that subject, let me just say that I 

think that the superannuates deserve an answer from the new 

government, Mr. Speaker. There were promises made, 

expectations raised when they were in opposition, and now it’s 

time, Mr. Speaker, for them to step up to the plate and address 

those issues front and centre. Mr. Speaker, the superannuates 

deserve that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the defined benefit plan, 

Mr. Speaker. We know now that the new plans of government 

and the plans that the majority of workers in Canada now have, 

Mr. Speaker, are defined contribution plans. A defined 

contribution plan, Mr. Speaker, is a circumstance whereby you 

know what you put in, but you don’t know for sure what you’re 

going to get out. So, Mr. Speaker, the contribution is defined, 

not the benefit. And when you define the contribution, Mr. 

Speaker, you provide yourself as a potential retiree with an 

opportunity to take advantage of growing markets. And, Mr. 

Speaker, up until a few months ago the majority, the vast 

majority of pensioners were very anxious to take advantage of 

the growing marketplace. And, Mr. Speaker, now of course 

there are pressures on individuals who have retired and whose 

pensions are subject to market forces. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, knowing what we know, it is hugely important 

for people who are employed where there is a pension plan to 

understand the difference between a defined benefit plan and a 

defined contribution plan, to understand what it is that they are 

involved in and to make decisions, Mr. Speaker, based on that 

in the months leading up to retirement. 

 

So that’s why this particular piece of legislation is important, 

Mr. Speaker, because people are going to make decisions based 

on the provisions that are inside this Act, Mr. Speaker, which 

when the majority on the government side passes it, that’s 

exactly what it will become, Mr. Speaker, the law of the land. 

 

So I hope that I have, for the benefit of those people who are 

watching here today and those who are taking notes, I hope that 

I have provided some understanding of the difference between 

defined benefit plans and defined contribution plans. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill 9, which is what we’re discussing here, 

deals with the following defined benefit plans. It’s very 

specific, Mr. Speaker. It applies to the public service 

superannuation plan. It applies to the Liquor Board 

superannuation plan. It applies to the Power Corporation 

superannuation plan. It also applies to the Anti-Tuberculosis 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

League employees’ superannuation plan, and, Mr. Speaker, it 

applies to the Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

employees superannuation plan. So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

specific group of plans that this legislation applies to. 

 

Now in referring back to the second reading speech of the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, he further outlined in his comments 

about providing the background for this legislation, he argued 

very clearly that these defined benefit pension plans were 

closed to new members on October 1, 1977. That means, Mr. 

Speaker, that decisions were made by individual employees 

prior to October 1, 1977 and, Mr. Speaker, these defined benefit 

plans no longer were available for new employees to contribute 

to. 

 

So that means, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with a very specific 

group of people, a specific group of people who have been 

working for the provincial government since 1977, some of 

whom have already retired, Mr. Speaker, many of whom have 

already retired. 

 

Now just in terms of numbers, what does that mean, Mr. 

Speaker? Well as of December 31, 2007 — so at the end of the 

calendar year preceding the one we’re in today — at December 

31, 2007, there were 1,847 active and inactive members 

remaining in the defined benefit plan and, Mr. Speaker, 7,856 

pensioners. 

 

So when the member from Regina Dewdney in his comments 

earlier talked about this change perhaps affecting thousands of 

employees within the provincial civil service, Mr. Speaker, he 

was bang on. This is just short of 2,000 active employees of the 

provincial government, Mr. Speaker, who could be in a position 

to legally double-dip on the approval of the government in front 

of us. So, Mr. Speaker, as members of the Public Accounts 

Committee understand, as members of the Treasury Board — 

current and former members of the Treasury Board — and as 

members of the Finance Committee, old former Finance 

Committee, know, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to 

understand the implications, the policy decisions on the bottom 

line of government and what are the overall total costs going to 

be. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, here we are potentially creating a 

circumstance where, as the member from Regina Dewdney 

properly indicated, we will have individuals who could be 

working for government today and retire tonight and, Mr. 

Speaker, be hired back by government tomorrow or early next 

week at their same salary. Mr. Speaker, they’re then eligible for 

their pension benefits and, Mr. Speaker, continuing on the 

salary grid as it applies, Mr. Speaker. And I think, I think, Mr. 

Speaker — and I will get into this more in a few minutes, Mr. 

Speaker — but I think that the majority of Saskatchewan 

residents would find that that would be inappropriate. 

 

Let me put it in another context, Mr. Speaker. I think members 

fully remember and acknowledge and understand that I served 

in the House of Commons as a Member of Parliament for two 

terms, Mr. Speaker, and as a Member of Parliament I was 

eligible for some pension provisions. Mr. Speaker, my pension 

provisions with the federal government, by law, Mr. Speaker, 

are clawed back should I go back to work in any capacity with 

the federal government. In other words, Mr. Speaker, it is not 

allowed by Ottawa for one to double-dip, to receive two 

cheques from the same employer, the employer being the 

Government of Canada. In this case, Mr. Speaker, this newly 

elected government is saying to the people of Saskatchewan, it 

is okay to receive two cheques for the same job working for the 

province of Saskatchewan. But more on that in a few moments, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we all know, Mr. Speaker, when members of the defined 

pension plans that are now closed, Mr. Speaker, there’s no more 

money going into those plans, Mr. Speaker, so the pensioners 

receiving their monthly stipends, Mr. Speaker, their pensions, 

are receiving it from a closed system. There’s no new money 

coming into the system. So it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, 

that those pension dollars be protected. 

 

Let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker — and I think it’s important to 

acknowledge this as well — is that Saskatchewan has been well 

served by our public servants, Mr. Speaker, well served over the 

years. Public servants in this province, Mr. Speaker, working 

with the elected members, have developed some of the most 

innovative public policy matters in the world — and I’m not 

exaggerating, Mr. Speaker — in the world. 

 

We go back a number of years, public servants working for the 

Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, developed the 

medicare plan that for five years we funded right here in 

Saskatchewan — the hospitalization plan. I’d better get my 

language right here. For five years, Saskatchewan managed and 

operated the hospitalization plan brought about by a very 

progressive government — but the policy matters developed by 

a public service in this province, Mr. Speaker — and for five 

years we funded that by ourselves until, five years after 

instituted here, the federal government made a decision that in 

fact it would be a Canada-wide medicare program with federal 

funding. Mr. Speaker, interestingly, over the years, what 

originally was a 50/50 cost-sharing program between federal 

and provincial governments rapidly became one where the 

provinces pay the majority of the share, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But Saskatchewan back in the early ’60s, not a wealthy 

province by any means, Mr. Speaker, fought hard, fought hard 

and built a system that now is universally revered, Mr. Speaker. 

And we can thank public servants for bringing that forward. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can cite an endless number of programs, 

whether it be in the education sector, the social service sector, 

the justice sector, Mr. Speaker, areas where public servants 

have contributed greatly to the well-being of the people of this 

province and whose work has been studied and instituted in 

other provinces in Canada, in other governments around the 

world, including the United States, Great Britain, Australia, 

countries in Africa, Mr. Speaker. These are things that we have 

to be proud of and recognize when we are talking about 

contributions that have been made by men and women serving 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of the work that our public 

servants have made and we don’t want to see barriers put in 

their way when they retire. But, Mr. Speaker, as protectors of 

the public purse as well as protectors of public policy and 

protectors of the people who work within government, Mr. 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

Speaker, we have to take this global approach to ensuring that 

we are doing the right things at the right time for the right 

people. 

 

Now back to the speech of the minister in introducing Bill No. 9 

back in March 2008, and the minister clearly says: 

 

The public employees pension plan does not and has 

never had a restriction for pensioners returning to work in 

the public sector . . . A retiree can return to work with the 

government on a contractual basis, as long as the contract 

does not create an employee-employer relationship, 

without affecting the pension, the payment of the retiree’s 

pension. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while there are and have been protections 

against double-dipping on salaries, people who bring a wealth 

of experience to the table have always been welcomed back by 

government to serve the people of Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s on a contract basis, and it’s done in such way that 

there’s a net benefit for the individual, for the ministry now or 

the old department, and for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And yet now, Mr. Speaker, even though that provision has 

always existed, we’re seeing that the government today is 

saying that, let’s not just do it on a contract basis. Let’s just 

allow people to stay in their jobs, retire one day and stay on 

salary, come to work the next and receive 170 per cent of their 

salary. Mr. Speaker, a challenging circumstance by any means. 

But we have never ever said to a retiree of the provincial 

government, your expertise is no longer wanted; your 

contributions to the province are no longer wanted; if you retire, 

you’re done. Mr. Speaker, we’ve never said that. We’ve always 

allowed a contractual relationship to exist. 

 

The public policy issue there, Mr. Speaker, is that if you need a 

contract filled by somebody, don’t you want that contract filled 

by the most experienced, most credible individual available? 

And quite often that’s somebody who has a clear working 

knowledge of the ministry or the department for which work 

was done previously, Mr. Speaker. These contracts have helped 

them to develop programs and not have to worry about the 

day-to-day matters that take place in the office environment — 

such things, you know, as managing the office supplies and that 

sort of thing. Mr. Speaker, a contract can be policy related. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while we’re at it, I said earlier that I wanted 

to ensure that the public understood the overall context of this, 

to ensure that we know that there are some provisions here that 

are certainly worth supporting. So, Mr. Speaker, I think we 

want to acknowledge that this Act does have a number of 

provisions that are worthy of our support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I just quote from the minister’s speech in 

this regard in which the minister on March 17, 2008, said: 

 

This Act was also amended in 2003 to provide members 

who would obtain a spouse after retirement the 

opportunity to provide the new spouse with a survivor’s 

benefit upon the death of the pensioner. This was in 

response to the needs of the pensioners. It is necessary to 

amend the existing calculation of this benefit to ensure 

that it results in a benefit that is cost neutral to the pension 

plan and the pensioner. 

 

The legislation, Mr. Speaker [and again I’m quoting the 

minister], requires the pension boards to identify in the 

pension plan’s annual report the names of those members 

who have retired or died in the fiscal year. This 

requirement serves no practical purpose and is not 

consistent with the spirit and intent of The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, indeed when we talk about cleaning up pension 

legislation, cleaning it up to the point where it is serving the 

needs of the pensioners, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the sorts of 

things that we need to continue to do from year to year as we 

gain better understanding of the plan itself and the needs of the 

pensioners themselves. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important that we also recognize 

some of the things that my colleague from Regina Dewdney put 

on the record back in March that were not part of his speech 

today, Mr. Speaker. And I say this is important simply because 

the people who are watching today or members of the 

government staff who are taking notes about how to manage 

this Bill in committee, Mr. Speaker, should be aware that some 

of the things that the member from Regina Dewdney said back 

in March, when the Bill was introduced last, continue to be 

relevant today. 

 

And remember, remember, Mr. Speaker, at the beginning of my 

remarks I indicated that within minutes of the member from 

Regina Dewdney taking his seat nine months ago, this Bill 

disappeared. There were concerns on the other side, Mr. 

Speaker, concerns that seem to have been lost. Perhaps 

members of government were lobbied by friends of theirs who 

could stand to benefit from this double-dipping provision, Mr. 

Speaker. Not suggesting that that’s the case, only that there’s a 

possibility, Mr. Speaker, that the members have returned to this 

legislation without a full and careful review. 

 

I want to quote the member from Regina Dewdney, Mr. 

Speaker, when he said: 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, we have had the Provincial Auditor 

cite over the last number of years that in fact people were 

doing that — they were double-dipping. And they 

shouldn’t be double-dipping, and they should be 

prevented from double-dipping. So rather than, Mr. 

Speaker, dealing with that issue, we’ve chosen [that is, the 

government has chosen] to deal with it in another way and 

simply make it legal to double-dip. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the point there and what we have to keep in 

mind for this discussion, Mr. Speaker, is that the Provincial 

Auditor has commented on the issue of double-dipping, has 

indicated that there shouldn’t be double-dipping. And, Mr. 

Speaker, people should be prevented from double-dipping. And 

instead of dealing with the issue as the Provincial Auditor has 

suggested, this government has chosen instead, and I use that 

word very carefully, they’ve chosen — because there were 

options, there are alternatives — they have chosen to make it 

legal, to make it legal to double-dip. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney had another 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

comment in regard to the Provincial Auditor as well that I think 

. . . Actually the comment that I wanted to put on the record, 

Mr. Speaker, had to do with choice. And that’s why I used the 

language about the members opposite indeed had a choice, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The quote again, Mr. Speaker, from March 17 by the member 

from Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker . . . And he’s talking here 

about how the government can’t hide from the fact that 

governments make choices, that they have options, Mr. 

Speaker, and choices are important to make. So, Mr. Speaker, 

this is what he had to say, and I quote, “We don’t have the 

money, we don’t have the money to have . . .” And he’s quoting 

government from prior to the election, Mr. Speaker, the election 

of November 2007. The government members are saying: 

 

We don’t have the money, we don’t have the money to 

have a universal seniors’ drug plan, the members opposite 

[had to] say. So we would put a means test in that you 

can’t be part of the universal seniors’ drug plan if you 

have a salary . . . [more than] $65,000 a year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, options. The member continues to quote: 

 

. . . we’ll let a civil servant, a senior civil servant, make 

$200,000 a year, collect $140,000 pension, and their 

health benefits at the same time — all at the same time — 

but we won’t let a senior citizen with a family income of 

65,000 [dollars] be part of a universal seniors’ health plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, governments have options. And, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that is more clear today than it was in 

March and even more clear than it was prior to the election last 

year, Mr. Speaker, the information that was contained today in 

the government’s release of the second-quarter report of the 

finances of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a technical briefing this morning for 

MLAs, and you walked by the door outside of where this 

technical briefing was taking place, you could almost hear them 

singing, we’re in the money, we’re in the money now. Mr. 

Speaker, the report today indicates that revenues continue to 

rise, Mr. Speaker, and even though spending has risen, Mr. 

Speaker, even though spending has risen, Mr. Speaker, 

revenues continue to outstrip the government’s increased 

spending. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite continues to have 

options, continues to have the opportunity to choose to do 

things differently. This is a group of people who one year ago 

were saying that a drug plan to benefit the seniors in this 

province was unsustainable — those were their words, Mr. 

Speaker, unsustainable — and today they’ve got so much 

money they don’t know what to do with, Mr. Speaker. So 

instead they sing, we’re in the money now, Mr. Speaker. 

Incredible circumstances. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in March of this year, we didn’t know where 

we were going to end up by this period of time. And certainly a 

year ago, the members opposite didn’t know where we were 

going. And let’s not forget that shortly after the election, the 

Premier steps up to the microphone and he says, oh my 

goodness, the finances of the province are stark — stark, Mr. 

Speaker. And every day since then, every day since then, the 

bank account’s gotten bigger and bigger and bigger. I don’t 

understand what the word stark means when the Premier of the 

province uses it in connection with the financial state of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The point of all of this, Mr. Speaker, quite clearly, is that 

governments have options, and never in the history of this 

province has the government had more options available to 

them than right now. And maybe even over the course of the 

next 12 months, Mr. Speaker, we will have even more options 

available to us as this mountain of money continues to grow. 

 

The Premier sent members of the government out on a summer 

excursion this year, Mr. Speaker, sent them out on a summer 

excursion to talk to people. Unbelievable, probably never heard 

of in the history of this province, that MLAs had to be told how 

to do their job, Mr. Speaker. But the Premier said, go out, go 

out, talk to people and come back and tell me what it is that the 

public wants us to spend their money on. What does people 

want to spend the money on? Well, Mr. Speaker, there were lots 

of options brought forward . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So the 

Premier was acknowledging that of course there are options 

available to governments and there are choices that government 

will then have to make based on those options. And so what 

came back, Mr. Speaker, according to members opposite, was 

that members of the public provided members of government 

with certain options, and choices have since been made. But, 

Mr. Speaker, those choices continue to leave money in the bank 

for government to do other things with, and today’s release of 

the second quarter report, Mr. Speaker, indicates that there will 

be additional dollars to work with in the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when government sits down to make choices, 

they need to be considering a number of things — housing and 

the drug plan for seniors, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s time that the 

government reconsidered their decision on that. They 

reconsidered their decision on Bill No. 9. They reviewed Bill 

No. 9; they brought it back, Mr. Speaker. I think review the 

seniors’ drug plan and bring it back, Mr. Speaker. There are 

dollars that they said were not sustainable in it in the past. There 

are dollars available today, Mr. Speaker, that certainly make it 

proven to be a very sustainable program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, coming back to Bill No. 9 shortly, Mr. Speaker, 

because I think the people of Saskatchewan, if they were 

consulted more fully on Bill No. 9, would say to this 

government, would say to the Premier, would say to the 

members sitting opposite, you represent — speaking to the 

government, Mr. Speaker, not to you — the people would say 

to the government members, you represent us, the people of 

Saskatchewan, in the provincial legislature. We do not approve 

of double-dipping within the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I think without a doubt coffee row — whether it’s in 

Neilburg or whether it’s in Herbert or whether it’s in Swift 

Current — coffee row would say to the members opposite, you 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

can’t legalize double-dipping in the province of Saskatchewan. 

You just can’t do that. You are not representing me when you 

do that. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan would say. 

 

The government has choices and options, Mr. Speaker. And the 

Premier should ask his members, the Premier should ask his 

members to go back out to the people they talked to before and 

ask them what they think of double-dipping. Ask them, Mr. 

Speaker, before we conclude our debate and our discussion on 

Bill No. 9. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an important matter. We will utilize, Mr. 

Speaker, time and options available to us over the course of this 

session and maybe into the next session, Mr. Speaker. We will 

use the time available to us to help the public to understand 

what it is that the government is doing with this legislation. And 

it is. The government had a choice to do as the Provincial 

Auditor was suggesting, a choice that the Provincial Auditor 

said, don’t legalize this. They are choosing instead, Mr. 

Speaker, to legalize double-dipping. And we’re talking about as 

many as almost 2,000 people, Mr. Speaker, who could benefit 

specifically and directly by this piece of legislation. Mr. 

Speaker, for those who are sitting on future Public Accounts 

Committee, this is a lot of work for them, a lot of work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’ve got my feet, I know that at some point 

this Bill will go to committee. It’s not going to go to committee 

today, Mr. Speaker, or in the very near future, but this Bill will 

go to committee. And the members opposite . . . I know that for 

those watching, they can’t hear the speeches that are being 

made on the other side while I’m standing on my feet here. 

They can’t hear the speeches that are being made from people 

who are sitting in their seats, Mr. Speaker. But there’s been a 

number of members opposite, while I’ve been on my feet and 

while the member from Regina Dewdney was on his feet, who 

are offering all kinds of suggestions and actually, Mr. Speaker, 

were asking some questions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but think that sooner or later 

this Bill goes to committee. It’s in committee where one can ask 

questions to get the answers as to what it is that’s intended, how 

will this influence, what are the unintended consequences, what 

are the costs going to be, who’s been consulted, all those sorts 

of things — the kind of questions, Mr. Speaker, that were being 

shouted across the floor, and the members of the public didn’t 

have a chance to hear them because only my mike is live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that when we are in committee 

discussing Bill No. 9, that the questions being asked are not 

being asked only by members from this side of the House. Mr. 

Speaker, I would hope that not only opposition members 

concerned about this are asking questions of the minister and of 

ministerial officials, but I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

members of government who also have concerns or questions 

about this Bill would ask them in committee, put them on the 

record, and ensure, Mr. Speaker, that the public has a full 

understanding of what the answers to those questions are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite had a lot of questions for 

the member of Regina Dewdney and myself this afternoon. Mr. 

Speaker, I will be attending this committee meeting, as much of 

it as I can, and I’m going to be listening for members opposite 

in asking their questions about this Bill . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The member from Regina Dewdney reminds 

me of something, Mr. Speaker. We know from previous 

discussions about other legislations that appeared in the spring 

and then disappeared off the order paper at the end of the 

session that the members opposite don’t have a specific process 

for reviewing legislation either before it comes into this 

Chamber or before it actually comes out of a ministry and 

enters into this Chamber. 

 

We know that the members opposite, many of them had not 

even seen legislation that was being introduced. They were 

caught by complete surprise with Bills like the accountability 

Act, Mr. Speaker, and they pulled that. With Bills like No. 9, 

relating to double-dipping, they were caught by complete 

surprise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite I hope have taken the opportunity to 

establish a legislative review process that allows every member 

of cabinet to understand the provisions of every Bill before they 

are actually introduced for debate in the Chamber. Because 

while members of the opposition are quite prepared to do the 

job that the public has asked us to do, which is to review the 

material that government puts forward to ensure that it’s in the 

interests of Saskatchewan people, one would hope that the 

government would also do that on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan as members of government — review what it is 

that’s coming from their hand-picked deputy ministers, Mr. 

Speaker, for who knows whose benefit, to ensure that the 

interests of Saskatchewan people are reviewed prior to 

legislation being introduced. I don’t think that was the case here 

with Bill No. 9, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know from my days working in the federal House of 

Commons, Mr. Speaker, that the public was very clear about 

double-dipping, and here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, people 

on coffee row have got lots of issues that they like to talk about. 

Mr. Speaker, they aren’t talking about double-dipping today. 

Why? Because the members opposite are quietly trying to 

bring, legalize double-dipping in with this bit of legislation, and 

it’s only going to be if the public has enough time to understand 

the issues and to get some information back into government 

sources. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, maybe, maybe the best thing that I could do in 

the interests of this Bill, in the interests of public good, public 

policy, Mr. Speaker, maybe the best thing that I could do right 

now is to challenge the people who are watching here today, 

watching the legislative channel today, to challenge the people 

out there who believe that double-dipping should not happen, 

that the Government of Saskatchewan should not legalize 

double-dipping. Mr. Speaker. To challenge those people who 

believe that the government should do what the Provincial 

Auditor has said, Mr. Speaker, and not allow double-dipping in 

the public service, challenge those people, Mr. Speaker, to pick 

up their phones, phone their MLA — preferably government 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker, because obviously the opposition has 

figured this out; we got it, Mr. Speaker — but to phone 

members of government, government MLAs, and to say, I do 

not support the principle of double-dipping. I ask you, members 

of government, I ask you, my MLA, I ask you to represent my 

interests and to choose, to choose not to support double-dipping 

and to choose the interests of Saskatchewan people instead. 

 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard November 12, 2008 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that may be the best thing that I could accomplish 

today with my few remarks. I hope, Mr. Speaker, that some of 

my comments tonight have shed some light on the principle of 

good public policy, on the principle of government choice and 

options, on the principle of support for a good public service 

and the good work that the public engages in. Mr. Speaker, I 

would hope that members opposite feel that there is a place to 

ask their questions, that they can utilize the provisions of the 

Chamber, of the committee rooms, and of the quiet of their own 

caucus chamber to address some of the issues that present 

themselves in Bill No. 9, the superannuation amendment Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the time is rolling along here but, 

Mr. Speaker, I think . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You see, 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the public at home do not see the 

members opposite continuing to ask their questions of me. They 

have not understood yet, Mr. Speaker, that they can ask these 

questions in committee when we get there. 

 

Actually, Mr. Speaker, it does remind me of the order paper that 

we will see next week, Mr. Speaker. Supplementary estimates 

were introduced in the Chamber today. Supplementary 

estimates, which means the government’s interim spending 

between now and the end of the government’s fiscal year will 

be discussed in committee next week, Mr. Speaker. There are 

numerous opportunities for members of government, members 

of the opposition to review some of the spending options, some 

of the spending choices of government, and we will be doing 

that in committee next week. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I urge members of the public to watch 

the proceedings of the committee work next week and to ensure 

that members of government and members of the opposition 

know their views as we proceed through those committee 

hearings to the end of this session. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that having been said, I think that there are a 

number of people who are choosing to pick up their phones and 

to give us some information about their feelings on this. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the House has the full benefit of 

some time available to gather those opinions and to present 

them in this House, Mr. Speaker, I would choose therefore at 

this time to move that debate on Bill No. 9, the superannuation 

amendment Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of Bill No. 9, The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and enter into debate 

on Bill No. 46, An Act to amend The Labour Market 

Commission Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation amends the Act 

and changes the composition of the board, Mr. Speaker, and 

changes it in some ways that may or may not be productive, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Clearly one of the major concerns we have about the changes 

made to this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is in 

speaking to stakeholders who are involved in this board, Mr. 

Speaker — the Labour Market Commission — they weren’t 

consulted, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t agree to these changes, and 

they weren’t consulted, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, there are 

concerns being raised about the changes, Mr. Speaker, but most 

significantly, if you’re going to change something that is 

working, Mr. Speaker, you should talk to those individuals 

involved with it, Mr. Speaker, prior to making the changes. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will reduce the size of the commission to 

11 members, and they are appointed now by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, Mr. Speaker. For those who don’t 

understand what that would mean, Mr. Speaker, that means 

they’re appointed by the cabinet, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in the past, the various stakeholder groups put forward 

names for individuals to be put forward on the commission. 

Today, Mr. Speaker, the cabinet will appoint all the members to 

the commission, and it does not necessarily have to have the 

support of any of the stakeholder groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are considerations that need to be 

taken into place when appointing the labour market board, Mr. 

Speaker. And one of those is, there needs to be a balance in 

gender; age, including youth; ethnic diversity, Mr. Speaker; 

geographic representation from the various areas of the 

province, Mr. Speaker; representation from the economic 

sectors of the economy, Mr. Speaker. And in the case of 

individuals appointed for the purpose of clauses 2(a) and (b), 

the number of employees in places of employment, Mr. 

Speaker, are taken into consideration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These changes, Mr. Speaker, have been put forward, as well as 

a change in the ministry in which that is accountable, Mr. 

Speaker. Today this new piece of legislation falls under the 

Minister Responsible for Innovation, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the new formula, new format of this commission 

brings concerns forward as to whether or not the representation 

is adequate in order to fully represent the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan and to recommend the types of changes that 

need to be made in the province, Mr. Speaker, in order to seek 

opportunities for all members of the province of Saskatchewan 

to be employed and seek meaningful employment in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we looked at this piece of legislation, the 

previous board was larger, but its composition was put forward 

after significant consultations, Mr. Speaker. Today they’ve 



November 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

decided to change that composition without even seeking the 

advice of the Co-Chairs of the board, Mr. Speaker — the 

current Labour Market Commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the new board — as I’ve pointed out before 

— reports to the Minister Responsible for Innovation or 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Before, previously it 

reported to the minister responsible for post-secondary 

education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And today the board with its much reduced size, Mr. Speaker 

— it formerly had 19 members, Mr. Speaker; it had larger and 

broader representation, Mr. Speaker, throughout the province 

— can this board fulfill the same level of duty that the previous 

board did? That’s the major consideration that we would have 

on this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it can’t, why did we reduce the size, Mr. 

Speaker? It can always be argued that a smaller board is more 

manageable and more easy to work with, Mr. Speaker, but you 

could have a board of one person and it’s much easier to work 

with, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, can it do the job and does 

it have the diversity and does it reflect the skills and abilities 

needed on that commission in order to actually fulfill its duties, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

The reduction of eight individuals on the board is just about a 

40 per cent reduction or more, Mr. Speaker. Does that reduction 

in any way hamper the ability of the commission to fulfill its 

duties? Mr. Speaker, these changes, as I’ve indicated earlier, 

were brought forward without consultation, even though the 

union Co-Chair, labour Co-Chair on the commission, Mr. 

Speaker . . . And we see this in conjunction with many other 

changes being made throughout the province without a clear 

understanding what those changes . . . what impact those 

changes will have on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s always a concern as we 

see changes being made without understanding what the impact 

potentially is on people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because we in opposition have a responsibility to ensure that 

legislative changes, in fact, are to the benefit of the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. And in doing so we need to look 

at it from a variety of perspectives, Mr. Speaker. And the 

reduction from 19 to 11 does change, in fact, the ability of the 

board to have as wide a diversity as it previously had, to have as 

much representation. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, this puts the 

board out of balance in comparison to what it was in the past. 

And it may not be able to function at the same level of 

accountability, Mr. Speaker, and efficiency as it did as a larger 

board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that a larger board does, 

more people involved, it increases both accountability and 

transparency and more people are aware of what’s going on, 

more individuals have the opportunity to report back to their 

stakeholder group, Mr. Speaker. And it creates for the people of 

Saskatchewan some assurance that the Labour Market 

Commission is in fact fulfilling its duties as the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan would like it to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we look at this particular change, we see a 

reduction in the number of individuals. Many of the other 

changes though in fact would be seen as housekeeping, Mr. 

Speaker. But this board has been in operation for a relatively 

short period of time in comparison to many government 

agencies or boards or commissions, Mr. Speaker, and so hasn’t 

had the opportunity to fully understand whether or not a larger 

number than 19 previously or 11 are adequate to do the job, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they weren’t even consulted — the current 

board or commission — in the changes that were made. They 

were made unilaterally by the government for ideological 

reasons, believing it should in fact be smaller, that it’s easier to 

control, easier to work with a smaller number of people, Mr. 

Speaker. And is that in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Those are things that all need to 

be examined in this Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this particular Bill, it changes 

first the ministry which it reports to and is accountable to, but 

also significantly changes the individuals on the board, in the 

sense that the representatives are significantly fewer. And with 

40 per cent fewer representatives, Mr. Speaker, can this board 

in fact fulfill its duties? Can it in fact, Mr. Speaker, outdo the 

duties that it’s expected to do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, seeing as we’re approaching the hour of 5 

o’clock, I would move we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., the hour of adjournment, 

the House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1623 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1623 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1624 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1624 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1624 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 2008 Lieutenant Governor’s Arts Awards 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1624 

 2008 First Nations Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1625 

 Salvation Army Red Shield Luncheon 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1625 

 Regina Early Learning Centre Capital Campaign 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1625 

 India-Canada Night 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1625 

 Aviation and Aerospace Week 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1626 

 Remembrance Day Ceremonies Honour Veterans 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1626 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Notification Policy 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1626 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1627 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1627 

 Investment Strategy for the Crown Corporations 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1627 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1628 

 Funding for New School Construction 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1629 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1629 

 Patient-First Review 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1630 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1631 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1632 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1632 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 42 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1632 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1634 

 Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1634 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1635 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1638 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1640 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1640 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1646 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1652 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


