




















































Hansard: November 25, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 18A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1827 

 November 25, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 

the Assembly, it is my pleasure to introduce representatives in 

your gallery from the Saskatchewan Coalition for Tobacco 

Reduction, the Canadian Cancer Society, Heart and Stroke 

Foundation, and Dutch Industries. 

 

These individuals are joining us for today‟s announcements of a 

province-wide smoking ban. Please join me in welcoming them 

to their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 

opposition, I too want to welcome these people to our gallery 

and look forward to meeting with them. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to this Assembly, it is my honour to introduce three 

guests seated in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

acknowledge Alex Fletcher, my nephew; Virginie 

Lavallée-Picard — how was that? Alex and Virginie are en 

route from Victoria to Montreal where they will be furthering 

their education. Alex and Virginie are graduates of Lester B. 

Pearson College of the Pacific in Victoria and the College of the 

Atlantic in Ann Arbor, Maine. 

 

They recently returned from a whirlwind tour recruiting for 

their alma mater in Maine that took them to, among other 

places, India, Singapore, Hong Kong, Norway, Italy, Bosnia, 

Germany, Wales, and yes, to Maidstone, Saskatchewan. This 

past Friday they visited the Alberta legislature, and this 

morning we had the opportunity to attend our Agribition. 

Accompanying Alex and Virginie is their doting aunt, and 

incidentally my wife, Heather. I would ask that we all join 

together in welcoming these guests to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 

all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce two 

very special friends of mine from Yorkton, formerly of 

Rosetown — Clairon and Joanne Seib. You want to give us just 

a little wave there, Clairon and Joanne? They‟re constituents; 

they‟re very good friends. Joanne‟s a nurse, a health care 

worker as well as a corrections worker. And Clairon is a very 

accomplished aircraft maintenance engineer, commercial 

helicopter and fixed-wing pilot, and is very active in aerial 

applicating and fire suppression with single-engine air tankers. 

 

So I‟d like to ask everybody to welcome them to this Assembly. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, there are a 

number of special guests in your gallery that I have the great 

pleasure of introducing to you and then through you to all of my 

colleagues in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

We‟ll start in the Melfort area of the province, Mr. Speaker, 

more specifically from the community of Pathlow which 

unfortunately fewer and fewer people are aware of because the 

landmarks are disappearing — except for the Hindley family, a 

very noted landmark from that particular area, the family of 

Everett Hindley who‟s my assistant and is stuck with me as we 

travel the province of Saskatchewan and have for a number of 

years. Everett‟s family includes his father, Tom; his mom, Pat; 

sisters, Melissa and Erica; and his niece, baby Elizabeth. And I 

would just want to welcome them here to their Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — While I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I 

may, some very close friends are here from Swift Current, 

Saskatchewan. My three-time campaign manager in our local 

constituency, Bryon Campbell, has joined us today. Bryon was 

here on a medical appointment and everything went very well. 

I‟m told the doctor said they don‟t want to see him again, and it 

isn‟t for any other reason than I don‟t think they need to see him 

for some time. So that‟s very good news. And joining him today 

is his good friend and my good friend from Swift Current as 

well, a long-time business person from Swift Current, Gerry 

Salter. Welcome them as well to their Legislative Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce, 

seated in your gallery, members of Alzheimer Society of 

Saskatchewan. And I would ask that when I name them that 

they stand and remain standing, please — Vivienne Hauck, 

president; Edie Laidlaw, board member; Sandra Weekley, board 

member; Don and Connie St. Onge, members; Joanne Michael, 

program services manager; Joanne Bracken, executive director. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, these people work very hard to create 



1828 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

awareness in the province, to support the sufferers of 

Alzheimer‟s and their caregivers, and to promote research in 

Alzheimer‟s. They deserve our admiration and appreciation. I 

would ask everyone in the Assembly to please welcome them to 

their Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome the members from the Alzheimer Society. I know 

myself and many other member of the Assembly have had 

personal experiences in their families with Alzheimer‟s and 

understand the work that you do and the value that that work 

serves the people of Saskatchewan. And I too would like to 

welcome you to the Assembly today and look forward to a 

reception at 5. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of new child care spaces. 

And I‟ll read the petition as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions on 

behalf of residents of Saskatchewan concerned about the 

minimum wage and the effect of the cost of living. And the 

petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Petitions are signed by people of Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan seniors. I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary 

education. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Regina Students‟ 

Union, the University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union, and 

the First Nations University of Canada Student Association. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens in business 

who would like to see a reduction in the education portion of 

property taxes. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are signed by concerned citizens of Regina and Pilot 

Butte. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1829 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Violence 

Against Women 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today 

is the UN [United Nations] designated day for the elimination 

of violence against women. 

 

They report on their website at least one out of three women 

around the world has been beaten, coerced into sex, or 

otherwise abused in their lifetime. Concerning spousal abuse, 

on average, a woman is beaten 13 times before reporting the 

abuse. Mr. Speaker, violence exists everywhere. The victims 

however are mostly women and children. 

 

I have seen violence, Mr. Speaker. I have seen women cut, 

bleeding, sitting and crying on their kitchen floor. I have also 

seen the four-year-old girl wearing only her underwear, 

cowering and shivering in the corner of a stone basement. 

 

The short-term effects — the bleeding, the bruising, the broken 

bones — Mr. Speaker, the injuries do not end there. 

Life-changing psychological effects take their toll on these 

victims. Physical disabilities, substance abuse, mental health 

issues, relationship difficulties, and trust issues are a few of 

these long-term effects. 

 

This is a societal issue and it exists in our Saskatchewan. We 

need an interagency response and a commitment from all 

citizens to become understanding, compassionate, and stop 

labelling. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, 

November 25, is recognized as the International Day for the 

Elimination of Violence Against Women. The day was 

designated in 1999 at the United Nations General Assembly. At 

that time the United Nations invited governments, international 

organization, and NGOs [non-governmental organization] to 

raise public awareness of the problem as an international 

observance. 

 

Violence against women and girls is a problem of pandemic 

proportions. According to the World Health Organization, at 

least one out of every three women across the world has been 

beaten, coerced into sex, or otherwise been abused in her 

lifetime, and usually by someone known to her. The United 

Nations Development Fund for Women says, and I quote: 

 

This is perhaps the most pervasive human rights violation 

that we know today. It devalues life, fractures 

communities, and stalls development. 

 

Violence against women continues throughout the world and is 

a major impediment to achieving gender equality. Sadly this 

happens in our communities and our neighbourhoods. 

 

Thankfully such organizations such as a transition house exist 

to provide women and their children a safe haven from abusive 

domestic situations. Unfortunately for various reasons many 

women are not able to seek the refuge of safe houses, and 

therefore suffer through the realities of life they know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

importance of the International Day for the Elimination of 

Violence Against Women, and to today commit to continue the 

fight for the achievement of gender equality and an end to the 

violence. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Alzheimer Awareness Reception 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tonight 

I have the honour of co-hosting an Alzheimer‟s awareness 

reception here in the building. The Minister of Health and I 

have worked closely with the Alzheimer Society to make this 

event a reality. 

 

Staff and volunteers of the society work hard year-round 

promoting awareness about timely diagnosis, proper treatment, 

and support for those affected by this disease. Last year the 

society celebrated 25 years of service to this province. 

 

Over 18,000 people in Saskatchewan suffer from Alzheimer‟s 

or related dementia. By 2031, Canada‟s biggest demographic 

group, the baby boomers, will move into the high-risk age 

group for this disease. 

 

I know first-hand the burden this disease places on family and 

friends. I know because my mother had Alzheimer‟s. 

 

The program and services offered by the society offer help and 

hope to caregivers and sufferers alike. These initiatives include 

presentations on understanding Alzheimer‟s disease all across 

Saskatchewan, support for caregivers in 40 communities across 

the province, the development of an enhanced care program to 

develop guidelines for care. 

 

I am happy to see by the RSVP list that many members from 

both sides of this Assembly will be in attendance tonight. I 

invite all members to join me in recognizing the critical work of 

the Alzheimer Society and the importance of raising awareness 

about the impact of this disease. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

An Honourable Calling 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to highlight 

for the Assembly a special event taking place tonight in the fair 



1830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

constituency of Elphinstone-Centre. I am speaking of the launch 

for the book tour of An Honourable Calling, the political 

memoirs of Allan Emrys Blakeney. 

 

Mr. Blakeney served as a CCF-NDP [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation—New Democratic Party] MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from 1960 to 1988, most 

of that time for the constituency of Elphinstone, I am very 

proud to say, Mr. Speaker. He served with distinction in the 

cabinets of Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and was the 

premier of Saskatchewan from 1971 to 1982. 

 

Blakeney played a pivotal role in the shaping of modern 

Canada. He was there in the thick of things at the birth of and 

the battle for medicare. He was there at the patriation of the 

Canadian Constitution and he was there when Saskatchewan 

fought to get a fair share from the wealth of natural resource 

development. And Allan Blakeney was there helping 

Saskatchewan to punch above its weight in its dealings with the 

likes of Pierre Trudeau, Jean Chrétien, René Lévesque, Bill 

Davis, and Peter Lougheed. And Allan Blakeney will be there 

tonight, Mr. Speaker, still vigorous in thought, ready to make 

yet another great contribution to public life in Saskatchewan 

and Canada. 

 

The title, An Honourable Calling, is well chosen not just 

because Allan Blakeney subscribed to the belief that political 

life was indeed an honourable calling. Rather it‟s because Allan 

Blakeney in his life and work brought abundant honour to the 

calling of politics. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, I offer 

congratulations to Allan Blakeney on the launch of his political 

memoirs and I know that many of us in this Assembly, 

particularly Mr. Blakeney‟s home MLA, the member for 

Meewasin, look forward to seeing Allan and Anne Blakeney 

tonight at the launch. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Festival of Trees Supports Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Congratulations to the Moose Jaw Health Foundation for what 

could be described as the Moose Jaw social event of the year. 

On Saturday evening, the citizens of Moose Jaw demonstrated 

their support and their huge generosity at the annual Festival of 

Trees in support of the Union Hospital. During this gala event 

of dining and dancing, a live auction, and cash donations, the 

400 people in attendance raised over $225,000. 

 

The Festival of Trees is a huge undertaking by the Health 

Foundation and a huge success toward health care, 

demonstrating the community‟s commitment to the Union 

Hospital. The $225,000 will be directed toward the renovations 

and revitalization of the intensive care unit. Each and every 

dollar will go toward the construction of critical care rooms that 

will help patients on their road to recovery. The funds raised by 

the Festival of Trees will go a long way in supporting the 

upgrades of the intensive care unit. 

Words are hard to find that would adequately describe the pride 

of the community for the efforts toward this cause. Thank you 

and congratulations to the Moose Jaw Health Foundation for the 

success of the event, and grateful appreciation to the businesses 

and the citizens who supported the cause so generously. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

High School Students Raise Addictions Awareness 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday, November 19, 

Prince Albertans participated in an addictions awareness walk 

to raise awareness of addictions in Prince Albert. Most of those 

who walked did so on behalf of someone close to them who has 

struggled with drug and alcohol addiction. 

 

Students from Wesmor Community High School, located in 

Prince Albert Northcote, also took part in the walk. Mr. 

Speaker, these students understand the importance of 

recognizing the impact of drugs on our communities. They have 

formed a club which is an offshoot of SADD [Students Against 

Drinking and Driving].The club is also called SADD, but stands 

for Students Against Destructive Decisions. One of these 

members walked in memory of her cousin who had been 

drinking one night and was pushed off a bridge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many shocking stories of addictions, and 

these young students deserve an enormous amount of credit for 

doing all they can to prevent others from becoming addicted. 

The addictions awareness walk ended at the gym at the Margo 

Fournier Centre where several information displays were set up 

by community agencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in extending 

our gratitude to the organizers of the addictions awareness walk 

in Prince Albert, to the community agencies that set up the 

educational booths, and to the students from Students Against 

Destructive Decisions for their part in raising addictions 

awareness and preventions in our community. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Saskatchewan Shines 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan continues to shine despite the economic 

downturn across Canada and around the world. 

 

Two new reports show that between September ‟07 and 

September ‟08 Saskatchewan recorded the largest decrease in 

Canada in the number of people collecting EI [employment 

insurance] benefits and that we recorded the second highest 

increase in retail sales. Between September ‟07 and September 

‟08, the number of people in Saskatchewan collecting EI went 

down by 8.5 per cent while the national average went up 3.9 per 

cent. Over the same period of time, we recorded the second 

highest retail sales increase in Canada. 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1831 

Under this government, Mr. Speaker, there is confidence in the 

Saskatchewan economy, but we have only begun. In the new 

year, our record investment in infrastructure will climb to 1.5 

billion, allowing us to continue to address the 16-year-old 

infrastructure deficit we inherited. 

 

Earlier this fall our government announced historic tax cuts and 

debt reduction. We have introduced measures such as the first 

increase in 16 years to the seniors‟ income plan and the new 

low-income tax credit to ensure we meet the needs of society‟s 

most vulnerable. We have set aside 2 billion as a fiscal 

insurance policy in these uncertain economic times. We will 

continue to take action to make Saskatchewan stronger, to 

create a better life for everyone in this great province. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the former NDP [New Democratic 

Party] government made a commitment to stabilizing 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2010, reducing absolute emissions 

by 32 per cent from 2004 levels by 2020. This would have been 

the largest per capita reduction in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised that they would meet our 

targets. It‟s right there on page 38 of their election platform. But 

the Premier has more or less admitted that the Sask Party will 

be unable to meet those targets. Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 

Environment: why is the Sask Party breaking its promise to 

meet the NDP‟s greenhouse gas reduction targets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s great to see the 

member opposite on her feet. The NDP have had a chance over 

the last year to ask 832 questions. They‟ve asked seven on 

climate change. And for something that was supposed to be 

such a massive priority for the NDP, they certainly aren‟t 

devoting a whole lot of time to it. 

 

But on the member‟s question I would say that, Mr. Speaker, I 

find it interesting that the NDP are asking this question when 

they‟re very . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I think members would like to hear the 

answer. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. Order. 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it 

interesting the member is asking that question when she said 

just this last April 22, and I quote, “I would say the federal 

targets are something that they [us] should clearly be adopting.” 

And as we all know, the federal targets are not the same as the 

provincial targets. They changed their position almost a year 

ago, so I think it‟s a little hypocritical for them to be asking this 

question today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — A real answer would be most welcome, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party axed the Green Future Fund the 

former NDP government established to help meet those targets. 

No matter what they say, that‟s why they won‟t meet them. And 

now they‟re scrambling to come up with an alternative. And 

what is their alternative? A levy that according to October 24, 

Prince Albert Herald, quote “. . . would be like a tax on 

emissions.” In other words, a carbon tax — an idea they 

mocked just weeks ago during a federal election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did she cut the $320 million 

the former NDP government set aside to meet our emission 

targets if their only alternative is an idea the Sask Party said 

would be harmful to Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, in actuality what the NDP 

had set aside was $7.5 million. In the last budget, we actually 

increased that by 10, to a total of $17.5 million. The 320 was 

nothing more than a press release; it was not allocated. 

 

But as to believing the effectiveness of NDP positions on 

climate change, if the member opposite hasn‟t noticed, we‟ve 

actually put a freeze on the green initiatives funding that was set 

up by the NDP. 

 

We were a little concerned that perhaps it wasn‟t set up 

correctly and that there may be some issues with it, so we had 

an independent review done. And it came back, Mr. Speaker, 

that the NDP‟s approach to this — to the green initiatives fund 

— lacked quantitative effectiveness, lacked measurability. It 

had weak objectives. It ignored the largest emitters which are 

oil and gas and SaskPower. It had a lack of clear priorities. It 

had a lack of focus on environmental objectives. The NDP plan 

was unlikely to achieve the government‟s objectives. And the 

NDP failed to look at nuclear power as an alternative for our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP have absolutely no credibility on this file. We will not 

take any lessons from them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we‟re still waiting for the 

answer to the first question. 



1832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, on October 23, the minister claimed, quote 

“We‟ve said all along there would be off-set fees if 

organizations weren‟t able to reach their targets.” But of course 

that‟s not the whole story. 

 

Apparently the Premier did share his plan with a business 

audience in Banff on September 26 in the middle of the federal 

election campaign according to Reuters. Meanwhile here in 

Saskatchewan, the Sask Party went out of its way to criticize 

carbon taxes in its effort to defend the minister‟s former boss, 

Stephen Harper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did the Premier spend the 

entire federal election campaign trying to convince 

Saskatchewan voters that carbon taxes were bad while telling 

people in Alberta something entirely different? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve 

already established that the NDP are fully in support of the 

federal climate change targets, and I would request some 

clarification on two other aspects of the federal plan. We know 

that the federal draft regulations for climate change outline a 

cap and trade program. The Throne Speech recently has also 

outlined a plan for a North American cap and trade system, 

something that our party is not in favour of. We want to keep 

that money in Saskatchewan. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I would point out during the last federal 

election the NDP platform for Saskatchewan has a lovely 

picture of Jack Layton and the member of the now opposition 

on the front cover, so I would imagine he endorses, his party 

endorses what‟s contained in here. And what‟s contained in 

there says, and I quote, “We will put a price on carbon through 

a „cap-and-trade‟ carbon pricing system . . .” 

 

So perhaps the member opposite could explain why she‟s in 

favour of shipping wealth out of our province instead of a 

made-in-Saskatchewan plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it took the Premier 24 hours to 

decide he didn‟t like the Prime Minister‟s new cap and trade 

plan despite criticizing the idea during the recent federal 

election. And why did he criticize it in the first place? To help 

Stephen Harper. He talked out of both sides of his mouth on 

carbon tax — again, to help Stephen Harper. It‟s clear that, as 

with so many things, the Sask Party makes decisions about 

environmental policy based on what helps their Tory cousins in 

Ottawa. An actual plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

seems to be more of an afterthought. 

 

To the minister: will we see her plan to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions any time soon, or does the Premier need to check 

with Ottawa first? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that‟s 

a very interesting premise to a question: that we‟re supporting 

the federal Conservative Party by coming out against their cap 

and trade proposal. 

 

And the last time I checked, the NDP in this province are the 

only ones in favour of a cap and trade proposal, which is on 

exactly the same page as the federal Conservatives. So if she‟s 

worried about what our plan is, I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker: 

it‟s not the NDP plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Support for Child Care 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the lack of affordable 

available child care is affecting the ability of Saskatchewan 

people and Saskatchewan families from entering the workforce 

or continuing their educational training. Last spring the Premier 

referred to an additional $31 million that he received from his 

federal cousins in Ottawa for child care as new and unique 

money for Saskatchewan. He again referred to the money just in 

comments at the end of last week. 

 

To the Premier: Saskatchewan families are waiting. When will 

he actually quit talking about the money and put in place some 

new child care spaces? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s clear across the province that we as a new government were 

able to inject $1.7 million of new funding to create 500 new 

child care spaces. Mr. Speaker, that will move us from a 

number of 9,900 child care spaces to 10,400. And as I‟ve 

indicated to the members opposite in this Legislative Assembly, 

that is a terrible statistic for the province of Saskatchewan. 

When we compare it to British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, 

based on population sizes, that‟s a horrible number. That‟s a 

legacy, Mr. Speaker, that‟s a legacy of the NDP. For 16 years 

we managed to move to a grand total of 9,900 seats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the first year we have added 500 seats. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize that for the province to be able to 

attract people, for the province to be able to have especially 

women continue with their education, we must add more 

spaces. And we‟re going to be concerned about that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1833 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when this NDP 

government had the money in the bank, we made substantial 

improvements to child care. Mr. Speaker, the record speaks for 

itself of over 1,000 child care seats created, spaces created in 

our last term of government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question for the minister is: on October 2008, 

the Speech from the Throne of the Sask Party government 

announced an additional investment of 1.7 million for child care 

— he just referred to it. To the Minister of Education: is this 

truly additional money, or is he just reannouncing last spring‟s 

budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the government was 

instituting a lot of programs, and there are two amounts of 1.7 

million. They happen to be the same numbers. As I indicated, 

1.7 million was necessary to fund 500 new additional spaces. In 

April 2008 this government also committed to a 4 per cent wage 

lift for early childhood care workers. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that cost 1.7 million as well. So those are the numbers. And I‟ve 

explained that to the member opposite in estimates, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the public of the province of 

Saskatchewan exactly how some people are looking at this. The 

person is Rebecca Anderson from Hazlet. She‟s the program 

director for the early learning child centre. And she says this, 

and I quote: 

 

I think it is something we are going to see more and more 

of. Part of the reason we got our spaces is that the 

government has prioritized four areas, and one of these 

areas is rural communities, so that helps. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, wait-lists are growing 

across the province. We can look at a wait-list at one centre in 

Saskatoon of over 400. Estevan child care, there are 66 spaces 

and 135 on the wait-list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me get this straight. The Saskatchewan Party 

government called the 1.7 million an additional investment in 

the Throne Speech, but it was really a re-announcement from 

this spring‟s budget which the minister agreed to in committee 

the other night. Wait-lists are growing, families are waiting. 

Why is this minister trying to mislead the public into believing 

he‟s investing new money in child care when he‟s simply 

re-announcing money from the spring budget? How many times 

is he going to re-announce the same amount of money and do 

nothing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before . . . Order. Before . . . Order. Before I 

recognize the minister, I want to remind members to be careful 

in how they direct their questions to other members. I recognize 

the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we were very pleased to see the federal government announce 

the continuation of the $7.5 million for this year‟s funding, in 

fact with an escalator clause. And I was happy to report to the 

member opposite that in fact the ‟08-09 fiscal year, we have 

received $7.725 million from the federal government to assist in 

actually developing new child care seats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite, the NDP, talk about their growth and 

that their rate of adding 1,000 child care spaces over four years 

was a tremendous growth. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve added 500 in one 

year, and we‟re going to continue to have to add more, Mr. 

Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, this is a growing province; we 

are attracting a lot of new families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I had the opportunity to be in Ukraine, I 

listened to people who are thinking about coming to 

Saskatchewan, and they‟re wanting to make sure that there is, 

that there is quality daycare. And to achieve that, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re going to have to add more seats. We‟re going to have a 

growing province, and we‟re going to have a growing 

population, and we‟re going to have a growing number of 

young children requiring child care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Support for Northern Communities 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, northern workers, northern 

businesses should benefit from the wealth created in the North. 

But the first year of this government has been hard on northern 

people. At a time when northern resources are in demand, this 

government has cut funding to northern skills training by 

one-third. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs: 

why did this government cut funding for northern skills training 

in the middle of a labour shortage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take notice of the 

question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party likes to talk 

about other increase in training spaces, but their answers show 

that they just don‟t understand the North. The fact is they cut 

funding that would have ensured northern workers benefit from 

the wealth created. 

 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, to the previous . . . The previous government set 

aside funding for a number of highway projects important to 

northern Saskatchewan. The projects included funding for 

Highway 123 to Cumberland House and the road paving project 

in Pelican Narrows. But the Sask Party has been dragging their 

feet on following through on these projects — may be their plan 

to re-announce them like they‟ve done with child care. 

 

To the Minister of Highways: why is he playing politics with 

highway projects that are important to the safety and the 

economic well-being of northern communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to be able 

to stand in my place today to answer the very first question 

asked of my ministry since we formed government over a year 

ago. I think this would indicate, Mr. Speaker, I think this would 

indicate, Mr. Speaker, the very serious intent and concern with 

which that former group of men and women who served as 

government now have on the issue of topics . . . on the topic of 

highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, highways are a very important part of our 

lifeblood. They will form a very important part of our economic 

success. What we were left with, Mr. Speaker, was a legacy . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I just want to remind members that 

every time the Speaker stands up, it‟s less time for questions. So 

I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we had 

from the previous men and women who served as the 

government of this province was a lot of talk about northern 

highways and not a lot of action. They had what they called a 

northern economic infrastructure program that they said they 

would fund to the tune of $67 million. Mr. Speaker, there 

wasn‟t a nickel of that money put aside for highways in 

northern Saskatchewan. They were making that expenditure 

contingent on getting federal participation. The request for 

participation from the federal government never happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are looking very seriously at the infrastructure 

requirements of the North. I just took a tour a couple of weeks 

ago of all of the northern part of the province. We see what the 

need is, and we‟re going to be addressing it very effectively in 

the near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the point is this project was 

already announced, and the money was set aside. The minister 

didn‟t need to rummage for money in his sock drawer. The 

money was there. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member has a right 

to place his question and be heard. I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Another important issue in the North is 

affordable housing. The Minister of Social Services has been 

asked all session when she intends to dedicate new money to 

affordable housing. Last week she told my colleague that some 

of the government‟s infrastructure money would be used for 

housing, but she has yet to make that announcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social Services: when will she 

announce new money for affordable housing? And how many 

new housing units will be built in the North? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for that 

question. I have said a number of times that we have over $16 

million in different stages of progress in housing — projects 

that are just about complete, projects that are in construction, 

and projects that are in the planning stage. In particular the 

projects that are in the planning stage, waiting for decisions by 

First Nation and Métis leaders, is the First Nation and Métis 

trust, Mr. Speaker. And that money is . . . We‟re listening to the 

advisement of First Nations and the Métis Nation leaders as to 

where they figure is the best place to place that money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, during the recent by-election 

campaign in my constituency, a lot of people talked to me about 

the need for better access to additions treatment in the North. 

 

It has become pretty clear throughout my questions here today 

that this government does not understand the needs for the 

services in the North. But maybe I‟ll have better luck with the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health: what is this 

government‟s plan for increased access to addictions treatment 

in northern communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much for that 

question, Mr. Speaker. Certainly when we look across the 

province, it‟s not only in the northern part of the province as we 

look across the whole province, there are definitely some gaps 

when it comes to addiction services and supplies that are 

offered. 

 

We are looking at that, and certainly through the Legislative 

Secretary that was appointed to me to be working on that file, 

she‟s been doing a lot of work on that file and has found very 

interesting findings — a number of things that should have been 

done over the last number of years that haven‟t been done that 

have put us in this position. We look forward to that report in 

the very near future that will certainly guide us on the decisions 

that need to be made that will help some of the most vulnerable 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

people in our society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 

 

Crop Insurance 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is on record as saying that 

the biggest concern he‟s heard in regards to crop insurance is 

that premiums are too high for the quality of insurance 

producers receive. The Sask Party now has the 16 

recommendations from the crop insurance review, and can the 

minister guarantee Saskatchewan producers that their premiums 

will be lower in the 2008-09 crop year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, I cannot make that guarantee because, number one, 

what we‟re doing is trying to repair and improve the programs 

from all the damage done under the NDP. 

 

One of the main suggestions that came out of the Meyers Norris 

Penny review was to reinstate spot loss hail. The key word there 

is reinstate. Because remembering, Mr. Speaker, it was that 

NDP opposition that cut spot loss hail from the crop insurance 

program. It was that previous government that raised premiums 

and cut coverage for a number of years. In fact if I remember 

right, Mr. Speaker, one year premiums went up on the average 

of 52 per cent. If the member is talking about us doing 

something like that, no we aren‟t; but can I commit to not 

raising them at all, no I can‟t. We raised them a bit this year but 

we also improved the coverage dramatically. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, six crop insurance employees 

with over 100 years of combined experience were fired by the 

Sask Party government in July, more than two months before 

the crop insurance report was presented to the minister. The 

minister said at the time, and I quote, “„I think we felt having 

some new people in place . . . would make it easier to put in 

place the changes we want to bring in.‟” 

 

Now the question is: how did the minister know in July, two 

months prior to receiving the report recommending changes to 

crop insurance, that it would be easier to implement the 

recommendations without these six employees? And can the 

minister tell the public what is the total cost of the severance 

packages that have been paid out to the six employees that had 

over 100 years of experience working in the public service? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to the member 

opposite, they‟ll know that producers all across this province 

were very upset when they cut things like spot loss hail. They 

were very upset after 2002 when they raised the premiums 

dramatically for a number of years in a row. Producers across 

this province were very upset with that NDP government when 

they cut coverage for crop insurance. And they showed that 

dissatisfaction by the numbers that were taking crop insurance 

and the number of producers that actually dropped crop 

insurance, when really they needed to have that risk coverage 

but didn‟t think they could afford it for the coverage they got. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again, what we‟re doing is cleaning up a 

mess left by that government for 16 years of neglect in rural 

Saskatchewan and to ag producers right across this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Relocation Costs  

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, once again the taxpayers 

of our province are left on the hook for the Sask Party‟s 

cold-hearted, self-serving actions. But there‟s more to this story, 

Mr. Speaker. Not only did the minister axe six employees with 

over 100 years of experience; he brought in a new general 

manager from Alberta. Well last week we learned that it cost 

the public $35,000 to move someone down the road to Regina 

from Brandon, Manitoba. 

 

Can the minister illuminate the House and tell us what does it 

cost the people of this province to bring in a new general 

manager from Alberta to Melville when we had six employees 

with a combined experience of over 100 years serving the 

public in our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the relocation policy that 

was established by the NDP under the Public Service 

Commission talks about the reasonable expenses that will be 

paid. 

 

They are: search for accommodation for employee and spouse, 

five nights; travel to new work location; temporary 

accommodation and meals for 30 days; moving expenses via a 

commercial mover; real estate and legal fees on sale and 

purchase of home; rent or lease of discharge fees equivalent to 

one month‟s rent; and incidental expenses of $500. Mr. 

Speaker, this is the policy of the Public Service Commission 

that was put in place by the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want the people of Saskatchewan to 

understand, under the NDP from 1992 to 2006 — every year, 

Mr. Speaker — there are a number of people who are dismissed 

without cause; dismissed for the reasons of replacing them, 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

according to Dwain Lingenfelter and Roy Romanow, that you 

needed to ensure that government could carry out their goal. 

Mr. Speaker, over those years, 645 employees were released by 

the NDP without cause. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟ll ask members to come to order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Workplace Smoking Ban 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

our government believes in protecting and promoting the health 

and safety of Saskatchewan workers and the people of our 

province. To this end we are implementing a province-wide 

workplace smoking ban on May 31, 2009. The ban ensures that 

residents will not be exposed to second-hand smoke as a result 

of their employment and thereby contribute to our overall goal 

of a stronger Saskatchewan and a better life. 

 

Increasingly information is not only available, but well-known, 

on the dangers of second-hand smoke. Second-hand smoke has 

been linked to a number of illnesses that include respiratory 

diseases such as asthma, cancer, and heart disease, to name but 

a few. More than 37,000 people will die this year in Canada due 

to smoking — 1,000 in Saskatchewan alone. As well, thousands 

of Canadians die each year from second-hand smoke. This is 

not acceptable — not when we know the many harmful effects 

of smoking. 

 

In April of this year, our government conducted consultations 

regarding a proposed workplace smoking ban. Mr. Speaker, 

from these consultations, general support for a ban was at 89 

per cent. Although some restrictions to workplace smoking 

have been in effect since 1996, smoking remains permitted 

within certain designated smoking areas. As a result, 

Saskatchewan fell behind most Canadian jurisdictions in this 

area. 

 

The workplace smoking ban prohibits smoking in all enclosed 

places of employment including buildings, vehicles, and other 

enclosed structures and underground mines, with the following 

exceptions: exception no. (1) traditional First Nation and Métis 

spiritual and cultural ceremonies; (2) designated smoking rooms 

in long-term care homes for residents and visitors that are 

allowed by the Ministry of Health‟s tobacco control legislation; 

(3) areas of underground mines that are located more than 10 

metres from other workers; and finally, some self-employed 

businesses, vehicles, and camp living accommodations with 

permission and when others are not present. 

 

As I‟ve said, Mr. Speaker, workplace smoking bans now exist 

in most jurisdictions in Canada and in many other countries. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s ban reflects best practices from 

other jurisdictions within Canada and around the world that 

have prohibited smoking in the workplace. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for 

providing me a copy of his notes. Mr. Speaker, we commend 

the work being done by the department in this area, and we 

should all work towards making our workplaces as safe as 

possible. 

 

We have recognized the link between second-hand smoke and 

respiratory diseases such as asthma, cancer, and heart disease. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are in favour of the changes mentioned 

by the minister. 

 

There are a few exceptions and for those, Mr. Speaker, we will 

be monitoring those and looking at also some of the limitations 

in the regulations that are there. And, Mr. Speaker, we will also 

be keeping a mindful eye on the advances in research in this 

area into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is important work. It‟s important work 

because it is for the safety of the workers of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — To present a report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services 

to report that it has considered certain estimates and to present 

its fifth report. I move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. The member 

from The Battlefords has moved: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 

2008. Under the existing seizure of criminal property Act, 

property that is either the proceeds of unlawful activity or that is 

being actively used for an unlawful activity is in theory subject 

to forfeiture by order of the court. However since coming into 

force in 2005, the current legislation has rarely been used by the 

chiefs of police as originally intended. Our legislation, with the 

support of dedicated funding for a provincially led process, is 

intended to ensure that the Act will be used as a civil method to 

access proceeds of crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the biggest change that this Bill will provide is 

that the Crown will be able to bring applications for forfeiture 

under the Act rather than asking the chiefs of police to do so. 

This will reflect a significant change in the level of government 

support and a commitment to the civil forfeiture process. To 

assist with this change, two new positions — director and asset 

manager — will be created to ensure that the Act will be used 

actively as an effective and efficient tool against organized 

crime. 

 

This Bill also provides for new interim orders regarding 

property that is or may become property that is the subject of a 

forfeiture application. This will be done to identify the extent of 

such property and to ensure that this property does not 

disappear or become devalued prior to the application for 

forfeiture being heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Bill also includes the following technical 

improvements to the process for the seizure of property. Firstly, 

it will define proceeds of unlawful activity to include increases 

of property value or decreases in debt. Secondly, providing that 

the director may claim costs and expenses with respect to 

proceedings leading up to and including the forfeiture 

application. Thirdly, providing for interim protection orders to 

avoid loss of property or devaluation of property. And fourthly, 

creating a new legal presumption that certain property is the 

proceeds of unlawful activity. Where a person participated in an 

unlawful activity which led to the acquisition of that property or 

an increase in its value, the presumption will exist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

provides the liquidation and forfeiture proceeds for all seizures 

of criminal property would now occur under this legislation, a 

single centralized process for the seizure and sale of the 

following: first, property seized under this Bill; secondly, 

property seized under the Criminal Code of Canada; and 

thirdly, property seized under provincially administered 

legislation or programs. 

 

Once seized and liquidated under this new process, funds 

generated through the seizure and sale of property will first be 

used to cover the expenses incurred through the seizure and sale 

process. The surplus then will be split evenly between the 

police operation and the Victims Fund for distribution under 

that process. This will allow the monies garnered through this 

process to directly benefit the ongoing crime prevention 

operation of the police and to benefit victims of crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this new Bill we are improving an Act that 

wasn‟t used, and we are consolidating all types of seizures of 

criminal property under one streamlined process to the benefit 

of police operation and the victims of crime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my great privilege to move second reading of 

The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 65, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 be 

now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to stand and speak on Bill No. 65, The Seizure of 

Criminal Property Act, 2008 presented by the Minister of 

Justice. Mr. Speaker, we have had the second reading 

introduction, explanation from the minister just moments ago. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to be able to say a few words here 

as we start to take a look at this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very interesting to note that there is in 

existence a seizure of criminal property Act, Mr. Speaker, 

introduced by this government not that long ago, Mr. Speaker. 

And the interesting part of course is that matters that the 

government is choosing to address could easily have been done 

by amendments to that Act or, Mr. Speaker, even to changes in 

policy and not necessarily needing a specific change in the Act. 

 

But what we have here is, number one, a lack of recognition 

that an Act exists, Mr. Speaker — other than the fact that there 

is a repeal clause at the end of the legislation that the 

government is proposing — and then, Mr. Speaker, a number of 

changes. Primarily it‟s changes in emphasis, Mr. Speaker, one 

of those of course being that in fact the power of the police 

chiefs is being removed in this Act, Mr. Speaker. That could 

have been done by amendments, and I think the government is 

choosing to reissue the Act, Mr. Speaker, instead of providing 

an amendment, just not to draw attention to that simple fact. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t expect that the police chiefs who 

haven‟t used this power, Mr. Speaker, will be objecting. 

 

That having been said, government always has the power to 

redirect the division of proceeds from the process of forfeiture 

of property and the seizure of criminal property. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we‟re going to have to take a very 

close look at the legislation that the government has presented 

— a close look that compares it to the existing Act that the 

government wishes to repeal, and determine exactly what 

changes have been made, where the new emphasis is going to 

be on the legislation. And perhaps more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, consult with those affected by this change in emphasis 

or policy to ensure that in fact we do have stakeholders or those 

who are most affected by this, their consensus, Mr. Speaker, to 

proceed. 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

By and large, Mr. Speaker, the Act as it stands appears to be 

very similar to the Act which is currently in place, Mr. Speaker, 

an Act that was brought forward by the former New Democratic 

Party government, and an Act that received a considerable 

amount of support from communities across Saskatchewan, 

including the policing community. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, there is a desire to ensure that the Act 

does what the government wishes it to do, that in fact we 

understand the comparison between the two pieces of 

legislation, and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, that there is a 

consensus of opinion to proceed with the changes that are being 

proposed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move that debate 

on Bill No. 65, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 65, The Seizure of Criminal 

Property Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Witness Protection Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill provides the legislative framework for supporting 

witnesses, their associates, and their family members who have 

been threatened or intimidated during a criminal proceeding. It 

will complement the efforts of police in combatting organized 

crime and gang activity in this province. 

 

Passage of this Bill will ensure that testimony is available to the 

courts to secure convictions against organized crime figures and 

gang members. This Bill will address the need to support 

witnesses not covered under the federal witness protection 

program so that more individuals requiring less extreme 

protective measures have their own measures of added security. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right now the federal Witness Protection Program 

Act, which is administered by the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police], does not meet the needs of some witnesses for 

protection that is less extreme. What this government‟s 

proposing is the assurance that all of our citizens who choose to 

come forward with testimony against individuals accused of a 

crime receive protective services. 

 

With this Bill, we hope to achieve a more comprehensive web 

of protection for witnesses who may not otherwise provide 

testimony for fear of retribution. Passage of this Bill will enable 

the province to provide short-term protection for witnesses, 

their associates, and their family members, until the threat no 

long exists. Provisions for protection contemplated under this 

Bill may include escorts or may include short-term stays in a 

safe place until the threat is passed. These are the circumstances 

that are most frequent when witnesses require protection and 

ones that are not now covered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill provides that when police and Crown 

prosecutors identify that a witness may be at risk, an assessment 

of that individual‟s or his or her associates‟ threat risk may be 

made by an official appointed by the minister to direct the 

program. 

 

Subsequent to that assessment, the Bill additionally provides for 

an approval committee comprised of three appointed 

representatives to review the applications for protection made 

by provincial officials. These provisions may also direct the 

work of the committee in determining whether a witness is 

eligible to receive protection services including the nature of the 

protection services, whether any associates of the witness 

require protection services, the length of time the protection 

services are to be provided, and the terms of any required 

protection agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also provides that a protected person will 

have a part in determining what protection arrangements he or 

she agrees to. As well the Bill makes provision for those 

providing protection services to witnesses and their associates. 

In short it requires that those providing those services must do 

so at the direction of the program director. 

 

Passage of the Bill will provide for the security of witnesses and 

their associates in another way. It limits disclosure of 

information related to the witnesses that may reveal his or her 

identity or whereabouts before, during, and after trial 

proceedings take place. 

 

Finally, this Bill provides for the ability of the province to 

protect our citizens and assist law enforcement agencies in 

cases where witness protection is required. Mr. Speaker, 

passage of this Bill represents a significant enhancement of this 

government‟s capacity to keep Saskatchewan‟s communities 

safe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition is going to say that this is not a new 

idea, that they actually came up with the program, that they 

were in fact getting around to it, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, an idea is nothing until it is put into action which is 

what this legislation does. After only one year in office, we 

have got around to what the NDP had 16 years to do, and that is 

to protect the safety of our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the crime stats over the past decade speak for 

themselves. We know according to the Canadian Centre for 

Justice Statistics that Saskatchewan has had the highest violent 

crime rate of any province. In fact over a 10-year period while 

the national rate declined 5 per cent, Saskatchewan‟s rate 

skyrocketed 48 per cent. We have led across the board — 

highest violent crime record, highest sexual assault and assault 

rates in the country, the highest youth crime rates, and the 

highest impaired driving rates in Canada. Saskatoon and Regina 

were the two worst ranked among census metropolitan areas for 

crime rates according to the . . . [inaudible] . . . crime stats in 

Canada for 2006 and 2007. This is the NDP legacy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So now that they might say they were going to get around to 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

this, in fact, in fact on September 12, 2007, just days before the 

election writ was dropped, the NDP issued a news release 

touting their high-risk witness management program — a 

program that had no legislative support, a program with no 

framework. This program now has a legal authority to operate. 

What this government has done is make the program 

operational. We have done more than announce a program that 

consisted of a press release on the eve of an election and a 

budget line item. This Act is more than an idea. This Act is a 

reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of The 

Witness Protection Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved that Bill No. 66, The 

Witness Protection Act be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

privilege and pleasure to stand to talk on Bill No. 66, The 

Witness Protection Act. Mr. Speaker, the Act has just been 

introduced for the second time, and I am pleased to stand today 

to do the second reading introductory remarks on behalf of the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course I listened very carefully to the Minister 

of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing in his introduction of 

the legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that he 

acknowledges that this program has in fact been in place for the 

last year. It has been funded by the previous government, and, 

Mr. Speaker, it has been administered for the last year. And the 

minister, Mr. Speaker, acknowledges of course that he has been 

the minister responsible for that program for the last year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we‟ve got here is a piece of legislation 

that appears to have been designed simply to give the minister 

an opportunity to stand at a news conference to say that this 

government has done . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I need now to 

remember at which point in my sentence my microphone went 

off here, Mr. Speaker. So now maybe I‟ll just start all over 

again. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, it does appear that the legislation 

in front of us — given that the minister acknowledges that this 

program previously existed and that he is the minister 

responsible for the program, Mr. Speaker — it would appear 

that the legislation being addressed today, being introduced for 

second reading, was in fact written simply to ensure that the 

member, the minister, had an opportunity at a news conference 

to announce that he knows that the program exists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just to establish a point here, Mr. Speaker, and I listened 

carefully to the minister in where he was talking about stats that 

exist under a New Democratic Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

There are lots of stats, Mr. Speaker, across the board that the 

opposition is very proud of when we were in government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I want to just quote from a news release, Mr. Speaker, and I 

don‟t doubt for a minute, as has happened on other occasions, 

Mr. Speaker, that when I read something onto the record, 

members opposite might want to cheer and clap on occasion. I 

think we would be prepared to acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker. 

But this is a copy of a news release, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 

put it onto the record. The news release is entitled, “High Risk 

Witness Management Program Announced.” It‟s “A new 

program to help police protect witnesses has been established in 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is quoted: 

 

Witness intimidation is a powerful tool used by organized 

crime groups and gangs to undermine successful 

prosecutions . . . This new program will ensure that 

Saskatchewan continues to be inhospitable to organized 

crime and gang activity. 

 

Unquote from the Minister of Justice. The news release goes 

on: 

 

The High Risk Witness Management Program will help 

police services protect witnesses who do not meet program 

criteria for the RCMP National Source Witness Protection 

Program. 

 

It will also enhance the ability of the justice system to 

secure critical evidence in the prosecution of serious 

offences, often involving gangs and criminal 

organizations. 

 

The investment in the program [is] what remains of the 

fiscal year 2007-08 will be $80,000 and then funding will 

be $320,000 annually. The program will be staffed by . . . 

[a] program officer and . . . [a] support person within the 

department of Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, almost word for word with some of the comments 

that the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing just 

made in this House, Mr. Speaker. But this news release is dated 

September 12, 2007. This news release, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister of Justice quoted is the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin who was then the New Democratic Party 

government minister of Justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s no question, no question at all when we 

review this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that we see an awful lot of 

what had been developed under our term in government, that 

had been put in place during a New Democratic Party term in 

government and, Mr. Speaker, which we would firmly 

acknowledge was a program that was necessary, Mr. Speaker, 

and a program that received funding and support through the 

government and the Ministry of Justice, the old Department of 

Justice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we are debating this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

of course we have to take a look at the language that exists 

within the Bill to ensure that it establishes, to ensure that it 

establishes, that the legislation establishes all of the elements 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

that existed in the program that the minister has been 

administering over the course of the last year and, Mr. Speaker, 

to ensure that over the experience that has existed during the 

last year, Mr. Speaker, that we‟re able to use that experience to 

evaluate, Mr. Speaker, how the program has met the needs of 

the people who actually required or needed the program, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we have lots of work that we need to do, and I know, Mr. 

Speaker, there are other members on this side of the House that 

would very much like to speak on this Bill. And it does appear 

that members of the government want to speak on this Bill. I 

will be anxious to listen to their remarks on second reading of 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I sense however, Mr. Speaker, that we 

won‟t hear any speeches from members opposite on second 

reading. However I want them to know that we on this side are 

most anxious to hear everything that they have to say, Mr. 

Speaker, and said in a way that gets recorded in Hansard, Mr. 

Speaker, as opposed to just said in, sort of, the heat of debates 

here in this Chamber. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I believe very strongly that the legislation in 

front of us is addressing needs that exist within the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it does what the minister 

indicates, is that it puts into law a program that previously 

existed and was serving needs within the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, we may be on the same page 

with regards to the language that is used in the legislation. But 

in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to need to review 

the Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, there are members on this side of 

the legislature who wish to speak on the record, having their 

remarks recorded in Hansard with regards to this legislation. 

 

So that having been said, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 

that debate on Bill No. 66, The Witness Protection Act be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

that debate on Bill No. 66, The Witness Protection Act be now 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 64 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with pleasure I 

get to stand here and speak to this Bill No. 64, the amendment 

to the municipal northern Act. 

 

I‟d like to share some of the concerns that I may have heard 

with this Act, and I want to share with Mr. Speaker some of the 

concerns I‟ve heard from some of the mayors and some of the 

Métis leaders. 

 

There could be some issues, and actually they‟re reviewing this 

right now, and I‟ve asked that they share those concerns they 

have with me. And if they go through them and they find that 

this Act doesn‟t cause them any concern or grief, you know, I 

would definitely want to support this Act. But there‟s definitely 

a lot of questions that they have, and I think they‟re trying to 

work through answering those. 

 

There‟s a meeting scheduled for this Friday that I‟ve been asked 

to attend. And they will be going over the changes that they 

want to make to this Act, and we‟ll have an opportunity to 

definitely see how they feel about it. And if it‟s going to impact 

them and if it‟s a tool that will be useful in the communities in 

the North, then definitely I would support this. And I can‟t see 

why anybody would not support it if the mayors and the North 

is supporting it. 

 

The Métis nation also had some concerns. And we‟ll have to 

see just exactly what their concerns are. And if they‟re okay 

with it after they review it, then by all means I think this thing 

could, you know, go through easy. But those questions have to 

be answered. 

 

I think like anything else, it‟s a tool that they will give them an 

opportunity to use. And definitely that tool would give them an 

opportunity to be equal with the rest of the province that are 

using the assessment tool that has been provided. And I think 

some of the concerns, originally when this Act was passed, had 

some concerns from some of the northern leadership about the 

duty to consult. 

 

And I believe that‟s why the previous government held on 

pushing the northern Act. And I think they‟ve had an 

opportunity now to talk. and they‟ve had meetings with officials 

from the northern municipal departments. And I think they‟ll 

follow up with those questions that they have to them and make 

sure that there are no concerns. And if there are concerns, 

hopefully they can work through them. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think some of these issues in 

here will deal with our housing and our roads and different 

things up there, but I think this Act would have some tools to 

assist the municipal governments in doing their assessment. I 

guess that it‟s an Act that definitely will have a lot of impact 

and could have a lot of impact in northern communities, and 

hopefully has no impact . . . And if there is going to be any 

impact on the trappers and cabins and stuff like that, that those 

issues will be addressed before it‟s passed. And when I go back 

to the North and find out from some of the community leaders 

and the different ones that have concerns with it, there are no 

concerns and this thing looks like it‟s a tool that‟s going to be 

used, then that‟ll be, Mr. Speaker, very wonderful and good for 

the North. It gives them a tool. 

 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

So with this change to the legislation, I believe it will give us a 

level playing field. If it doesn‟t interfere, and if all the parties 

are happy with it, and there‟s no concerns, it definitely . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh definitely a cost and stuff like 

that. There‟s that to bring up. But at this point we want to make 

sure that everybody‟s comfortable and that the duty to consult 

has been done with northerners, and to make sure that this Bill 

doesn‟t hurt them or harm them, it‟s good legislation that will 

be useful, then I would see that there‟s no reason why we 

wouldn‟t support this. 

 

But again I want to be very clear. The northern people and the 

good people in northern Saskatchewan have to make sure that 

this Bill would not harm them. If they have concerns, they have 

to have the opportunity to express themselves and to bring that 

forward here, Mr. Speaker. And I want to make sure when I 

meet with them Friday and as we go on, if there‟s any concerns, 

that they notify me and let me know. And I will do all I can as a 

representative, and as well as the opposition here would do to 

deal with the issues that they may arise from what they feel is 

not supporting them in this Bill. But if it is a good Bill and 

they‟re okay with it, then I think it‟s definitely going to give 

them a level playing tool as a tool to do their assessment. 

 

So at this point I want to get back to the community and to the 

North on Friday and have those meetings and follow up. And if 

everything goes good and our northern people are comfortable 

with this and the leadership, they feel like they‟ve been 

consulted, the Métis feel like they have no issues with this, I 

can‟t see why, you know, we wouldn‟t support this. It‟s good 

for the North, but I just want to make sure again that northern 

people and the people are comfortable and have a good 

understanding of this, that we‟re doing our job. 

 

And thank you for your comments, you know, hearing every 

now and then the encouragement to go on. I appreciate that, Mr. 

Speaker. And I will try to do my best to represent the people of 

the North, make sure that their issues . . . And when they bring 

issues and they surface them, that they‟re dealt with, and that 

this legislation hears them and truly understands them, that 

some of the issues are there. 

 

And there‟s many issues; we know that. And some of those 

issues will be addressed and hopefully with the different 

ministries and departments, and I know this legislation may not 

help them. It may help them with dealing with some of the other 

issues we have to deal with in the North, and I hope it does. 

And if it doesn‟t, well I guess we‟ll have to bring in Acts that 

will help them and bring concerns. 

 

Definitely that‟s the job of this House. And I, you know, want 

to definitely, Mr. Speaker, want to acknowledge all the hard 

work that‟s gone in by the ministries to deal with some of the 

concerns that northern leaders had. And our departments are 

going to work with them and making sure they‟re comfortable 

with it. I want to also acknowledge that work of the 

departments and the ministries that are working with the leaders 

— not only the municipal leaders, but the Métis — to make sure 

their information is there and they‟re comfortable with that. 

 

And like I said, I want to get to back, Mr. Speaker, to my 

community and find out, meet with the leaderships. I know 

there‟s a group from all the North getting together on Friday. 

And they‟ll come up with any concerns, and if not, this thing 

will be really easy, and it should flow and come through here. It 

should pass. But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would like 

to adjourn debate of Bill 64. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 64, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 58 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it is a 

pleasure to stand today and speak to Bill No. 58, An Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when looking at any changes to an existing Act, 

it‟s always important to review the proposed changes 

thoroughly and to examine whether or not the changes that are 

proposed are indeed what is best for the province and to ensure 

that the changes cover everything that needs to occur. 

 

In reading the minister‟s opening remarks in bringing forward 

this Bill, the minister in his preamble to this talked about a 

number of government priorities that the Sask Party 

government is focusing on. And to those that sit in this House 

regularly, and perhaps those that watch at home and those that 

follow the news, people are aware of what these priorities are. 

The priorities of tax relief, infrastructure, and debt relief — 

those are three areas where many efforts have been focused. 

 

And I found the minister‟s comments at the beginning of his 

remarks to be quite interesting because it‟s part of a larger 

process that we‟re seeing take place from the other side, Mr. 

Speaker. Part of a larger process where, in my opinion, the 

complete story, Mr. Speaker, all of the facts are not necessarily 

being shared with the Saskatchewan people as frequently and as 

openly as they could be in many circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s really part of a revisionist history that I‟m 

seeing the other side conduct, Mr. Speaker. A history that they 

are trying to rewrite through two means: either through the 

might of their legislative majority, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the one 

approach. Or through the process of repetition of saying 

something over and over and over, Mr. Speaker, in hoping that 

people won‟t actually look at the facts for themselves — in 

hoping, Mr. Speaker, that people won‟t look at the full story, in 

hoping that people won‟t vet their comments to ensure that they 

are indeed as factual as they ought to be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in these three items that I mentioned, I think 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

it‟s important to set the record straight, set the record straight to 

show what has been occurring in this province for some time. 

The opposite side speaks as though these three items, focusing 

on these three items were invented by them. But in my opinion, 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. I think if 

you look at the track record of the previous NDP government, 

you will see significant action in these three areas that has 

occurred over the past years. 

 

On the issue of debt repayment, Mr. Speaker, in the last term of 

the NDP government, over 1 billion of debt was repaid. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s important to note also that this continual 

repayment of debt occurred at a time when commodity prices 

were not where they have been over the past couple of years, 

Mr. Speaker. I know when I‟ve spoken to people in my 

constituency about this issue of debt repayment, it is an 

approach of government that does have fairly broad support by 

public. 

 

And I know when speaking to people of all political stripes, 

what I have heard, Mr. Speaker, on this issue of debt repayment 

and the ability now that the sitting government has to knock off 

significant chunks of the existing debt, what I have heard from 

individuals of all political stripes, Mr. Speaker, is that it is only 

fitting, it is only fitting that the debt that was racked up by the 

Tories of the past would be paid off by the Tories of the 

present, Mr. Speaker. It‟s only fitting that the people who 

created the debt are those that also pay off the debt. That‟s very 

important to remember. 

 

And that‟s one aspect, Mr. Speaker, that as the Sask Party 

government is engaged in its efforts to revise history, to revise 

what actually occurred, they are overlooking this, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟re overlooking how this debt came to be. They‟re 

overlooking how the province ended up in the state that it is in. 

 

The second area, Mr. Speaker, was the area of lowering taxes. 

And I think this is another area, Mr. Speaker, where we‟ve seen 

steady and continual changes in the right direction by the 

previous NDP government, Mr. Speaker, whether that was 

reducing PST [provincial sales tax], whether that was income 

tax changes, whether that was property tax changes, or whether, 

Mr. Speaker, that was engaging in a historic business tax review 

and implementation — one of the most significant 

implementations of a business tax changes in the history of the 

province. That too, Mr. Speaker, is an area or changes that the 

Sask Party government now just tries to sweep under the carpet, 

tries to pretend that it never happened, Mr. Speaker, tries to 

pretend that they invented the notion of lowering taxes. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the actual reality 

and on that point, Mr. Speaker, I want to set the record straight. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, we have addressed debt repayment. 

And I have shown how that‟s been an ongoing thing over many 

years. Lowering taxes, I‟ve shown how that was an ongoing 

thing over many years. The other area is infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. Again on the issue of infrastructure, another area 

where over the past years, prior to the existing government, 

there had been steady and significant and groundbreaking 

investments made in infrastructure. 

 

Whether the examples are the synchrotron, whether it‟s the 

Petroleum Technology Research Centre, whether it‟s VIDO 

[Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization] and InterVac 

[international vaccine centre], Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s in 

various highways, hospitals, schools, or universities, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s a long track record and history of significant 

investments in infrastructure. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now for the Sask Party government to go 

around and suggest that they invented these three approaches, 

the approaches of debt repayment, lowering taxes, and 

infrastructure, I am left scratching my head, as are, Mr. 

Speaker, the many, many people in Saskatchewan. They do not 

understand how they could be making such a claim. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have touched on how the Sask Party 

government inherited a track record of debt repayment, of 

lowering taxes, and infrastructure. It‟s also very important, Mr. 

Speaker, to mention that they also inherited one of the strongest 

economies in Canada and a huge surplus, Mr. Speaker. And 

that‟s an important point. When Tories leave government, Mr. 

Speaker, they leave a huge debt, they leave a deficit, they leave 

problems for people. And that simply was not the case when the 

Sask Party government took over control. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, going back to the initial comments of the 

Finance minister in introducing Bill 58, An Act to amend The 

Income Tax Act, he also talked about how, over the summer, 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party MLAs were instructed, they had 

their marching orders to go out and listen to people and see 

what feedback you receive. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t doubt that among some of those 

comments that were made that there were comments made 

about debt repayment, lowering taxes, and infrastructure. Why 

am I not surprised, Mr. Speaker? Because that‟s been going on 

for a long time. People understand that those are good things. 

 

But I think the difference, Mr. Speaker, what happened over the 

summer when the Sask Party went out, well let‟s see what the 

result was according to the minister‟s statement. This is from 

his remarks introducing this Bill on November 17 from 

Hansard. In the bottom of the second paragraph he states, “As it 

turns out, the people of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Saskatchewan are in agreement on the priorities.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m surprised he could say this with a straight 

face. Why am I surprised? Because, Mr. Speaker, I would 

suggest that the whole process was simply about optics. It was 

simply about presenting to the people a facade of openness, a 

facade of listening to the concerns of people. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I am certain that the news release, when they 

talked about the results — I believe it was at a caucus retreat in 

P.A. [Prince Albert] National Park, a very beautiful location — 

I would not be surprised, Mr. Speaker, if that news release had 

been drafted weeks, if not months, before the feedback from the 

MLAs was actually given to the leader of the party and reported 

to caucus. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because it was a scripted event. 

It was a charade, in my opinion. I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that it was a genuine effort to reach out and to hear what the 

people of Saskatchewan wanted the government to hear. 

 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? Because I know, I know for a 

fact, Mr. Speaker, that many of the issues that are facing 

Saskatchewan families right now, Mr. Speaker, I know . . . I 

know many people — I could name them off now — I know 

many people that passed on feedback to the Sask Party 

government about immediate concerns that they had. These 

weren‟t concerns that they made up and I know this is not one 

or two select people. I know there were many, many, many 

people, Mr. Speaker, providing this feedback to the Sask Party 

government. 

 

I know people brought up Station 20 West and the 

mean-spirited decision to cut the funding for Station 20 West. I 

know for a fact many, many people brought that issue up with 

government. But do we hear anything about it, Mr. Speaker? 

No. All we saw was a stubborn determinedness to follow the 

course that they had set even though they know they made the 

wrong decision on that decision. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that people were talking about the need 

for child care spaces. I know they were talking about the 

immediate action required to ensure that there are enough child 

care spaces. But, Mr. Speaker, what have we seen? We‟ve seen 

re-announcements of existing funding, Mr. Speaker. Hardly 

immediate action. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that as we‟re approaching winter, many 

people have a concern about utility rates. Many people have a 

concern about paying their bills at the end of the month in the 

areas of heating, in the areas of electricity. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that many people spoke to the Sask Party 

and stated that they wanted strong corporations to ensure that 

through the strong corporations they were able to continue to 

receive the lowest cost utility bundle in Canada. But sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, what we‟ve seen on that front is the complete 

opposite. 

 

Now don‟t take my work for it, Mr. Speaker. I‟d urge you to 

read some of the editorials in the papers that we have in the 

province. Remarks to the effect — I don‟t have the exact quotes 

with me — but remarks to the effect suggesting that this was 

not about the best business sense, the selling of Crown assets. 

This was not about setting the Crowns up to be in a position 

where they are strong in the years to come. This was not about 

Crown corporations being able to provide real benefits to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. The furthest thing from 

what is the reality, Mr. Speaker. This was about an ideological 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, to undercut the long-term viability of the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, nothing more. 

 

It‟s the initial steps, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the decisions being made 

now in order to make the future argument that Crown 

corporations are not necessary and that Crown corporations do 

not bring real benefits to Saskatchewan people. That is the 

reality, Mr. Speaker. That is what people on the street are 

saying, Mr. Speaker. But sadly, Mr. Speaker, that is not the 

information that the Sask Party chose to listen to when the 

Finance minister made his remarks in the Act, talking about 

listening genuinely and sincerely to what the people of 

Saskatchewan wanted. 

 

They chose or they were instructed — I don‟t know which one, 

Mr. Speaker — but they chose, they had selective hearing. They 

only chose the things, Mr. Speaker, that matched up with their 

paradigm and their world view. If it didn‟t fit what they 

believed, what they thought was true, regardless as to whether 

or not it was the proper thing for the province, regardless as to 

whether or not it‟s what people were telling them, they chose to 

report only what they wanted to hear or what they were told to 

hear, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s how, Mr. Speaker, we get to the 

situation now of Bill No. 58. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as blind as the Sask Party government is to the 

immediate needs of Saskatchewan people, whether that‟s 

accessibility to post-secondary education, whether that‟s 

affordability issues in areas of home heating, whether that is 

affordable car insurance through SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] and other services through Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, they chose to be blind to those 

issues. And they chose to be blind to those issues just as, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re equally blind to the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the Sask Party government is 

equally blind to the past. And this ties into the revisionist 

history that we‟ve been seeing from the other side, either 

through the legislative majority or through their continual, 

constant act of just saying the same information, cherry-picking 

this and that, not providing all the facts, saying it over and over 

in their hope that people would believe. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

know that Saskatchewan people are aware of their intention to 

rewrite history, and I know they‟re looking at the bigger story. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s important to look at the past because out of the 

past actions of what happened under the previous Devine 

government and the Romanow government and the Calvert 

government, we can understand how we are in a position now 

where tax cuts are possible. We can understand how a Sask 

Party government about a year ago was able to inherit the 

billions of dollars it did. We can understand how the province, 

through the work of government but more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, through the work of hard-working Saskatchewan 

people and the many sacrifices that Saskatchewan people had to 

make to climb out of the hole that was left by them by the 

Devine government. 

 

I was . . . Well I wasn‟t surprised, sadly, Mr. Speaker, today. I 

wasn‟t surprised, Mr. Speaker, to hear the Agriculture minister 

in his response to some questions. And this is a mantra that we 

hear from all the Sask Party MLAs and ministers because 

they‟ve been given their marching orders. They know what 

they‟re supposed to say. And they are in many ways, Mr. 

Speaker, good puppets. You can pull the cord on the back and 

you can expect one of three phrases to come out of their mouth. 

And sure enough, Mr. Speaker, we heard one of those lines 

from the Agriculture minister today. And again the Minister of 

Agriculture, one of his responses to questions that was posed to 

him today, he talked about cleaning up a mess, Mr. Speaker. He 

talked about cleaning up a mess. 

 

Well I‟ve heard some members on the other side remark about 

my newness to this Assembly and perhaps my age and whether 

or not I was around during the Devine era. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

was around. I do admit I was not paying as close attention to 

politics as I do now, but my elementary school years were good 

ones, Mr. Speaker. And fortunately through the great 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

educational system we have in the province, I was able to learn 

how to read. And, Mr. Speaker, the ability to read is a very 

important thing. And it‟s something, Mr. Speaker, that I would 

encourage the members on the opposite side to do. They should 

spend a little more time, instead of simply taking their 

instructions on what to say in every situation, Mr. Speaker, I 

would urge the members to go back and look what has 

happened over the past years. Look at the books. Do some 

reading and figure out what actually happened. 

 

And I think if they . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 

minister from Rosemont has commented that perhaps they 

should brush up on math skills as well. And I won‟t make any 

comment on that about today. I‟ll leave that for his speech when 

he addresses this piece of legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I went back, Mr. Speaker, and did some 

reading, I learned a few things, and a few things, Mr. Speaker, 

that do not jibe with what the Minister of Agriculture was 

saying today. A few things, Mr. Speaker, that are in no way 

consistent with this mantra that we‟ve been hearing from the 

opposite side about cleaning up a mess. It just does not make 

any sense to me, Mr. Speaker. And you might ask, why? 

 

Well I went back, Mr. Speaker, and I looked at the credit 

history of the province because the credit history of the 

province is one way that we can look at the province over a 

period of time and see what happened during different decades, 

different breakdowns over the years, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And while the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy wants me to go to 1905, and well that will be another 

speech as well, perhaps after the member from Rosemont. But I 

will start in 1982, Mr. Speaker, and that was the era of the 

Devine government. 

 

So from 1982 to 1992, what did we see happen in the area of 

credit readings? Well, Mr. Speaker, I had heard this but when I 

read it, I saw it to be true — 15 downgrades, consistent; 15 

downgrades every time. Every time, Mr. Speaker, the outside, 

the third party verification sources looked at our province, saw 

what was happen during the Devine era of Tory rule, the era 

when many members of the opposite side sat as members or 

were political staffers within that government, what did we see? 

We saw 15 downgrades — 15. 

 

Now if the Minister of Agriculture had made the comments he 

made today about cleaning up a mess in following that era of 

government, those comments would be very appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. I would slam my hand on the desk. I would clap and I 

would say, hear, hear. There is a mess to clean up. Things are 

brutal. I can‟t believe there‟s been 15 downgrades in the credit 

rating over that period from ‟82 to ‟92. Shocking. 

 

So as I did more reading, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to know what 

happened during the next period, and this was the Romanow 

period from ‟92 to 2001. Well after 15 downgrades, Mr. 

Speaker, I would agree that there was a mess to clean up. I 

would agree that things were pretty ugly. I would agree that we 

were close to losing the keys on the house, on the proverbial 

house, Mr. Speaker. But again through the hard, hard work of 

Saskatchewan people, of the sacrifices they made because they 

knew the horrible situation that they were put into by the 

Devine Tories, Mr. Speaker, through the sacrifices of the 

Saskatchewan people and the leadership from the NDP 

governments of the time, there were 10 upgrades. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So what we saw, Mr. Speaker, was a complete and absolute 

about-face, a reversal of what had been happening for the years 

prior, Mr. Speaker. Now I would suggest that that is cleaning up 

a mess, Mr. Speaker, cleaning up a mess, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Minister of Agriculture would know nothing about because all 

the Minister of Agriculture inherited, Mr. Speaker, was billions 

of dollars of surplus and a cooking economy, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s what he inherited — the complete opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

of what the Romanow government inherited. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Romanow government period ended, 

and then we saw the Calvert government, so I was curious. At 

this point would we see a reversal, would we see a turning back 

to the dark days of the Devine Conservative government, the 

government that many members on that side sat in, were closely 

tied to, worked in political campaigns, worked in this building, 

had a very, very close relationship to? Well, Mr. Speaker, under 

the Calvert government, thankfully on this side, what we saw 

was a continuation in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. We saw 

a continuation; we saw six more upgrades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that makes 10 upgrades under the Romanow 

government plus the six upgrades in the Calvert government. 

I‟ll add it up for the members opposite. That‟s 16 straight 

upgrades, Mr. Speaker, from S & P [Standard & Poor‟s], 

Moody‟s, DBRS [Dominion Bond Rating Service Ltd.], and 

CBRS [Canadian Bond Rating Services]. That‟s significant, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So as I did my research, as I did my reading, I could not 

understand how the Minister of Agriculture could stand today 

and talk about cleaning up a mess. It was not consistent with 

what the facts demonstrated, in my opinion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this ties back to my earlier comments about 

the revisionist history that we‟re seeing on the other side. It ties 

into the comments about why now today, Mr. Speaker, we are 

in a position where we‟re able to continue with the trajectory 

where there have been tax cuts in a variety of sectors over the 

past years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve seen the other side try to say over and over again this 

mantra or through their legislative majority, Mr. Speaker, try to 

get the message out there that things were left stark. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I know when I talk about the financial situation, the 

province being stark as it was suggested about a year ago, with 

constituents and with people on the street, there‟s chuckles all 

around, Mr. Speaker. People can‟t quite believe that that 

statement was made. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was very early into the administration of 

this Sask Party government. But, Mr. Speaker, it was some 

foreshadowing. It was an indicator of what would come in the 

coming months. And what we‟ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is a 

continuation of what the members opposite have been told to 

do. They‟ve been told you‟ve got three lines; these are the three 

lines that you say in any given situation. If someone comes and 

pulls the cord on your back, I want you to spit out one of these 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

three lines, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s what they‟ve been doing 

consistently. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important to set the record straight to 

demonstrate that stark perhaps is not the best word to describe 

the province. And I think most people would see that that is to 

be the case. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know on this Bill No. 58, An Act to amend 

The Income Tax Act, I know there are many other members on 

this side who would like to carry on and ask some more 

questions that have been raised by this proposed legislation, ask 

some more questions about the many, many situations, Mr. 

Speaker, where what the Sask Party government is saying does 

not match reality in any way, Mr. Speaker. I know there are 

many more members who want to join the debate on this one. 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 

debate on this Bill. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved that Bill No. 58, The Income Tax Amendment Act 

2008 (No. 2) be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Massey 

Place . . . Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — I haven‟t moved to Saskatoon yet. Good 

afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to speak to 

Bill No. 43, The Trespass to Property Act. Mr. Speaker, the 

theoretical principle behind The Trespass to Property Act 

proposed by the Sask Party government is one that is potentially 

dangerously blind to the socio-economic reality of the 

day-to-day living in an advanced society such as Saskatchewan. 

 

Reviewing the form and contact of this proposed legislation, it 

is clear that this Bill is based on the traditional notions of 

property and accordingly seeks to affirm the right of property 

owners without in any real way addressing the needs and rights 

of the general population to have access and to use property in 

an age and time where a large portion of private spaces are 

largely publicly used. 

 

The Sask Party legislation is so broad and so potentially 

dangerous in its application precisely because it seeks to apply 

— wrongly, I would also submit — the same principle of 

trespassing that applies to private residents to publicly used 

property. Unlike the social and economic character of publicly 

used property, a private dwelling or residence is obviously a 

place where privacy is paramount and the nature of expression 

of that ownership oft differs. 

 

When members of the public use amenities in shopping malls, 

walk in a street or on a sidewalk or form an assembly in front of 

a legislature, there exists no discernible challenge to their 

property title and possessions or inappropriate breach of 

privacy. 

 

When someone enters the premises of a private dwelling, they 

are appropriately viewed by the law as likely challenging 

ownership and infringing on the privacy of the individual. 

Whereas the law, at least before the advent of this legislation, 

does not view the youth standing outside a shopping mall‟s 

front door or a group of citizens assembling at the front of the 

Legislative Building in the same way. But with the Sask Party‟s 

trespass to property Act, it has the potential to drastically 

change. 

 

When someone enters the property of a private dwelling, they 

understand and recognize that this is the exclusive property of 

the individual. The same consideration however should not, in 

my view, be taken when looking at the Legislative Building or 

the local shopping mall. 

 

If you enter the premises of a private dwelling, the law already 

recognizes that by the very virtue of ownership, any unjustified 

or unwanted entry is considered a trespass even technically if 

no damage occurs. Through the Sask Party‟s trespass property 

Act however, this blind principle could be applied to spaces 

considered more public than private due to its common use 

even though it may be under private, government, or 

government-related title. 

 

The traditional principle of trespass is not a friendly one. It 

makes supreme the rights of the property owner and, as a result, 

does not even contemplate the needs or potential rights of the 

general population. Yet this is the principle the Sask Party 

government wants strengthened and expanded to cover 

everything, but referring to section 15(a) vacant Crown and 

agricultural land; (b) Crown resource land; (c) park land as 

defined in The Parks Act; or (d) any other Crown land or 

category of other Crown land that is prescribed in the 

regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s explore the spirit and force of the Sask 

Party‟s trespassing Bill by considering a hypothetical example. 

 

In the constituency of Regina Walsh Acres resides an elderly 

gentleman that diligently and passionately cares for his yard. 

From time to time, there‟s a stir in the neighbourhood over his 

lawn. You see, the single mother down the street has two school 

age children who are not always, admittedly, considerate 

especially when they drive over this man‟s lawn with their 

bicycles. Despite his repeated warnings, these two young girls 

tend to gravitate to this local green oasis. 

 

Under this Sask Party legislation, the gentleman who owns the 

lawn is encouraged to press trespassing on these young girls. I 

see no age limit in the Act. And as would be argued 

successfully by the property owner, the girls now deemed 

trespassers were told that they were not in certain terms 

welcome. Consequently they would very reasonably fit the label 

of trespasser and be eligible for a fine of up to $2,000. 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

And what should happen if they cannot pay their fines? Well 

reading the legislation, I suppose jail would be one of these 

alternatives. That is what happens if someone is charged with a 

fine and is delinquent in payment. My sincere hope is that in the 

words of Joni Mitchell quote “Not if local justice has . . . [at 

least] one good eye” would this happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in no way is this an exaggeration. I couldn‟t utter 

something so profoundly undemocratic and ridiculous be it not 

for the Sask Party‟s attempts at passing this particular piece of 

legislation in this province without the clarifications that it 

needs. We are still waiting to see what truly lies ahead for the 

working people of this province since the passage of Bills 5 and 

6. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in a society which has at its very 

foundations the holding of private property that take the form of 

a house or office tower to spaces that appear more public in 

terms of looks, character, and use. Amidst this reality, the Sask 

Party‟s trespassing Bill seeks to treat all of these areas, with 

exception to those specifically exempt in section 15, the same 

as a private dwelling or at least to the same degree. 

 

Among the most prominent example would be a shopping mall 

which by its very nature, purpose, and design is open to the 

public. It has roads, sidewalks, parking lots, and other amenities 

that resemble a more public space rather than a private 

dwelling. Within this privately owned mall, there exists a 

number of vendors that carry out businesses offering a variety 

of goods and services. In order for these private enterprises to 

be successful, the mall invites the public. Unlike the trespassing 

scenario on the premises of a private dwelling, there is no clear 

and immediate threat to the mall owner‟s title or to his or her 

privacy when members of the public come and go from these 

areas. Indeed the individual vendors depend on mall traffic. 

 

Moreover, legislation such as The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code prevents the mall owner and his or her agents from 

discriminating or denying entry on the basis of race, colour, 

national origin, or sexual orientation. But the Sask Party is now 

asking members of the legislature to support Bill No. 43, The 

Trespass to Property Act, that is determined to potentially 

sanction the arbitrary exclusion of people just by virtue of 

ownership and not the conduct or character of the individual in 

question. 

 

Yes, according to this Act it would be permissible for the owner 

of a mall or the owner‟s agents to stop anyone from entering the 

premises without the further clarification that‟s needed. 

Whether that person is wearing a hat or seniors gather as a 

group for coffee, this legislation potentially sees fit to deny 

citizens the ability to access this space by enabling the owner to 

charge trespassing. 

 

I stand opposed to such a blind application of a doctrine that is 

so totally devoid of any reasoning and legitimizes a clear abuse 

of property ownership where public access and generally 

considered public spaces are concerned. This type of 

application is so outdated, so unnecessary, and so excessive in 

its privilege to the owners of property because it denies the need 

to have public spaces. And it also, I would submit, denies 

through its potential application the ability of citizens to enjoy 

their fundamental freedoms of expression, association, and 

peaceful assembly. 

 

We live in a society that has an economy that is principally 

based on private ownership, and concurrently we have 

expectations and rights as citizens to a public commons, a space 

or aspects of our lives that have remained in the public domain 

or through common use considered collective property. With 

the Sask Party government‟s trespass to property Act, this 

balance could decisively come to an end as it seeks to provide 

sweeping protection to property owners with no real 

consideration of the general public. 

 

The general public should not, as the Sask Party‟s trespass to 

property Act does, be viewed by the law as a bunch of 

trespassers. They have a privilege, I would argue, as citizens of 

this province to peaceful assembly, expression, and association. 

They also have a right to access public spaces. Such a privilege 

should not be able to be revoked by mere whim, by stiff fines, 

but rather on specific grounds related to unacceptable uses of 

property, clear unlawful behaviour such as the destruction of 

property. And on that occasion, those citizens have the Charter 

right to receive counsel and fair treatment under the law. 

 

It has been part of the Sask Party‟s rather ambiguous 

explanation as to the intention and motivation of this 

trespassing legislation as a first in this province that other 

jurisdictions in Canada have similar petty trespassing 

legislation. While I acknowledge this evidence, I would point 

out that the legislation varies in terms of fines, definition of 

Crown lands and spaces, and moreover a clear exclusion of 

minors from charge of trespassing. 

 

Concurrently, the Sask Party‟s trespass to property Act has 

among the highest fines in the country, very few exclusions to 

trespassing that they place under Crown land, and subsequently 

a disproportionately great deal of authority given to cabinet, and 

no exemption for minors, whereas jurisdictions like Prince 

Edward Island in their trespass to property Act, identify that no 

child under the age of 12 may be persecuted for trespassing. 

 

Of further interest to the Assembly, I believe, is a brief mention 

of the recommendations made by the commission established in 

Ontario several years ago to assess the outcomes of their 

trespassing legislation. The commission titled, task force on the 

law concerning trespass to publicly-used property as it affects 

youth and minors concluded that the trespassing legislation had 

a negative impact on youth. In his recommendations, 

Commissioner Raj Anand specifically mentioned that property 

owners, not alleged trespassers, should bear the onus of 

showing why he or she should not be permitted access to the 

property. 

 

Under the Sask Party‟s trespass to property Act, the onus 

remains on the trespasser, and even then the onus relates 

specifically to title and not necessarily just the exercise of 

charter rights. Section 7 reads: 

 

It is a defence for a person charged with an offence 

pursuant to section 3 or 5 to prove, on the balance of 

probabilities, that he or she reasonably believed that he or 

she had title to or an interest in the premises that entitled 

the person to enter in or on the premises or to engage in 

the activity complained of. 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, the individual‟s conduct is not the 

main question as the property owner can on whim deny a 

person access. The only successful defence of trespassing 

would be that (a) you reasonably believe that you had legal 

reason to be there, (b) that you had permission from the 

occupier or someone authorized by the occupier, or (c) you 

failed to understand the sign forbidding or prohibiting activity 

or even entering the premises in the first place. 

 

[15:30] 

 

As an elected member of this Assembly, I require clarification 

that this does not ultimately provide the owners of property, and 

by extension the Sask Party government, the arbitrary, 

repressive means to bar citizens from public areas, legislation 

that has the potential to classify conduct that is legal now in a 

free and democratic society to be considered trespassing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you think of all the significant and 

meaningful progress that has been made in this Chamber by 

MLAs committed to evolving the political, social, and 

economic instruments of democracy to help those around us 

live better, more fully human lives, you cannot help but 

question the Sask Party‟s legislation. 

 

I recall in particular the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights which 

reaffirmed liberty and freedoms, medicare which gave 

Saskatchewan people the right and freedom to receive the care 

they need, and The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act 

that gave Saskatchewan people the security to economic 

well-being and freedom of self-determination. 

 

It was through the ethic of consultation, transparency, and — as 

Woodrow Lloyd used to remark — quote “our Saskatchewan 

habit of getting our feet under the table and talking together, 

thinking together, and planning together” that successive 

Saskatchewan governments worked to strengthen and grow 

communities that in turn shaped this province. 

 

In this same Chamber, the Saskatchewan Party government is 

potentially asking MLAs to once again deny rights and 

privileges to the citizens of this province. They are asking us to 

sanction yet another piece of legislation that avoided public 

consultation, that was generated in their back rooms and could 

be negative for the working people and producers of this 

province, legislation that seems anti-democratic in nature as it 

seems to potentially seek to provide the Saskatchewan 

community and its people of the very rights and freedoms they 

have worked so long and hard to achieve in order to be at the 

best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has potential damage and unintentional 

consequences, shall I say, that could be arrived from this Bill. 

 

And at this time I‟d like to move adjournment of this debate so 

that other members of my caucus also have the ability to 

express their concerns about this Bill going forward as well. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the member for Regina Walsh Acres that we adjourn the 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Motion carried. 

 

Bill No. 63 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 63 — The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise 

today to speak to Bill No. 63, The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2008. It‟s become sort of a 

pattern with this government that when they don‟t have a policy 

or have no idea how to run something, they‟ll appoint a board. 

And so I guess that‟s what they‟re doing here with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They have no idea how to run the economy. They use all the 

New Democratic policies that were in place from the previous 

government, and so they appoint a board of about 160 people. 

And I think they should have added about another 1,600 

because they‟re completely devoid of ideas on that side on how 

to do it. But, you know, interestingly the first recommendation 

that came out of the board was denied. 

 

And strange to see that they‟ve got the Premier on one hand 

making one comment, the minister on another hand making 

another comment, and the Minister of Enterprise Saskatchewan 

making other comment. And I guess we see the Deputy Premier 

won in this case because they‟re choosing to do nothing, just in 

a different way. 

 

So here we go, Bill 63, they‟re going to add four members to a 

board. And you know truthfully, it‟s a good idea. It‟s a good 

idea because they‟re devoid of ideas so they should get them 

from somebody. 

 

To quote the minister, quote, “Mr. Speaker, our government 

believes that available and affordable housing is necessary for 

sustained economic growth in this province.” Strange for a 

party that had not one housing platform plank in their election 

platform. Devoid, absolutely devoid of housing policy. And so 

now I guess we should appoint a board a year after we‟re 

elected so we can do something on the housing front. 

Outrageous. And we‟ve got a need for housing and social 

affordable housing and student housing in Saskatchewan, and 

so we‟ll appoint a board and maybe we‟ll get some ideas. 

 

Now Prince Albert, a prime example of where we have housing 

shortages, we‟ve got a population where social and affordable 

housing is a necessity. And we‟ve got, you know, some projects 

that were under way previously and paid for by the former 

government and have been worked on for years. And there‟s 

been one announcement in Prince Albert since this government 

was elected, and nothing coming down the pipe either. So in 

Prince Albert the only announcements that have been made by 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

this government were announcements that were funded by the 

previous government and the work had already been done. 

 

We‟ve got editorial boards in Estevan and Weyburn screaming 

for housing. The economy‟s booming because of policies put in 

place by the former government. And these areas of the 

province have huge economic activity, thus need for increased 

workers, thus housing needs for these workers. And what‟s this 

government done? Not a thing — nothing. And so I find it 

strange that after a year, the only movement we have on 

housing is to add four more people to a board. It‟s unfortunate, 

but not all that surprising. 

 

So additionally I read the speech from the minister responsible, 

and she says that there‟s a task force with input from 

approximately 138 sources. They presented their report and 

outlined 36 recommendations. So again, if you don‟t have a 

housing policy, if you have no idea about housing, you should 

ask somebody else. And at least they‟re smart enough to admit 

that and to follow through with that. 

 

So what have they done? They say, in her speech, we acted 

quickly to deliver on several of those recommendations. Well 

what is several? What were the recommendations that were 

acted on, and how many more will be un-acted on? Thirty-six in 

total and how many have they acted on — one or two. It‟s a sad 

story that they‟ve got to tell on this issue. 

 

Now we have housing authorities in and around the province, 

and they‟ve been widely ignored, their advice has been widely 

ignored. And I hope that in the case of these members of this 

board, of these four people, some of them would have sat on a 

housing authority at some point so that they could provide some 

input. 

 

Now you know largely we support these changes because they 

will add advice from the public, which the government needs. 

They‟ve spent a year in office and have yet to announce one of 

their own housing projects — $3 billion surplus, not one 

housing project to announce that wasn‟t funded previously. So 

it‟s unfortunate and sad for the people involved that need social 

and affordable housing and student housing. 

 

And speaking of student housing, the minister‟s unaware that 

she‟s responsible for student housing in this province. She‟d 

like to pass it off on somebody else. But allow me, if I could, to 

read from The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 

 

Student housing 

 

19(1) The corporation may encourage the construction of 

student housing or the acquisition of existing buildings 

and their conversion to student housing in areas where a 

need can be established for the purpose of providing 

adequate housing for students. 

 

Adequate housing for students — it‟s written right here. To 

continue: 

 

In addition to the powers conferred upon the corporation 

by section 15, the corporation may: 

 

(a) approve the making of an application for a loan from 

the federal corporation by a municipality, or an agency 

thereof, a hospital, The University of Saskatchewan, The 

University of Regina, a school board, conseil scolaire, or 

other educational institution, a co-operative association or 

a charitable corporation. 

 

So you see it‟s plain that either one of the universities, any 

school board is able to access student housing under this Act. 

And yet the minister has no idea that she‟s responsible for 

student housing in this province. 

 

And so I find it an unfortunate circumstance that we find 

ourselves in, in this case. And so I appreciate that the members 

opposite have chosen to increase the board from one member to 

five, and I‟m sure the rest of the province will appreciate it as 

well because there‟ll be some ideas coming forward on housing 

now. And because I assume that there are a number of other 

colleagues on our side of the House who have some knowledge 

and input and ideas on housing and would like also to join in 

this debate, I move that this Bill is adjourned. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Prince Albert Northcote has made a motion to adjourn debate 

on this Bill. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It is agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 50 — The 

Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

very pleased this afternoon to rise and speak on this very 

important piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, The Missing 

Persons and Presumption of Death Act is a very important 

piece of legislation. It‟s a new Act and it is important to those 

families and those individuals who have over their lifetime had 

the unfortunate circumstances of having to deal with a missing 

individual, Mr. Speaker. And we need to spend some time 

looking at this piece of legislation in detail, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the nature of the legislation, and we need to ensure 

that it accomplishes exactly what the legislation is intended to 

do and nothing more and nothing less, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In putting this Bill together, Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that 

the government is respecting and responding to the 

recommendations of the provincial partnership committee on 

missing persons. Mr. Speaker, that‟s a group of individuals 

from across the province that have been tasked with making 

recommendations to the government in order to put forward 

meaningful changes, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that families that 

are facing this situation, Mr. Speaker, have the opportunity to 

have conclusion, to draw to an end this very unfortunate 

situation. 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to point out that that committee was 

established under the previous government — has been in place 

for some time, Mr. Speaker — with the sole intent of bringing 

forward recommendations that we would see in either an 

amendment to the present absentee Act or, Mr. Speaker, a new 

Act that in fact brings closure and comfort to those family 

members. And we‟re pleased that the government has brought 

forward this Act. We‟re pleased that they‟ve had the 

opportunity to look at the recommendations from the committee 

put in place for this purpose over the last few years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Estate matters, as all members of this Assembly would know, 

are often very complicated issues, and any steps we can take to 

reduce those complications are beneficial to families, Mr. 

Speaker, and beneficial to our judicial system. And for the 

advantage of the people of Saskatchewan, this piece of 

legislation is very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes talking about some 

of the provisions in this piece of legislation and what it‟s 

designed to accomplish. Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation 

will update the province‟s antiquated legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that has been in place for some time. And these particular 

changes and the recommendations from this committee, this 

work started some time ago as well, Mr. Speaker, through the 

committee that was established by the previous minister of 

Justice under the former government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it will deal with the aspects of personal 

property of missing persons, and it will also create a 

presumption of debt provision to address the concerns raised by 

the provincial partnership committee on missing persons, Mr. 

Speaker. Families of missing persons have raised concerns 

regarding the lack of clear process, Mr. Speaker. And that clear 

process affects their families every day. They‟re not only 

having to deal with the loss of one of their loved ones, a very 

important person in their life, Mr. Speaker, but they‟re also 

having to deal with a number of processes that, Mr. Speaker, 

were not meeting their needs. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So the previous government, in looking at how to fix those 

needs for the people who have dealt with this, Mr. Speaker, 

sought the input from individuals who have dealt with these 

issues, Mr. Speaker, individuals who have dealt with families 

with these issues, Mr. Speaker, and the result is of course the 

piece of legislation we see today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that lack of clear process with respect to an 

interim authority to act and the ability to obtain information 

often made it difficult for family members. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

ask we examine this legislation in more detail. We are looking 

to see that those issues are clearly dealt with in this legislation, 

that families no longer have to have those same concerns that 

they‟ve had prior to this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Families have also had difficulty dealing with the day-to-day 

affairs of missing persons, Mr. Speaker, and the declaration of a 

person as missing, Mr. Speaker, and later the presumption of 

death. Mr. Speaker, these concerns and these needs raised by 

family members who have had to deal with these tragic 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, were raised with the previous 

government. The previous government acted by putting in place 

a committee to deal with this, Mr. Speaker, and today we see 

the result of the actions of that committee in a series of 

recommendations that have come forward in the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, which was an act of co-operation between the people 

with missing persons, the last government, and this government 

in following forward and bringing forward the legislation to 

ensure that those families‟ concerns and needs are dealt with, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said earlier, we are thankful and appreciate the fact 

that they carried through with this process and brought forward 

a new piece of legislation that is dealing with the 

recommendations and concerns of those families, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s not, Mr. Speaker, just the matter of the families having to 

dealing with the loss of that significant individual in their lives 

but having to deal with the complicated processes that often left 

them with questions unanswered, Mr. Speaker, and with the 

inability to deal with the day-to-day circumstances they had to 

deal with in dealing with property and lives of those individuals 

affected by that missing person, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the declaration of a person that is missing and the 

appointment of a property guardian and the management of the 

missing person‟s estate, Mr. Speaker, are much clearer in this 

piece of legislation than it would have been in the past. And the 

intent of putting the committee together, Mr. Speaker, and 

asking those learned individuals who have had to deal with 

these situations what needed to be changed, was to accomplish 

this Act, Mr. Speaker. It was about trying to accomplish exactly 

what we hope this legislation, at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, has accomplished. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is very complicated legislation. It will 

take a period of time of in-depth examination and analysis by 

the members in opposition, Mr. Speaker, but also some 

additional consultation with the committee and others to ensure 

that in fact what they actually wanted and needed to have 

changed, Mr. Speaker —to make their lives less complicated, to 

make the transition from the missing person to the presumption 

of death, Mr. Speaker, more easily obtained, Mr. Speaker, so 

that families have less . . . are not traumatized several times in 

the process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act will establish clear provisions with respect 

to the appointment process with relatives and the public 

guardian and trustee over the property of a missing person, Mr. 

Speaker, and how that trustee and guardian must act in relation 

to respecting that property, Mr. Speaker. It also gives the 

opportunity for individuals to object, to object on how that is 

being handled, Mr. Speaker, by any one individual or public 

trustee by a family member. 

 

The new provisions will allow the court to place conditions and 

restrictions upon the appointment of a property guardian which 

will allow the public trustee and public guardian to have some 

say, Mr. Speaker. It will require the property guardian to file an 

inventory and provide a yearly accounting for those items that 

are within a property guardian‟s purview and responsibility. 

 

It will also allow for the removal of the property guardian if the 

property guardian isn‟t acting appropriately in carrying out their 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

duties, Mr. Speaker. If that property guardian isn‟t acting in the 

best interest of the missing person, Mr. Speaker, and the family, 

then in fact that guardian could be removed from his duties, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill clarifies the role of the public guardian, 

trustee and the management of the estate and the missing 

person, so it puts clear provisions and restrictions around which 

the public guardian must act, Mr. Speaker, in order to fulfill 

those duties as laid out within the legislation and act in the best 

interest of both the family and, Mr. Speaker, the missing 

individual. 

 

The Bill will create clear presumption of death provisions that 

allow for the family of the missing person and the court to more 

effectively deal with the estate over the long term, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the most difficult decisions that is ever made by a 

family, Mr. Speaker, is to accept the fact that that missing 

individual, Mr. Speaker, has in fact deceased, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it wasn‟t clear in the past, the transition from the 

declaration of a missing person to the presumption of death, Mr. 

Speaker. This creates an effective process, Mr. Speaker, and 

clear provisions to allow this to occur in a way that is far more 

acceptable to the family, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, this 

is an important aspect, Mr. Speaker, as in the past that was 

much more difficult. And as we move forward with this 

particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it‟s absolutely, 

absolutely important, Mr. Speaker, that we don‟t put families 

through any more ordeal or trauma than they need to in order to 

deal with this very important issue in their lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s important that families feel supported, Mr. Speaker, and 

that they feel that the processes that the government and the 

courts go through, Mr. Speaker, is transparent, easily 

understood, Mr. Speaker, and works in the interest of the 

missing person and family members that are having to deal with 

this tragic situation, Mr. Speaker. And we hope that this 

legislation does that for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in looking at this legislation, Mr. Speaker, it is complicated, 

as all estate legislation is and the division of property legislation 

is, Mr. Speaker. So we need to examine it in great deal to 

ensure that the rights of both the missing person and family 

members are protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also deals with how property may be returned to 

a person presumed to be dead if he or she is later found to be 

alive, Mr. Speaker. If for some reason an individual has been 

presumed dead, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, that person is 

later found to be alive, Mr. Speaker — perhaps is in a hospital 

or has had amnesia, didn‟t know who they were, Mr. Speaker, 

and they weren‟t able to be found, Mr. Speaker, and they 

surface again some time later, Mr. Speaker — it deals with how 

that individual can have their property returned to them, Mr. 

Speaker, and how they can be made whole. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

also a very important provision in this piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation will ensure that 

families of missing people are able to address on the interim 

their concerns, Mr. Speaker, and deal with the ongoing 

concerns that they will have in an effective, timely manner. 

And, Mr. Speaker, during this very difficult time for families, 

Mr. Speaker, we want to have processes that are as easily 

understood and easily put into practice as we can, Mr. Speaker, 

because these families are already dealing with a very difficult 

situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are interested in this 

legislation as well. Many of them are giving me advice as to I 

should be talking longer and in more detail on this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. They want more detail, more depth, so that they 

truly have the opportunity to understand what the piece of 

legislation they put forward is all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, although this legislation is complicated, as all 

legislation dealing with matters of estates are, Mr. Speaker, this 

is without doubt an improvement. And this improvement was 

necessary. And we do appreciate, Mr. Speaker, that this 

improvement has been brought forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure — as we do as the official 

opposition with every piece of legislation — this in fact 

accomplishes what was intended to be accomplished. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that requires us to talk to a number of stakeholders, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the concerns they raised were 

actually listened to, Mr. Speaker, and that those concerns are 

reflected in the legislation as we see before us, Mr. Speaker. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, legislation can sometimes have 

consequences that are unseen or unforeseen consequences, Mr. 

Speaker. And we need to ensure that in our examination of this 

that it does what is intended to do, but doesn‟t in fact do things 

that it was not intended to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had a piece of legislation in place for 

many years that this is replacing. Mr. Speaker, this on the 

surface appears to be a significant improvement. Once again I 

would like to thank the members for taking the time to work 

with the committee that was established by the previous 

government that dealt with the issue of missing persons, and in 

fact hope that they have incorporated all the recommendations 

from that committee in this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. And in working with those individuals, Mr. Speaker, 

they obviously, as did the previous government, seek their 

knowledge for a reason because these people have had to deal 

with the current legislation and the current difficulties that 

families have experienced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think most importantly this piece of 

legislation is a step forward. It was identified by the previous 

government and moved on by the previous Minister of Justice. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, after the election, Mr. Speaker, a new 

government‟s put in place. They saw the wisdom of continuing 

on with this, the fine work that had been started by the previous 

government, Mr. Speaker. And as a result, we have today a 

piece of legislation before us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, although 

desired by I think all members of the House, needs to be 

examined, Mr. Speaker, in detail. We will attempt to do that 

over the next several months, Mr. Speaker. We will attempt to 

speak to a number of the stakeholders throughout the province, 

Mr. Speaker, to talk to families who have had input, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, reflect — in our final comments on 

this piece of legislation, as we move it through the various 

stages the legislation has to go through, Mr. Speaker — that 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

information, that reflection of family members and 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, in our considerations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that, I would move that we adjourn debate on 

this Bill at this time. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Regina Dewdney has moved adjourned debate on this Bill. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 51 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again this is legislation that is very similar that was in works 

while the previous government was in place. The previous 

government started working on this issue, and we‟re pleased to 

see that at least some aspect of the legislation is carried forward 

with the new government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While in principle we support elements of this legislation in 

general, we are not ruling out amendments to this particular 

piece of legislation, as it does contain some clauses that had not 

been discussed while it was under consideration by the previous 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about one particular provision in this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that does not seem to make a great 

deal of sense on the one hand. It allows for . . . The Bill gives 

the Judicial Council the jurisdiction to continue for a two-year 

period, after a judge has retired or resigned, for them to 

investigate a judge that is either retired or resigned, Mr. 

Speaker. Now we question fundamentally the point of having 

the ability to, after a judge is retired or resigned, to carry out an 

investigation against the judge, Mr. Speaker, when there is no 

. . . At the end of the investigation, Mr. Speaker, regardless of 

what the findings are, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no ability, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s no penalty. There‟s no ability to hold that 

particular judge accountable for anything he may have done, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what is the wisdom in carrying out an expensive 

investigation after the judge has left — either retired or 

resigned, Mr. Speaker — if there is no ability, Mr. Speaker, to 

carry out any sanction or penalty? Mr. Speaker, common sense 

needs to apply as we put forward legislation as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And to have a provision that would not be used, Mr. 

Speaker, because it does not have the ability to do any more 

than what‟s already happened, Mr. Speaker, to remove the 

judge from his position as a judge, Mr. Speaker, and the judge 

has already resigned or retired, Mr. Speaker. Why would we 

have a provision that would carry out an expensive 

investigation but in fact would have no ability to change any 

outcome, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[16:00] 

 

So putting that particular provision in the legislation we 

question, Mr. Speaker. We don‟t think that it makes sense. It 

doesn‟t make common sense to the average person to spend 

taxpayers‟ dollars, Mr. Speaker, investigating an incident where 

there is no penalty, when there is no outcome to that 

investigation, Mr. Speaker, and there is no ability to hold any 

accountability even at the conclusion of that investigation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I have to point out that if it were matters of criminal issues, Mr. 

Speaker, then the investigation would still go on by the police; 

it wouldn‟t go on by a judicial council, Mr. Speaker. And there 

would be accountability. But we‟re talking about the authority 

of a judicial council to investigate a judge, Mr. Speaker, and in 

doing so then remove that judge from the bench, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in this case, the person‟s already moved from the bench. 

They‟ve either retired or resigned, Mr. Speaker. And in carrying 

out an investigation that has no ability to put forward any 

penalty, Mr. Speaker, or to change any outcome, Mr. Speaker, it 

makes no sense. 

 

It is mentioned, Mr. Speaker, clearly by the current Minister of 

Justice that they didn‟t in any way want to affect the person‟s 

pension, Mr. Speaker, which would‟ve been the only way to 

deal with the person in a monetary sense, Mr. Speaker, that they 

could enforce. And without adding new provisions of penalty to 

deal with a situation like this after a judge has resigned or 

retired, Mr. Speaker, it makes little or no sense to proceed with 

that provision in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, it would never be used. 

Because I think the Judicial Council, Mr. Speaker, would be 

wiser than to carry out an investigation that has no ability to 

bring out any end, Mr. Speaker, to change anything or to bring 

forward any penalty, Mr. Speaker. Why would they want to do 

that? Why would they want to put their time forward when 

there is really nothing that the outcome would change, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, so that particular provision causes us some 

concerns, Mr. Speaker, and that particular provision, Mr. 

Speaker, doesn‟t make sense to many members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that the legislation provides no sanctions 

beyond removal from the bench and therefore accomplishes 

nothing, Mr. Speaker, means that the investigation has little or 

no real substance, Mr. Speaker, in terms of disciplining any 

judges found guilty of any form of misconduct. And without 

that, Mr. Speaker, it does perhaps take away from the real 

authority of the Judicial Council in dealing with a judge, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To put them in a situation of deciding to investigate or not to 

investigate somebody when they can have no avenue of penalty, 

Mr. Speaker, puts them in a situation which I don‟t think we 

should be putting them in in legislation, Mr. Speaker, having to 

make the decision whether or not to investigate a peer. Even if 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

the peer had been involved in misconduct, Mr. Speaker, if he‟s 

no longer on the bench, Mr. Speaker, if he‟s resigned or retired, 

why would the council want in fact to hold an investigation, Mr. 

Speaker, knowing at the end of that investigation there is no 

consequence, there is no penalty, Mr. Speaker, and therefore not 

likely to have a great deal of impact, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, clarity is of utmost importance when it comes to 

dealing with pensions, Mr. Speaker, and relating to provisions 

relating to pensions, benefits, and remuneration, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we hope that this Bill in fact does provide 

some of that clarity that is, Mr. Speaker, sought after by both 

judges in our province, Mr. Speaker, and in fact, very clearly 

the provisions of law and how they apply to judges, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see, Mr. Speaker, that judges, like everyone else in the 

province, are subject to The Family Property Act that divides 

the pension or annuity or retirement benefit, Mr. Speaker, as 

part of that division of property, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

entitlement to a pension, annuity, or retirement benefit, 

including the entitlement of a spouse to a pension, annuity, or 

retirement benefit on the death of a judge, Mr. Speaker. These 

are changes that are supported, Mr. Speaker, and we believe are 

necessary to be clear and to be clarified in this particular piece 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, retired judges and former judges are often 

included in the definition of a judge, as they have entitlements 

to retirement benefits, Mr. Speaker. So there‟s some 

clarification, Mr. Speaker, as to what benefits retired judges 

have, Mr. Speaker. And all these changes are beneficial to, Mr. 

Speaker, provide clarity as we move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it requires that judges‟ allocation of their entire 

benefit entitlement cannot be reduced below the lesser of 50 per 

cent of the commuted value of the total of the pension, Mr. 

Speaker, if there is a division of The Family Property Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation provides many other 

what we would see as largely housekeeping changes to bring 

this Bill to conform with other current pieces of legislation that 

are available to us, Mr. Speaker, within the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while there are many aspects of this Bill we do 

support, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier there are aspects of 

this Bill that we currently don‟t support, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, whether we will made amendments or oppose this Bill 

simply on those particular changes are issues we need to 

examine. The fact that you put forward a provision that really 

has no teeth, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with retired or resigned 

judges, Mr. Speaker, raises some concerns. 

 

The members opposite are encouraging me to continue in more 

detail on this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. They 

want to hear more about the legislation they brought forward. 

Maybe many of them perhaps didn‟t read it, Mr. Speaker. But, 

Mr. Speaker, at this time because we have many, many other 

important pieces of legislation to deal with today, Mr. Speaker, 

I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 51, The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act. 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Dewdney has moved to adjourn debate on this Bill. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 52 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 52 — The 

Trustee Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I notice that some members 

have entered the Chamber who were previously absent, and I 

don‟t imagine for a moment that they have come to hear debate 

on The Trustee Act, particularly, Mr. Speaker, the contribution 

made to The Trustee Act by a lawyer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But although the area may seem dry and the legislation 

uninteresting to most people, Mr. Speaker, this is an example of 

legislation that most people probably never much give a thought 

to, unless they become a trustee or perhaps when they‟re 

creating a trust by writing a will, come under its application. 

And it‟s the type of legislation that is . . . [inaudible] . . . 

fundamentally important to how our society functions, how 

people carry out their duties to each other, Mr. Speaker, but 

because it doesn‟t deal with anything exciting — fortunately, in 

most cases — it may seem dry to many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in the minister‟s second reading speech, he did make some 

commentary about the language that is in the current Act that 

may be a little bit more clear, a little more understandable in the 

Bill that‟s being proposed than the legislation that‟s being 

changed, if the legislation‟s indeed changed following debate 

and discussion by this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, George Bernard Shaw once said that “all 

professions are a conspiracy against the laity,” and I think he 

probably included lawyers amongst those professions in 

conspiracy against the laity, as well as others. I don‟t, as would 

surprise no one here, subscribe to that particular belief myself. 

Speaking in defence of the legal profession if not any of the 

others, the rule of law is a pillar of our democracy, pillar of 

healthy democracy, as is independent courts, and as is an 

independent legal profession, an independent bar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have heard some suggest that the incomprehensibility of 

legislation like the current trustee Act, and perhaps even the Bill 

proposed from the government, that that incomprehensibility is 

part of this conspiracy against the laity. That lawyers have an 

interest in people not understanding the law, even laws that 

apply to them so often as The Trustee Act does when people are 

carrying out their duties to beneficiaries of trusts, their duties to 

their fellow citizens, and sometimes their duties to people 

closest to them, when they are carrying out those 

responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When confronted with the accusation that legislation is not 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

easily understood, Mr. Speaker, and that accusation is made 

fairly common about legislation, the answer on the part of 

lawyers and the answer on the part of legislators might very 

well be as well, Mr. Speaker, is that legislation is not drafted to 

be easily understood. Legislation is drafted so as not to be 

easily misunderstood. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as society changes and as practices change 

and as it becomes worthwhile to consider providing new 

powers, different powers, adjusting to changes in society, 

changes to the common law, and changes to language, then it 

becomes clear that some legislation is not only not easily 

understood by those that it affects, but not easily interpreted by 

those legal advisers entrusted with providing guidance to people 

who are needing the legislation as guidance in carrying out their 

duties to each other. 

 

I think this shows the value of law reform commissions in this 

particular case, in suggesting ways in which legislation can be 

updated, in which the language in the legislation can be updated 

and practices can evolve with new changes in our economy, 

new changes in our society, and new ways of speaking about 

our responsibilities and duties that are no longer reflected in 

legislation that maybe has its origins 100 years ago as is the 

case with our trustee legislation, which arguably can use some 

amendment in respect not only to the powers and duties of 

trustees and manners of dealing with trustees but also in its very 

language itself. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the minister gave me the opportunity to speak 

about a matter that I thought I would never have a chance to 

speak of once I graduated from law school, and that is the rule 

against perpetuities, which law students struggle to understand 

and then, having become lawyers, find absolutely no reason to 

ever deal with again in their entire careers. And the rule against 

perpetuities is being removed from the trustee legislation by this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, and on the recommendation of the legal 

community that deals with trusts. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that the rule against perpetuities 

has actually found its way into popular culture in at least one 

instance that I can think of. There is a movie, Mr. Speaker, 

called Body Heat. The movie itself has a great deal of appeal on 

a number of levels. It‟s a film noir, Mr. Speaker. Kathleen 

Turner is a femme fatale. William Hurt plays a lawyer who 

ends up in prison, so there‟s something for everybody in this 

movie, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for wills and estates and trust lawyers, there is a very 

creative use of the rule against perpetuities in a crucial plot 

twist in the movie, Mr. Speaker. And those people who have 

seen and enjoyed Body Heat may have missed the role the rule 

against perpetuities plays in that movie, and I highly 

recommend renting Body Heat and watching for that particular 

use of the rule against perpetuities because it does point out the 

dangerous effects that arcane, complex, and outdated rules can 

have if they are primarily as pitfalls along the way and not 

actually of any assistance to people who are administering 

estates, setting up trusts, and such, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess I‟ll thank the minister for that because I don‟t think 

I would have had a chance to say anything useful or creative 

about the rule against perpetuities in my entire career as a 

lawyer or a legislator without his reference to it in his second 

reading speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now as I think has become very clear from my remarks, the 

opposition has no difficulty with the principles involved in this 

legislation. There may be some work needed in committee to 

make sure that there are no unintended consequences of what 

the government is proposing. Having taken this opportunity as a 

legislature to move this legislation forward, to advance its 

language, to expand some of the powers, and make more 

precise some of the duties of trustees, we want to make sure we 

get the job right, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t want to be speaking about 

Body Heat and the rule against perpetuities again next year. 

 

But so that work can be done in committee, Mr. Speaker, I will 

allow it to move there. I don‟t think there‟s any members who 

are interested in speaking to the second reading debate other 

than myself now. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude 

my remarks. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the member for Meewasin that Bill 

No. 52, The Trustee Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 

the intergovernmental committee. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill now stands 

referred to the intergovernmental committee. 

 

Bill No. 56 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 56 — The 

Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 

portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Trustee Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on the Bill that is a 

companion piece to the Bill that just went to committee, Mr. 

Speaker, I don‟t have any movie reviews. 

 

This is legislation that of course is necessary because of 

consequences to other legislation resulting from The Trustee 

Act amendments that have now gone to committee, a Bill that is 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

far-reaching in its effect on a number of matters. We‟ve heard 

debate this afternoon on the missing persons legislation, and 

trusteeship comes in there. It comes in, in any case, where for 

whatever reasons — either because of death or disappearance, 

incapacity — somebody has to care for somebody else‟s 

property. And there is a number of pieces of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan that deal with the 

issues that give rise to trusteeship. 

 

And therefore there are consequences to amending that 

legislation and particularly far-reaching amendments in respect 

to duties, powers, responsibilities of trustees, and in changing 

the language and updating the language to correspond with 

changes in language in society, in economy, and changes that 

have been brought about to become a law, either responding to 

or acknowledging those changes, Mr. Speaker. And for those 

reasons, the two pieces obviously fit together. It would make 

little sense to send one out for examination to the committee 

and not the other, Mr. Speaker. And for that reason, I think the 

debate in this Chamber on this legislation is over upon me 

concluding my remarks, which I have now done. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The question before 

the Assembly is a motion by the member from Meewasin that 

Bill No. 56, The Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs. 

 

Bill No. 57 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 57 — The 

Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d 

like to start my remarks this afternoon on Bill No. 57, The Land 

Titles Amendment Act, by stating, Mr. Speaker, that over the 

last number of years since we began the modernization process 

of our land titles system, I don‟t think we‟ve had a single sitting 

of the legislature where we haven‟t seen some changes made to 

The Land Titles Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We went through probably the most significant modernization 

of land titles system in the country, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s very 

complicated legislation, Mr. Speaker, and as a result I think 

each of the last six or seven years, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 

before us an amendment to The Land Titles Act, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s good. 

 

Each time as the system‟s utilized by landowners, Mr. Speaker, 

real estate agents, lawyers, Mr. Speaker, we find small 

problems in the system which we move forward to correct. 

When you move from basically a paper-based system to what I 

think can arguably be said one of the most modern land titles 

registry systems in the country, Mr. Speaker, or anywhere for 

that matter, we‟re bound to have, as we move forward with that 

modernization, issues that come up, issues that need to be 

addressed on an annual basis. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve all sat through many, many changes 

over the last number of years as the land titles system has been 

modernized. Each year we‟ve seen improvements. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we commend, Mr. Speaker, the government for 

bringing forward again, once again this year, more changes that 

help improve the system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The old system, as we all know, was ponderous and difficult to 

use, often took periods of time that were weeks if not months in 

backlog, Mr. Speaker. Today the new system is much quicker, 

much more readily and easily used by both the legal profession, 

Mr. Speaker, and by individual owners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today many of the processes can be done online by any 

Saskatchewan citizen. And, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is 

go online, Mr. Speaker, pay your fee with a credit card, Mr. 

Speaker, and you can in fact obtain information, get titles, do 

your own transactions online, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s a 

significant improvement from the day when individuals had to 

travel to one of the seven or eight land registry offices in the 

province. In some cases, Mr. Speaker, people had to travel 

significant distances and perhaps several hours, Mr. Speaker, in 

travelling, Mr. Speaker, carrying out their jobs with the land 

titles system, Mr. Speaker, registry system. 

 

We‟re pleased that the changes made this particular year seem 

to once again improve the system, Mr. Speaker. And so we all 

recognize, I think, in this Chamber the importance of the new 

modern Information Services Corporation delivery of this 

system, Mr. Speaker. And I think that we all recognize the 

value to Saskatchewan citizens. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

predict that over the next half a dozen years at least, we‟re 

going to continue to see annually a land titles amendment Act 

that in fact continues to tweak the system to make it, Mr. 

Speaker, that much better each year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is addressed this particular 

year is to help address the issue of fraud in land sales, Mr. 

Speaker. Although it‟s extremely rare in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, if you were one of those individuals who have lost title 

to your property through fraud, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very, very 

significant. Mr. Speaker, I understand that we‟ve only had two 

reported cases over the last 30 years, but those are two very 

important cases to those individuals. And if we in fact can put 

additional precautions into a registry system such that fraud is 

much more difficult or impossible, Mr. Speaker, it‟s well worth 

doing. 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments expand the assurance provisions 

of the Act to provide additional protection to title owners as 

well as to mortgagees suffering losses as a result of a fraud, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is very, very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the majority of changes throughout this legislation 

are designed to improve the functionality of the system, to make 

it more user-friendly, to fix those loopholes that perhaps were 

missed in an original design, in original legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and to continue to make the system better for all 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation relates to the registry of grants and 

will provide the information setting out what the original grant 

was from the Crown, Mr. Speaker. So as we move forward, 

we‟re seeing various improvements, Mr. Speaker, as we 

proceed with updating this system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s raised the continued question about how we 

move forward in the province as we deal with unpatented and 

ungranted lands in this province, Mr. Speaker, which are largely 

in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but are throughout the 

province, but specifically, largely in northern Saskatchewan. 

And this legislation will allow for the compensation for 

appropriate extra costs if they relate to a problem with the title 

involved, Mr. Speaker, and including the use of fraud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one very positive point of this legislation is that 

there are quite a number of places where present rules that are 

located in regulations — in other words they are easy to change 

by the government without being brought and debated in this 

House — are in fact being recognized by officials who are 

dealing with this Act every day, should be included in the Act, 

and they‟re moving things that were previously in regulations 

into the Act themselves, Mr. Speaker. So that when those 

changes are here, they‟re more transparent to all members of the 

legislature and to the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In general these are very good changes, Mr. Speaker. This is 

legislation we support. We have supported over the years the 

various changes to this legislation, Mr. Speaker. We will 

support these changes, Mr. Speaker. We do need to take some 

time though to examine them in more detail to ensure they do 

what they‟re intended to do, Mr. Speaker, and don‟t 

unintentionally do something that they‟re not intended to do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the complexity of land titles 

legislation, it takes examination in great detail, Mr. Speaker, 

and we will take the opportunity to do that over the next few 

months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we congratulate the government 

on continuing to ensure that this system works for the people of 

Saskatchewan, works in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, for the reasons 

that we need to do a more detailed examination and greater 

detailed examination of these particular changes to ensure that 

they accomplish what they‟re designed to do, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move that we adjourn debate on this piece of legislation 

at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 57, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 59 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise and make comments on The Election Act, the 

Act to amend The Election Act, 1996. Mr. Speaker, what I‟ve 

done for the last couple days is really had a look at the Bill as it 

was tabled in the House, gone through each of the new sections 

and the changes. 

 

I‟ve also gone through the explanation. The explanatory notes 

accompany Bills, as you are well aware, when changes are 

tabled in the House, to get a good idea and a good 

understanding of what the changes are and what they actually 

do. And, Mr. Speaker, always when you read the Bills, you 

need to be able to put it into context as to where it fits within 

the actual legislation, look at what it‟s replacing and what 

changes are proposed in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I‟ve also done over the past couple of days 

and today is look at the second reading speech of the minister 

when he presented the legislation and also the second reading 

speeches of my colleagues to see what their comments are. 

And, Mr. Speaker, on first glance you would almost think, well 

this is pretty good, and it fits with the government‟s initiative to 

put in set election dates which needs to have a little more to it 

than just . . . you can‟t just declare set election dates and 

everything runs along fine. We also have a number of other 

issues that need to be addressed. 

 

So when you look through this, it talks about the amount of 

advertising that can be done and what restrictions are on those 

and also, working backwards from the set election dates, to 

calculate dates that need to be in place for what the ministries 

can do, what advertising the Crowns can do and what they 

can‟t. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you go through, when you go through 

all of the information that‟s there — the second reading 

speeches, the actual Bill, and the explanatory notes — well at 

first glance, you might have thought this was a good idea. When 

you look at all of the information and all of the detail — or 

should I say, the lack of detail — that is contained within the 

Bill, really what it gets down to is what you might have thought 

was not bad to begin with really is replaced with, the only 

comment is fluff. It really does absolutely nothing. 

 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

And we can go through it section by section, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would love to have the opportunity to do that. And when you 

look at . . . First and foremost, it talks about 30 days prior to the 

issuance of an election writ “. . . no Government ministry shall 

advertise in any manner with respect to the activities of the 

ministry.” But it is allowable subject only to emergency or 

compelling public safety information. So then I went back to 

the Bill, and I thought, well is there definitions for what‟s 

compelling public safety information, what‟s an emergency? I 

looked for any type of definition as to what‟s there, and there‟s 

nothing in the Bill. 

 

So then we looked farther, Mr. Speaker, and it speaks about the 

120 days prior to the issuance of the writ for a fixed date 

general election: “. . . no Government ministry shall spend . . . 

more than its average monthly amount for advertising.” Well 

we‟re going back over three months, and, Mr. Speaker, this is 

very easy to work around. All you have to do is crank up your 

spending for advertising prior to that date to increase your 

average and to have anything that you might like to do purely in 

the name of an emergency or compelling public safety 

information fall within the limits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill and . . . Actually the second reading 

speeches talked about or spoke to the issue of providing fairness 

of the electoral process. Well it‟s fine to talk about fairness, and 

it‟s fine to lay down some of these parameters and priorities in 

what the Bill supposedly restricts. But, Mr. Speaker, there is 

absolutely no penalties or recourse if any of this legislation is 

broken. 

 

And when we get into the bigger picture, we can look at past 

experience federally with fixed election dates. And we know 

that even though the Prime Minister broke his own law, called 

an election early for what it looks like now, pure chance of 

avoiding some issues of falling economy through having to deal 

with that in the Parliament of Canada, he chose to go with an 

early election. And while we didn‟t see any discussion during 

the election or prior to the election about deficits . . . In fact, the 

Prime Minister made comments about, there was no way they‟d 

be going into a deficit. And then within a week of the election 

being over, all of a sudden we‟re hearing discussions of a 

deficit. 

 

So you know when he was manipulating his own legislation to 

actually avoid making some tough decisions as government, 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at this, you think, what precludes 

that from happening here in Saskatchewan? We have the fixed 

election dates. Can they be manipulated and played with for 

purely political purposes? So when we look at this with the 

advertising and the restrictions, supposed restrictions that are 

put in place, there‟s absolutely no consequence if it‟s broken. 

 

And there‟s one part in here, and I have to look through my 

notes, but it speaks to — I think it‟s in the explanatory notes — 

and it speaks to solemn declarations that must be made. Talks 

about: 

 

Every person in Saskatchewan in charge of a broadcasting 

undertaking . . . or an undertaking that publishes in a 

newspaper, magazine or periodical in Saskatchewan shall 

file with the Chief Electoral Officer a solemn declaration 

setting out: 

whether or not information mentioned in this section has 

been published or broadcast . . . 

 

if any information has been published or broadcast, the 

name of the Government . . . [department] that requested 

the publication and the details of the publication. 

 

So these solemn declarations mentioned in this subsection must 

be filed within two months of the polling day for the election. 

 

But what‟s the consequence if any of these are contravened? 

Who does the calculation of what the average is? How long 

after an election are we going to see the actual details of what 

the calculations of the average monthly total for advertising has 

been — what it should have been, what it shouldn‟t have been? 

How long is it going to take before we see a calculation once 

the solemn declarations are actually submitted to the Chief 

Electoral Officer? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to some people they may be able to stand up and 

say that this somehow meets a type of election commitment that 

they made, but when we really get down to the nitty-gritty of it, 

it really doesn‟t mean anything. It has no substance to it and, 

Mr. Speaker, if the government is actually legitimately looking 

at any type of electoral reform, there are many other things they 

can do that wouldn‟t have the comment of fluff attached to 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is purely rhetoric, and it really isn‟t anything 

substantial that I can see. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve gone through 

it all. I‟ve read it all, tried to figure what‟s the issues — no 

consequence, no definitions attached to the Bill. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I will commit, before I totally disagree with the Bill, I 

will give it further review and I will allow my colleagues to be 

able to stand and make comments on the issues that they feel 

are there or are missing within the legislation itself. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many questions when it 

comes to this Bill: what it addresses but more importantly what 

it ignores. And if it actually achieves what the government is 

saying that it achieves, that just causes rise to many more 

questions. So, Mr. Speaker, what I would do now is adjourn 

debate so my colleagues will be able to comment further on the 

legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 59, The Election 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 61 — The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 



November 25, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

know one way to get applause in this House is to say that I‟m 

going to make some very brief remarks with respect to this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in case the public has forgotten, the Bill that‟s 

before us is to make some amendments to The Local 

Government Election Act. The Local Government Election Act 

provides a legal framework to enable all local governments — 

whether it‟s cities, towns, villages, northern municipalities, 

rural municipalities, and also school boards to hold their 

elections. We could understand there needs to be some rules 

and regulations with respect to these elections, and these rules 

and regulations spring from The Local Government Election 

Act. And what the government is proposing to do is to make 

some amendments to that Act. Now the minister, in moving the 

Bill, indicated that these would be minor, but I‟m not so sure. 

 

One of the changes that the minister is proposing is to allow, in 

the event of a by-election for mayor or reeve — a mayor in the 

case of a urban municipality, a reeve in the case of rural 

municipality — would enable councillors to run for the vacant 

position of mayor or reeve without stepping down from the seat 

they now hold. 

 

In general elections, one cannot run for both offices at the same 

time, but the minister says that there‟s a concern that‟s been 

expressed that if a number of councillors want to run for mayor, 

then their seats would have to become vacant in order for them 

to do that. Then you would have to have further elections to fill 

those vacant seats, and if enough councillors ran, then you 

would have a council that would not be able to constitute a 

quorum to conduct business. 

 

So it‟s an issue that, as explained, certainly could become a real 

issue, but we‟ll want to know from the minister as to whether or 

not this has in fact happened in municipalities and to what 

extent this is a real issue in Saskatchewan. And is it something 

that needs to be applied to all municipalities? Is it more of a 

concern, say in smaller municipalities, in smaller urban 

municipalities, in rural municipalities? Is it a concern for 

example with respect to our cities? And those are the kinds of 

questions that we‟ll be wanting to put to the minister at the 

appropriate time. 

 

One of the other changes that, on the face of it, we have 

absolutely no concern with is a proposal by the city of 

Saskatoon. Now the city of Saskatoon has a bylaw that require 

campaign contributions to be disclosed. So if someone‟s 

running for councillor, someone‟s running for mayor, the city of 

Saskatoon takes the position — pursuant to changes that were 

made before in the local government Act — that those who run 

should disclose contributions from whatever source. The 

question of where the money comes from to enable people to 

run in municipal elections is a real issue, especially when we 

look at zoning and planning issues in our larger cities, so I think 

the city of Saskatoon has acted wisely, given the enabling 

clauses in the local government Act to put in place then some 

requirement that campaign contributions be disclosed. 

 

But there is no real follow-up. And we‟re pleased to see from 

them now some suggestion as to what needs to be done if a 

candidate doesn‟t disclose this information, because there‟s no 

real effective way of monitoring that. So there‟s no real way to 

ensure compliance of that bylaw in Saskatoon so they‟re asking 

for an amendment that would allow them to withhold the 

candidate‟s deposit. 

 

When a person runs for office in our municipalities, and 

especially in our cities, there‟s some requirement that they put a 

deposit down to indicate that they‟re serious about running. It‟s 

not a huge sum but nevertheless would be some hundreds of 

dollars or $100 or so, so as to ensure that you‟re not just doing 

this on a whim; that you are taking it seriously. Saskatoon is 

saying we should withhold candidates‟ deposits, returning those 

deposits to people that run until and unless they‟ve complied 

with the stipulation and the bylaws for the reporting of 

campaign contributions. 

 

Whether or not that will be effective is a good question, but I 

think we‟ll have to continue to work with municipalities to go 

forward to get a better sense from them as to whether or not this 

particular amendment will help them to do that, or whether 

further changes will be required down the road. 

 

One of the other requirements in this legislation is a request by 

rural municipalities that they also be allowed to adopt or to put 

into place voters lists. It‟s not unusual for urban municipalities 

to develop voters lists to get a register, if you like, of those who 

are eligible to vote so that when you go to vote it‟s much easier 

than having to go through a whole identification process or a 

cumbersome identification process. And now a number of rural 

municipalities are also asking for that. 

 

I can understand why. We have had some controversial 

elections in some rural municipalities in Saskatchewan. I think 

the notion of a voters list to clearly determine upfront who may 

or may not be eligible would be welcomed by those 

municipalities as a way of reducing some of the conflicts that 

we‟ve seen in the past. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Probably the most controversial item that has concerned 

municipalities is not in fact something that‟s contained in the 

Bill. The minister indicates that the provincial government is 

not proceeding with a request from municipalities to move from 

a three-year term for urban and northern municipal and school 

board officials, because at this point those locally elected 

officials from urban municipalities, northern municipalities, and 

school boards are elected for a three-year term. 

 

Rural municipalities operate differently and their people are 

elected for two-year terms, but now the associations and those 

that are responsible from some of the urban municipalities 

primarily are requesting that we go from a three-year term to a 

four-year term. And they point out the fact that when people are 

elected to the provincial legislature, it‟s done for a four-year 

term, and they say, why should it be any differently for urban 

municipalities? And that‟s a valid question. 

 

And it‟s interesting the minister, in his remarks, in speaking to 

this when he moved the Bill, stated that, while there was 

support from the municipal and education sector, other 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2008 

stakeholders expressed concern. And I think we‟ll want to know 

as to who these other stakeholders are, that those stakeholders 

would be in a position to trump what I see as a collective 

decision by municipalities and education authorities to extend 

that term. And who is it that is so opposed to changing it from a 

three- to a four-year term, but that would then prevent the 

government from moving ahead on that? 

 

It‟s interesting that the minister would now express, how shall I 

say, hesitation about moving in that direction when certainly he, 

as a member of Regina City Council, would‟ve taken the 

position that we ought to be moving to a four-year term, but 

now is saying that we ought not to do that. So the question is, 

who is it that‟s able to convince the provincial government to 

not now proceed to a four-year term for municipalities? So 

we‟ll want to know about that at the appropriate time. 

 

We note, Mr. Speaker, that the minister and the government 

conducted extensive consultation with all of the organizations 

that represent municipalities, not just the organizations that 

represent the elected officials, such as Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, but also with the associations that represent the 

officials that work for those local governments, such as the 

Association of City Clerks, the Urban Municipal Administrators 

Association, and the Rural Municipal Administrators‟ 

Association, and so on. 

 

So there has been extensive consultation on some of these items 

that are now coming forward and items that are not, according 

to the government, now coming forward. And we‟re pleased to 

see that that extensive consultation is taking place. But I point 

this out, that it has been extensive and that we, as an opposition, 

would not be doing our job if we did not ourselves undertake 

some consultative process to ensure that these are the right 

issues that need to be dealt with at this time. 

 

So now it‟s our turn to consult, Mr. Speaker. And pending that, 

I will at this point move to adjourn debate in this matter. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 61, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2008.  

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the work of the Standing Committee on the Economy, I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn in order to facilitate the working 

of committees. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:49.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1827 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1827 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1827 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1827 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1827 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1827 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1828 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1828 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1828 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1828 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1828 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1828 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1829 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1829 

 Alzheimer Awareness Reception 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1829 

 An Honourable Calling 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1829 

 Festival of Trees Supports Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1830 

 High School Students Raise Addictions Awareness 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1830 

 Saskatchewan Shines 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1830 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1831 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1831 

 Support for Child Care 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1832 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1832 

 Support for Northern Communities 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1833 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1833 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1834 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1834 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1834 

 Crop Insurance 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1835 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1835 

 Relocation Costs 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1835 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1835 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Workplace Smoking Ban 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1836 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1836 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1836 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1837 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1837 

 



 

 Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1838 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1839 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1840 

 Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1841 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1845 

 Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1847 

 Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1848 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1851 

 Bill No. 52 — The Trustee Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1852 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1853 

 Bill No. 56 — The Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Trustee Act, 2008 
  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1853 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1854 

 Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1854 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1855 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1857 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


