




















































Hansard: May 13, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 42A  TUESDAY, MAY 13, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1279 

 May 13, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you it’s 

certainly my pleasure and my honour to introduce a very 

important and special guest to myself here in the Assembly 

today, and that would be my mother, seated up in your gallery. 

 

And I’ll ask my mother to wave to us here. And I know my 

mother’s arranged to be away from her work at Scotiabank here 

this afternoon to come in and sit in on Assembly. And I ask all 

members to extend a greeting. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m requesting leave to give 

an extended introduction, from members of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has requested leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 

pleasure today to introduce some very special people that have 

joined us in your gallery. There are there four distinguished 

guests. 

 

It’s a pleasure to introduce Captain Wes Gramiak, detachment 

commander, Canadian Forces recruiting detachment, 

Saskatoon. Captain Gramiak is also Chair of the Central 

Saskatchewan Military Family Resource Centre in Dundurn. 

Joining him is Master Corporal Tom Kennedy who is also here 

today with us in the House. He is with the air traffic control 

section at 15 Wing in Moose Jaw and chairs the Moose Jaw 

Military Family Resource Centre. Also with us today is Mr. 

Regan Gorski. He is the executive director of the Central 

Saskatchewan Military Resource Centre in Moose Jaw, and 

finally — last but not least — Richard Cuttell, executive 

director of the Central Saskatchewan Military Family Resource 

Centre in Dundurn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these gentlemen have provided each member of 

this Assembly with a yellow Support Our Troops lapel pin, and 

I hope all members will wear these pins with pride. 

 

In addition these men have been instrumental in advancing a 

request for the observance of Canadian Forces Day in 

Saskatchewan. And it is my great pleasure today to proclaim 

just such a day here in our great province, that we would 

officially proclaim June 1 as Canadian Forces Day in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, our government has taken a great 

deal of interest in protecting the jobs, as did the previous 

administration, of reservists who serve our country outside of 

our province and who need time away. We join with everyone 

in Saskatchewan who feels justifiably proud of the sacrifice and 

commitment that has been shown, that has been demonstrated 

by not just reservists but of course members of the regular 

forces as well. 

 

One individual that we in the Legislative Assembly should be 

particularly proud of is an employee of this building, John 

Saltasuk, who works in the House business and research office 

in Executive Council. John left Friday for two weeks of reserve 

training in Brandon, Manitoba. This summer he’ll be leaving 

again for New Brunswick for further training. We salute John’s 

commitment to the country, to the reservist program, and we 

know that he is symbolic of many, many others like him — 

women and men right across our province and right across the 

country. Today’s proclamation and our celebration of Canadian 

Forces Day really is just a very small, small token of the 

appreciation and respect that we all have for those who are 

prepared literally to risk everything in the defence of freedom, 

in defence of our country. 

 

I should note as well that the Central Saskatchewan Military 

Family Resource Centre is encouraging people in the province 

to also observe what they are calling Red Shirt Fridays. By 

wearing something red on Fridays, each of us can show some 

support for Canadian troops currently serving us around the 

world. 

 

I wonder if all members will join with me in welcoming these 

very special guests to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier in welcoming our guests here today. I want to take 

the honour that I have of being here in this Assembly to, on 

behalf of families of members serving in the mission in 

Afghanistan, to express our appreciation and gratitude for the 

work done by the military family resource people. And it’s 

appreciated, I know, by many who have a spouse, a parent, or a 

child serving overseas in the mission in Afghanistan. And I 

want to, on their behalf, extend my personal welcome as well as 

the welcome of the opposition to our guests. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce a group of grade 5 students from the 

Delisle Elementary School. They’re in the west gallery. With 

these grade 5 students are teachers, Mrs. Dreher, Mr. Normand, 

and chaperones, Ms. Parker, Mrs. Vanderveen, Mrs. Nickel, 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2008 

Mrs. Hamm, Mrs. Derksen, Mrs. Middleton, Mrs. Lee, Mrs. 

Wiebe, Mrs. Worth, and Mrs. Gaucher. We are going to get 

together later for a photo and then have a visit in room 218, and 

I’m sure there will be many, very interesting questions to me 

about the role of an MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and the legislature. So please join me in welcoming 

these students from the Delisle Elementary School. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly 25 students from St. Marguerite Bourgeoys School in 

my riding, Mr. Speaker. These young people are here today to 

see the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, and we’ll have 

an opportunity later to have a visit and ask questions. It’s very 

nice to see them here today with their teacher, Mr. Bradley. So 

thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I also would like to introduce to you and through to all 

the members of the legislature 10 grade 10 students from 

Melville Comprehensive School and their teacher, Stuart 

Wilson. I’ll have the opportunity to have a photo taken, and 

we’ll have a meeting a little bit later. So I ask all members to 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier and my colleague 

to welcome the gentlemen here from the family resource 

centres, both the central Saskatchewan-based 15 Wing Dundurn 

. . . or 17 Wing Dundurn — I apologize — but also the 

gentleman from Moose Jaw based at 15 Wing. 

 

I know while we recognize these gentlemen today and 

recognize the service that they provide to families, I can speak 

quite clearly that I know the Moose Jaw family resource centre 

provides services to families 365 days of the year and its 

important support and important resources for those that may be 

separated from family members and join us in Moose Jaw, I 

know, from right across the world. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to join and welcome these 

gentlemen to our House today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

introduce to you or perhaps reintroduce to you an individual 

seated in your galley, and that is Mr. Patrick Button. Patrick is a 

member of SLIP, the Saskatchewan legislative internship 

program, and he’s just completed a term with the member from 

Yorkton. The interns have switched sides, and Patrick will be 

serving with me until the end of the program. 

 

It’s been just a short little while that Patrick has been working 

with me, but he’s already proven to be a very bright individual, 

someone with a good work ethic and has already helped me out 

in a number of ways. Patrick just finished an economics degree 

at the U of R [University of Regina], and he’ll be headed to the 

University of Toronto to begin graduate studies in the fall. I 

wish Patrick all the best as he is on the home stretch of the 

internship program here in the legislature. I’d ask all members 

to join me in re-welcoming Patrick. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you a couple people in the gallery. I have an 

intern as well. His name is Justin Redekop. We haven’t spent a 

lot of time together yet, but he appears to be a highly intelligent, 

energetic, and hard-working young man, always pleasant. 

 

Another person in the gallery is Amanda Vindevogel. She is a 

close family friend. I’ve known her since she was knee-high to 

a grasshopper, and the man with her is affectionately known as 

the boyfriend. And I would like to welcome them to their 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to as well 

reintroduce my intern for this half of the internship program. 

Dwayne Meisner is up in your gallery, and of course they’ve 

just come back from an incredible trip to England and points in 

that area. So I don’t know how much more we can share, but 

it’s going to be worthwhile. 

 

And I appreciate the good work that he’s done in terms of his 

assistance to date and of course his insights into the kind of 

things that are happening around here. It’s very important to 

have some fresh eyes. So welcome Dwayne. I’d ask all 

members to help me welcome Dwayne to this House. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members as well I would like to introduce 

three individuals who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery at the 

front: Al Kirchgessner and his sister, Agnes, from Saskatoon 

and their brother, Ernest, who’s come in from Victoria. And 

Ernest tells me that he’s really got into this watching the 

proceedings in the Legislative Chamber in BC [British 

Columbia] and takes note of what’s going on in Saskatchewan. 



May 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

So join me in bidding a warm welcome to the Kirchgessners. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition that deals with the shabby way the 

employees and our South Hill community was treated with the 

closure of our South Hill liquor store. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

signed by individuals concerned about the withdrawal of 

government funding from the Station 20 West project. And the 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Signed by individuals from every neighbourhood in Saskatoon, 

and Delisle and Outlook are also represented, Mr. Speaker. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have the 

privilege today to present a petition on behalf of residents of 

The Battlefords. The petition deals with the means testing of the 

seniors’ drug plan. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners acknowledge 

that earlier there was a seniors’ drug plan which capped the 

costs of prescription drugs for all seniors at $15 per 

prescription. They therefore: 

 

Call upon the Legislative Assembly to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to means test seniors 

and ensure that all seniors continue to have access to 

affordable prescription drugs. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan which continues to be a major, major issue. I’ll 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability hold open public consultations for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

in opposition to the government’s Bill 5, The Public Service 

Essential Services Act and Bill 6, The Trade Union Amendment 

Act. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed from people from Watrous, Young, 

Lanigan, and Moose Jaw. I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Youth Expedition to the High Arctic 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

have the pleasure today of informing this Assembly of the 

British Council Canada’s Cape Farewell youth voyage 

expedition to the high Arctic in September 2008. 

 

This innovative education program is designed to raise 

awareness of climate change and its implications. Participants 

are Canadian youth age 15 to 17 from high schools representing 

every province and territory in Canada. Schools that are 

selected assemble a team to support a chosen student on the 

expedition. This student will complete scientific and creative art 

projects with the assistance of top scientists and renowned 

artists on the expedition. 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2008 

Proposals were received from schools all over the country. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great pride that I inform the Assembly 

that Invermay School has been chosen as Saskatchewan’s 2008 

representative for the Cape Farewell project. All of the students 

and staff including science teacher Ron Adair, art teacher Penny 

Castle, and principal Gail Krawetz are extremely excited about 

the opportunity to participate in such a worthy endeavour. The 

impact of Arctic climate change is being felt worldwide, and the 

students and staff of Invermay School should be commended 

for wanting to learn more about how this challenge can be met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

students and staff of Invermay School for contributing to efforts 

to solve one of the most urgent problems of our time. We wish 

them well with their Cape Farewell adventure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Saskatoon Regional Youth Historica Heritage Fair 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to attend the 

Saskatoon regional youth historica heritage fair on May 2. 

There were over 100 projects by grade 4 to 9 students from 

Saskatoon public, greater Saskatoon Catholic, Prairie Spirit, 

Sun West, and Ahtahkakoop Cree Nation. I thoroughly enjoyed 

viewing the projects and visiting with the students. 

 

I would like to congratulate the following plaque winners. In 

the agriculture category, Kylee Junop; archaeology, Nicholas 

Gabruch; architectural heritage, Elizabeth Shirley; the arts, 

Andrew Slusar; business and industry, Eric Westad; Canadian 

leadership and citizenship, Samantha Huckerby; Canadian 

sports history, Tess Thiessen; design award, Emily Polanik and 

Jaden Senger; engineering technology, Jenna Polischuk; First 

Nations history, Lissa Kiss; Franco-Canadian history and 

culture, Austin Buxton; heritage buildings, Sophie Reisinger; 

Métis history, Morgan Ryan-Roe; nature and natural habitat, 

Austin Shirley; rural families, Shay Brehm; Saskatchewan 

history and folklore, Troy Baschuk; Saskatchewan heritage, 

Jordana Day; stories of childhood, Meaghan Clubley; and in the 

other category, Kristen Wall, Richard Proctor, Jade Spoonheim, 

and Sebastian Belanger-Zemluk. 

 

The Laurier LaPierre medals are awarded to Sarah Ball, Patrick 

Langer, and Connor Wonko. 

 

The two students who will represent Saskatchewan at nationals 

in Victoria this July are Silas Black whose project is on Eleanor 

Yates, and Kaitlyn Chomitsky whose project is on Dr. Banting 

and diabetes. 

 

I would like to congratulate all the students, their teachers and 

parents, and especially teachers George Charpentier and Wally 

Dyck for their hard work in organizing the fair. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Weyburn Red Wings Coach Marks Milestone Victory 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today it 

is my pleasure to pay tribute to a legend in Saskatchewan 

hockey circles. The man I speak of is Dwight McMillan, head 

coach of the Weyburn Red Wings. Dwight began coaching the 

Red Wings in 1972 and has guided them to many winning 

seasons, including national championships in 1984 and 2005. 

 

He has coached and mentored hundreds of young men over the 

years including former Los Angeles King head coach Barry 

Melrose and our very own Minister of Health. I would also note 

that the member from Lloydminster is Coach McMillan’s 

nephew. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year on February 1, Coach McMillan’s 

Red Wings defeated the La Ronge Ice Wolves by a score of 4 to 

1, but it wasn’t any ordinary win. That victory marked Coach 

McMillan’s 1,000th victory as a head coach. Mr. Speaker, to 

put this feat into perspective, it is believed that only two other 

coaches have accumulated 1,000 victories at one level of 

hockey — legendary NHL [National Hockey League] coach 

Scotty Bowman and Ottawa 67’s Brian Kilrea. 

 

Mr. Speaker, throughout his career as head coach, Dwight has 

been also busy away from the rink raising two sons with his 

wife, Diane, and working full-time for EnCana and 

PanCanadian, retiring in 2005 after 38 years. Mr. Speaker, in 

typical fashion Coach McMillan was quick to share the praise 

with others — his players, assistants, the Red Wing 

organization and its supporters, and his family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, I 

offer my congratulations to Dwight McMillan, his wife Diane, 

and their family on reaching this incredible milestone. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Hospital Home Lottery Winner 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, today I’m very pleased to share 

a Saskatchewan actor’s and a constituent of Saskatoon Nutana’s 

good fortune. Last week the winner of the Saskatoon’s Hospital 

Home Lottery was announced. An elated Kent Allen and his 

wife Kathy emerged triumphant to receive the keys to an 

$850,000 show home in Saskatoon’s Willows neighbourhood. 

 

The Allens toured their new home before TV cameras, so on the 

suppertime newscast that night, we could all watch the joy of 

Kent and his family. In addition to the grand prize home, the 

family won a 2008 Cadillac and $10,000 in cash. Mr. Speaker, 

proceeds from the sale of tickets to the Hospital Home Lottery 

will go to the Irene and Leslie Dube Centre for Mental Health. 

 

Kent is an accomplished local actor who is famous for his 

recent role as John Evans in the television mini-series The 

Englishman’s Boy. Kent has also had a role in another TV 

mini-series The Tommy Douglas Story. Kent has appeared in 

episodes of our beloved Corner Gas and in numerous movies 



May 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

produced in Saskatchewan and abroad. Mr. Speaker, we are 

truly lucky to have such an accomplished actor living in our 

province, and I would ask all of my colleagues in this 

Assembly, to join me in congratulating the Allen family on their 

recent, great good fortune. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Leading the Country in Economy Growth 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan leads the 

country again. Statistics Canada has released its latest 

international export numbers, and Saskatchewan leads the pack 

with 36 per cent increase when you compare first quarter ’08 to 

first quarter ’07 numbers. Our neighbour Alberta is way back 

with 22 per cent growth, and every other Canadian province is 

down, Mr. Speaker. This increase means $6.3 billion in the 

pockets of the Saskatchewan people. That is only the latest in a 

long string of numbers for this province. 

 

In recent weeks we have heard of record land sales. We hear 

that Canada will lead the country in retail sales, construction 

activity, and population growth. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

will lead the country in economic growth this year. Wages are 

at record highs and unemployment at record lows. We have 

been called Canada’s new it province. 

 

It says a lot, Mr. Speaker, about the change in direction the 

people of this province chose on November 7. Before that day, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were hungry for 

change, and they got it. They elected a government that keeps 

its promises, wants to grow the economy, and ensures everyone 

shares in the benefits. 

 

They elected a government committed to learning from the 

challenges of other jurisdictions who have experienced rapid 

growth. Mr. Speaker, the only thing that’s going down in 

Saskatchewan these days is the support for the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to 

remind everyone of Saskatoon’s, in fact our province’s, most 

favourite festival that kicks off our wonderful Saskatchewan 

summer — the SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival, June 20 to 

29, its 22nd. 

 

It’s starting out in grand style with legendary musical group, the 

Neville Brothers, at the Bessborough Gardens Mainstage, as 

part of the festival’s opening night party. “We couldn’t be 

happier about having the Neville Brothers open the 2008 

Festival,” said festival manager, Kevin Tobin. He goes on to 

say, “What a way to start the Festival out right!” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatoon will be swinging into summer with 

numerous concerts throughout the city, free stages, and 

numerous workshops. And concerts will be happening in 

Regina and North Battleford as well. 

 

But what keeps this festival moving though are the volunteers 

behind the scenes. Some 250 people will be making sure the 

music fills the air without any problems. They deserve a lot of 

credit. Thank you. 

 

“The Festival draws people from all across Saskatchewan, as 

well as visitors from around North America,” said Lyle Bolen, 

president of the festival. He notes that the festival’s community 

engagement, artistic diversity, and strong growth, as well as the 

many economic benefits it delivers to Saskatchewan builds a 

vibrant cultural community in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in congratulating the 

SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival on yet another great year. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Severance Package 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the cover-up 

continues. Now the NDP is refusing to release the letter it sent 

authorizing a $131,000 severance payment to former NDP chief 

of staff, Jim Fodey. What are they hiding? If they’ve been 

telling the truth about Mr. Fodey’s departure, what are they 

hiding? If Mr. Fodey is truly entitled to this $131,000 severance 

payment, then what are they hiding? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP covered up the truth about their caucus 

fraud scandal 16 years ago, and they’re still doing it today. The 

NDP claim to be concerned about openness and accountability. 

They claim to be concerned about the government changing the 

approval process for contracts over $50,000, yet they flat out 

refuse to release the letter authorizing this huge severance 

payment to an NDP staff member who supposedly resigned. 

Typical NDP, say one thing and do another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has turned a $6,000 fraud scandal and 

cover-up into a $131,000 bill to Saskatchewan taxpayers. At the 

very least, they owe Saskatchewan people an honest 

explanation. They owe Saskatchewan people the truth. Will the 

Leader of the Opposition show that he actually still is the leader 

of the party, do the right thing, and release the letter? If not, 

what are they hiding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, it’s been brought to my attention 

we have a few other guests in the Chamber with us, and I would 

ask leave to introduce these guests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — We have joining us today from 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2008 

communications and technology services branch, Holly Schafer 

and Laura MacDonald — they’re in the Speaker’s gallery — 

and from the Legislative Library, Kim Heidebrecht and Keith 

Willis. Laura and Keith are students currently on work terms 

with the LAS [Legislative Assembly Service]. And we welcome 

you to the Chamber today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Allegations of Conflict of Interest 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, SaskTel employees and the people of Saskatchewan 

have some questions for the minister about his plans for 

SaskTel. 

 

The official opposition has been told that SaskTel is diverting 

all SaskTel Max and high-speed Internet installation services to 

Jump.ca. Can the minister confirm that Jump dot will be taking 

over SaskTel Max and high-speed installation and inform the 

House whether he or the board made the decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

assure the hon. member that I didn’t make no such decision. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the contract, 

Jump.ca is benefiting from new business being directed its way. 

As the minister surely knows, the chairperson, Grant Kook, 

who the minister appointed as Chair of the SaskTel board, is 

also the CEO [chief executive officer] of Golden Opportunities 

Fund. 

 

The Golden Opportunities Fund has $2 million invested in 

Jump.ca. Well Golden Opportunities prospectus states that the 

fund manager is eligible for financial incentives if the fund does 

especially well. 

 

To the minister: the board Chair that the minister appointed has 

the potential to benefit financially from any move that sees 

business go to Jump.ca. What does the minister say about this 

possible conflict of interest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can tell 

all members of this Hon. Assembly that Mr. Grant Kook does 

run Golden Opportunities, a labour-sponsored venture capital 

fund in Saskatchewan. It has about $100 million under 

administration. His fund has benefited Saskatchewan in many, 

many ways. 

 

I was very, very pleased when we approached Mr. Kook and 

asked him to extend his public service to Saskatchewan people 

by accepting the very important job of Chair of SaskTel’s board 

of directors. I can assure the member opposite that Mr. Kook’s 

intentions are to benefit Saskatchewan and to benefit SaskTel in 

every endeavour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Grant Kook is not the only 

one with a financial interest in Jump.ca. And according to the 

April 20, 2007 public disclosure statement, the minister 

responsible for the Crown holds investments in the Golden 

Opportunities Fund. As I’ve mentioned, Golden Opportunities 

is set to profit from work diverted to the SaskTel, a Crown that 

the minister is responsible for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is simple. To the minister: how does 

he explain his possible conflict of interest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the 

members opposite and all members of this Hon. Assembly that 

yes, I am one of the holders of the Golden Opportunities Fund 

which is one of two labour-sponsored venture funds in 

Saskatchewan that benefit our entire province. 

 

I can tell the hon. member that there’s many, many thousands of 

individuals who have benefited from their management and also 

many companies within Saskatchewan who have benefited from 

this. I am very surprised at the line of questioning, and I would 

be interested to see if the member opposite will be following 

this line of question outside the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the many, many thousands 

of investors in Golden Opportunities are not the ministers 

responsible for SaskTel. So let’s recap, Mr. Speaker. In January 

the Minister Responsible for the Crowns appointed Grant Kook 

as the SaskTel board Chair. Mr. Kook is CEO of the Golden 

Opportunities Fund which has $2 million invested in Jump.ca. 



May 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

We’ve been told Jump.ca is to perform all future SaskTel Max 

and high-speed Internet service installations. That work could 

greatly improve the profits of Jump.ca and therefore the Golden 

Opportunities Fund which the minister also has investments in, 

according to public records. 

 

To the minister: there are lots of unanswered questions about 

what, if any, conflict of interest may be at work here. And what 

is the minister going to do about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

assure the hon. member that yes, I do have shares within 

Golden Opportunities and they have been properly disclosed 

with the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. And I would hazard 

to guess that probably most members of this Assembly share 

that investment as well. 

 

I can tell the member opposite that I also have investments 

within Potash Corporation, Cameco, and other Saskatchewan 

. . . because I believe in Saskatchewan and that’s where I 

believe that the money should be put to work. And I can assure 

the member that there is no conflict of interest, perceived or 

otherwise, in regards to those funds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Funding for the Arts 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for the people of 

our province, the minister’s three and a half million dollar slush 

fund, developed at the expense of the Saskatchewan Arts Board, 

doesn’t only affect the Arts Board. Because of these cuts the 

Saskatchewan Motion Picture Association also will see its 

operation budget reduced. Additionally, we’ve learned that 

SMPIA’s [Saskatchewan Motion Picture Association] proposal 

for funding of a career development program has been declined. 

Mr. Speaker, SMPIA is an organization that has helped 

promote, develop, and maintain our film industry in our 

province for over 20 years. 

 

To the minister: with $2 billion in the bank, why would she 

make cuts to an organization that’s vital to the film industry in 

our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you for the question. In response to 

the issue with cutting of Crew Call, it is our determination in 

the ministry that SaskFilm is our lead agency on training 

initiatives for people within the film industry. We are taking the 

lead. We believe that SaskFilm is the one to offer that particular 

program, and they do so quite adequately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — It’s not ironic that this news comes as a 

surprise to SaskFilm. It’s the way they’ve developed their 

programs — on the fly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it looks like a three and a half million dollar slush 

fund wasn’t enough for the minister. Now she’s taking funding 

away from an industry in our province that’s in the middle of 

unprecedented growth. They’re not shy about their beliefs that 

the arts community shouldn’t get funding from government, but 

cutting money to an ed program in a non-profit organization 

goes beyond that to destructive. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t about 

budgetary constraints or the need for a framework; it’s about 

her ideology. 

 

To the minister: will she restore funding that was taken from a 

vital industry in our province? Will she restore the funding 

she’s cut from SMPIA? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said before in this 

House that we are as a ministry stepping back involving . . . 

We’re going to involve stakeholders within the industry for 

consultations to ensure that we put together a proper framework 

to ensure the viability of the arts and cultural sector in this 

province. 

 

We are also following a direction as provided by the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Public Policy to develop this 

framework, because this province under that government did 

not, did not have a proper framework. Mr. Speaker, we are 

taking it on good authority that what we are doing is the right 

thing to do, to step back and take a thoughtful approach to this 

very vital industry to ensure sustainability into the future, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is beginning to look 

like a pattern. In one year, they sabotaged status of the artist 

legislation. They’ve ripped three and a half million dollars 

dedicated to the Saskatchewan Arts Board so that the minister 

can develop a slush fund. And now, while this government sits 

on over $2 billion, they’ve cut funding for ed programs at 

SMPIA, programs that have been offered for nearly a decade. It 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2008 

certainly hasn’t taken long for the Saskatchewan Party to show 

their contempt for arts and culture in our province. 

 

To the minister: what other organizations is she targeting? What 

other groups are on her funding cut hit list? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, our commitment in the 

platform just prior to the election was that we were going to 

ensure and maintain funding to the arts and cultural sector. 

Promise made, promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Personnel Changes in the Public Service 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we have been asking questions 

since day one about long-time civil servants and their treatment 

by this government. Mr. Speaker, many civil servants that were 

let go by this government have not yet been afforded fair 

severance packages, and the government refuses to negotiate in 

good faith with these individuals, Mr. Speaker, forcing them to 

go to the courts to look for settlement. 

 

To the government: why are you refusing to negotiate with 

these civil servants in a fair and equitable manner? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the member opposite knows full well that individuals who are 

released because of a change of government, who are released 

without cause, have rights to severance packages. Those 

severance packages are negotiated between legal people that 

will be hired by the individual involved or by the government. 

 

These negotiations are continuing, Mr. Speaker. There may be 

some impasses and someone decides that they wish to go to a 

court of law. That is the rights within a democratic society, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has a habit of 

appointing their friends to high places. Many of those friends 

are from the former Devine administration. Gren 

Smith-Windsor was appointed by the government as acting 

deputy minister of Health. Many questions about the 

appointment were asked by many people, especially since his 

termination as CEO of the Prince Albert Parkland Health 

Region in 2005. 

 

The Premier defended that decision by saying it was not a 

permanent appointment but simply an acting position until they 

did a national search for a deputy minister. To the government: 

will the new deputy minister be appointed soon or is the 

government simply going to appoint Gren Smith-Windsor to 

this position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe in the fall session these questions were asked at that 

time and answered at that time. An acting deputy minister has 

been appointed for the Ministry of Health replacing 

long-serving John Wright, absolutely. A search has been taking 

place over the last number of months, a nationwide search. And 

I believe that the list has been shortened and I think a 

permanent deputy minister for Health will be named very soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we understand the Ministry of 

Social Services is not filling vacant positions in income 

security. The minister’s failed attempt at restructuring may have 

caused her some budgetary problems. Will the minister commit 

to filling those vacancies or is she using the vacancies as a 

backdoor method to follow through with her plan of 

restructuring? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize . . . Order. Before I 

recognize the minister, I just want to remind members to direct 

the questions through the Chair. I recognize the Minister of 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have taken 

direction from my deputy minister when vacancies need to be 

filled. I have done nothing to fill positions or prevent them from 

being filled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the civil service continues to wait 

for the next round of firings to occur. They know the end is not 

yet here. To the government: when can we expect the next 

round of civil service firings? 



May 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated in this 

Assembly many times, the initial transition phase is primarily 

over. We have asked ministers who are now reviewing staff, 

who are reviewing vacancy positions that have occurred, Mr. 

Speaker . . . In the entire civil service, both within the Crowns 

and within the government ministries, there are over 20,000 

employees, Mr. Speaker. And through a process of attrition, 

through a process of retirement, there is about a change of 1,500 

employees on an annual basis, Mr. Speaker. So that means over 

100 changes are made monthly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there will be changes. I can assure the member 

opposite there may be changes within ministries in terms of 

people who are evaluated by the deputy ministers and by the 

process that’s in place. And the members will find out if those 

changes will occur over the course of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The Deputy 

Premier indicates to us that the transition phase is primarily 

over, Mr. Speaker. Well that doesn’t give a lot of people great 

comfort, Mr. Speaker. Could he please define for us what 

primarily over means? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we know that the former government, the NDP, in 1991 I think, 

took about two and a half years to complete their transition 

phase, Mr. Speaker — two and a half years. So for that member 

to stand there and say what does primarily mean, it means that 

the transition team is nearly finished. 

 

There are still some evaluations that are taking place. There are 

still some positions that need to be filled, Mr. Speaker. And 

those will continue under the direction of the Deputy Premier 

and the Premier as we work towards creating a civil service in 

this province that we can be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Gasoline Prices 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we interestingly heard last week 

that despite having promised when in opposition to cut the gas 

tax in the province of Saskatchewan if the world price of oil 

exceeded $60 a barrel, now apparently the government does not 

believe that it needs to be concerned about the price of gas at 

the pumps. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got analysts telling us that 

the gas prices are projecting upwards. And we learned over the 

course of the weekend, Mr. Speaker, that in fact pump 

measurements in this country, in this province may not be in 

fact accurate. 

 

Well last week the Minister of Finance told the House that he 

and his government were monitoring the situation. Well I’ll tell 

you what, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister of Finance monitors his 

growing treasury, people’s pocketbooks are being squeezed. So 

my question is for the Premier: how high does the price of gas 

need to be before his government will take some action? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. 

member for the question. First of all, we are seeing certainly 

higher energy costs right across the piece. There are higher 

utility bills being dealt with by people across the country. And 

certainly gas prices are on the rise. 

 

We here in Saskatchewan are fortunate to at least partially 

benefit from high energy costs because, of course, the hon. 

member is right — revenues to the government increase. This 

government is carefully monitoring the situation. This 

government is committed to this basic principle, that the people 

of the province should and will share in the prosperity of 

Saskatchewan, that this government will use those revenues to 

make important investments — like $60 million today for the 

St. Mary’s School and an affordable housing project and, yes, 

like relief for Saskatchewan families. 

 

There will be the opportunity perhaps for long-term debt 

reduction. These issues I know our MLAs are going to be 

talking about throughout the summer. And I’m interested in 

some more specific ideas from the opposition as well. How 

much would they like the gas tax to be reduced? And what else, 

what other ideas do they have for the revenue the province now 

sees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, oh how, oh how things 

have changed. Back when the price of gas, Mr. Speaker, when 

the price of gas was just peaking over $1, here’s what the Sask 

Party members opposite had to say. The Minister of Enterprise 

and Innovation said, quote, “Saskatchewan motorists are upset 

and angry about high gas prices.” The Minister of Government 

Services said, quote, “The government is getting rich from oil 

revenues, but Saskatchewan drivers are getting nailed every 

time they go to the pumps.” And the Leader of the Sask Party, 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2008 

now Premier said, quote, “Saskatchewan people deserve a 

break.” 

 

Well it’s apparent they’ll say anything in opposition; and now 

in government, it’s do nothing. So the Premier apparently has 

dropped his plan to reduce the provincial gas tax. Does he have 

a plan then to help people who are struggling — whether they 

be families, whether they be farmers, whether they be business 

people — does he have a specific plan to help people with the 

high cost of fuel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for the question. I can remember when those debates were 

taking place here in the Legislative Assembly. The opposition 

at the time came forward with some very specific ideas, some 

specific numbers. We did quite say, very publicly by the way, 

and apparently with the agreement of the NDP, that gas tax 

relief was not perhaps the best way to provide relief for 

Saskatchewan people. It neither sent the right message with 

respect to conservation and the environment, and neither did it 

provide broad-based relief for Saskatchewan people who face 

high costs. 

 

But at the time there was some specific proposals put forward 

by this party. So I’d ask the hon. member again, he must 

certainly have a specific proposal in mind. If he has changed his 

mind, if he has changed his mind and now believes that this 

kind of relief is the right kind of public policy alternative, we’d 

like to hear the specifics. 

 

In the meantime, in the meantime Saskatchewan families are 

benefiting from a government that’s committed to fixing the 

infrastructure deficit we inherited from there. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re also demonstrating, even today, we are committed to 

ensuring that the people of his constituency at St. Mary’s 

School, through housing and a brand new school, share in the 

prosperity of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I wrote a letter to 

the Prime Minister of Canada. I said to the Prime Minister in 

my letter, about the same time this Premier was promising to 

cut the gas tax for motorists in Saskatchewan, the Prime 

Minister was . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, at the same time this Premier, 

now Premier, was promising to cut the gas tax for 

Saskatchewan motorists, his friend Stephen Harper was 

committing the federal Conservative Party to reducing the GST 

[goods and services tax] on the amount of the cost of a litre of 

gas, anything over 85 cents. 

 

So I’ve written the Prime Minister this morning to say it’s about 

time he kept his promise and give even this small bit of relief to 

the motorists of Canada, the motorists of Saskatchewan. 

Furthermore, I’ve said to the Prime Minister that it seems to us 

appropriate that all of the fuel tax being collected by the federal 

government in Saskatchewan ought to be returned to the people 

of Saskatchewan for our infrastructure and the maintenance of 

our highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then I ask the Premier, would he do this much? 

Would he join with me today in contacting his friend Stephen 

Harper, the Prime Minister of Canada, demanding that the 

Prime Minister at least keep his promise to the people of 

Canada and return to the people of Saskatchewan all of the fuel 

taxes that is being collected in our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the hon. member for the 

question. We certainly agree that a tax on a tax is not the right 

practice for any government. In fact I remember prior to being 

chosen as leader of the opposition, as an MLA I wrote a similar 

letter to the minister at the time, the Finance minister, Mr. 

Martin. And of course no change was forthcoming. The change 

has not yet occurred. And certainly applying the GST to other 

fuel taxes doesn’t make a lot of sense. 

 

I note that the hon. member has said he also put in his letter 

how he wants the federal government to make sure that the 

money from the federal tax stays in the province. And, I mean, 

certainly this idea has some merit as well. 

 

But I’m not sure that’s the right member to write that letter 

because it is the history of that party and that leader that they 

would take this gas tax from Saskatchewan motorists — in the 

millions and millions of dollars — but they would not put it in 

the highways in the province. And so we were left with that 

billion dollar pothole people talked about in the campaign. 

 

I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the province 

appreciate this government’s approach, for every dime of gas 

tax and more will go to fix the roads in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier may want to be 

reminded that it is the law in Saskatchewan that every cent of 

fuel tax collected goes to the highways — that law put in by the 

New Democratic Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier will say anything in 

opposition and now when consumers in this province — you 

name it, families, working people, farmers, business people, 

people looking forward to summer vacation — are facing these 



May 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1289 

kinds of prices at the pumps; we’ve apparently got pumps that 

aren’t measuring properly; we’ve got a federal government that 

won’t keep its promise. 

 

Will he not, at least, today join us — he can phone, he can write 

— contact the federal government, lower that GST and give us 

back the money that’s being collected in Saskatchewan? Will he 

at least do that much? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the budget is full of 

measures that this government has taken to make sure that the 

people of Saskatchewan are sharing in the prosperity that we 

see. It was in this budget where we saw an historic $5 million 

investment to food banks and CBOs [community-based 

organization] to invest in life skills and employment training. It 

is in this budget where we saw an historic investment with 

respect to addictions treatment, an historic investment in school 

facilities, an historically large investment in health care 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was in this government’s budget . . . well in fact 

it was this government’s action today with respect to next 

year’s budget, that we would fix a problem that has gone 

unattended by now two successive former premiers who 

represented Riversdale, and that’s a brand new school at St. 

Mary’s, and a brand new affordable housing project, Mr. 

Speaker, for that particular constituency. 

 

All of that at a time of unprecedented growth that should have 

members opposite a little happier than they are, frankly. The job 

numbers are out. We broke another record, over 8,000 new 

jobs. We’re leading in export, not just the rest of the country — 

we’re beating Alberta while the other country’s actually 

backing up. This is the place to be — in Saskatchewan right 

now — and the only group that hasn’t figured it out is the 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 24, The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 24, The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

that Bill No. 24, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. It’s carried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — On division. 

 

The Speaker: — On division. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 



1290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 13, 2008 

third report. I move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Human 

Services Committee: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Human 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair responsible for 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

that it has considered certain estimates and to present its third 

report. I move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

wish to table the answers to questions no. 661 to 669. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 661 to 669 tabled. 

 

Clerk: — Item 10, question no. 670, asked by Mr. Forbes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Did I say 669? I believe it was 692, was it 

not? 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has asked leave 

to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you members 

of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

— the directors Don Taylor, Doug Steele, and Ray Orb who 

we, the member for Rosetown-Elrose and I, had the good 

fortune of having lunch with at the rural administrators’ 

association convention at lunchtime today. And we also want to 

make sure we acknowledge, and everyone knows, the large part 

they play in representing municipalities all across the province. 

 

So I would ask all members today to welcome them to their 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Nutana on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to join the minister in welcoming 

guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I’d like to join the Minister of Agriculture in 

welcoming our guests from SARM. The minister is correct, 

SARM provide a number of services to farm families across 

Saskatchewan and they are involved in all kinds of public 

policy endeavours. So I join with the minister, on behalf of the 

opposition, in welcoming our guests from SARM to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 



May 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1291 

facilitate the work of the standing committees, I move this 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the work of committees, this House 

now stands adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:29.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1279 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1279 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1279 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1279 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 1280, 1290 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1280 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1280 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................... 1280, 1283 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1290 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1281 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Youth Expedition to the High Arctic 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 

 Saskatoon Regional Youth Historica Heritage Fair 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1282 

 Weyburn Red Wings Coach Marks Milestone Victory 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1282 

 Saskatoon Hospital Home Lottery Winner 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1282 

 Leading the Country in Economy Growth 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1283 

 SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1283 

 Severance Package 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1283 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Allegations of Conflict of Interest 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1284 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1284 

 Funding for the Arts 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1285 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1285 

 Personnel Changes in the Public Service 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1286 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1286 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1286 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1286 

 Gasoline Prices 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1287 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1287 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1289 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1290 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1289 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1290 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


