




















































Hansard: May 06, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 38A  TUESDAY, MAY 6, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1195 

 May 6, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s truly an 

honour for me today to introduce someone who has been 

extremely important for my entire life. For the first time in his 

life, an 88-year-old gentleman is in the Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, and that‟s my father. Bert McCullum is in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. He has never been in his Legislative 

Assembly. And I am so proud to have him here today. 

 

Accompanying him, and his chauffeur, is another gentleman 

I‟ve known my entire life, and that is Mr. Don Bowman. Mr. 

Bowman is very active in a number of community organizations 

and committees. And he has been the reeve for the RM [rural 

municipality] of Osborne for many, many years. So I would 

welcome everyone to welcome these two gentlemen to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Chess‟n Math Association, Canada‟s national scholastic 

chess organization, promotes chess to students in grades 1 to 

12. And the Saskatchewan association is sponsoring of course 

the competition here in Saskatchewan. And on May 18 and 19 

in Edmonton, Alberta, there will be each of the grades 

represented. There will be 12 students represented. And it is my 

pleasure this afternoon to introduce four of the individuals who 

will be representing specific grades in the competition. I would 

like them to wave as I introduce them. 

 

Representing grade 2 is Avram Tcherni. Representing grade 4 is 

Quinn Taylor. Representing grade 7 is Maegan Krajewski. And 

representing grade 11 is Dakota Wagner. Mr. Speaker, these 

four individuals, along with eight other individuals that will 

represent the communities of Saskatoon, Nipawin, North 

Battleford, and Leask will be, I‟m sure, representing 

Saskatchewan very well. And I‟d ask all members to encourage 

them by showing our appreciation for and welcome you to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 

to you to all the members of the Assembly today, seated in the 

Speaker‟s gallery is 25 ladies called the Travelling Nellies, and 

they‟re here from Rosthern. They hopped the bus early this 

morning, Mr. Speaker, and travelled down to their Legislative 

Assembly. And I would ask all members of the Assembly to 

please welcome these 25 Travelling Nellies to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce to you and, through you, to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly a friend seated in the eastern gallery, 

Nicole O‟Byrne, who‟s a scholar. She‟s got an honour‟s degree 

from the University of Regina, a law degree from the University 

of Saskatchewan — very interested in issues surrounding 

Aboriginal people and the law. She‟s doing graduate studies out 

in British Columbia, and I can‟t help but think that the semester 

break has brought her back to us for more study. Anyway if all 

members could please join me in welcoming Nicole O‟Byrne to 

the Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to you, 

Mr. Speaker, and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I‟d 

like to introduce a school group in the west gallery. There‟s 21 

students from the Wymark School and a fine looking bunch. 

And I happen to know their teacher very well. Mr. Brad Gasper 

is their teacher, and we go back a number of years. He came 

from the town of Glentworth originally. And I‟ll be meeting 

with them after. The chaperones that are with the group today 

are Keith Trudeau, Melissa Schapansky, Lynn Dyck, and Brent 

Nelson. Like I say we‟ll be meeting after question period, and 

they‟ll have a chance to ask a few questions of me, and I‟m 

looking forward to that meeting. So I‟d ask all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and, through you, to all members of this Assembly I‟d like to 

introduce a couple of people that are very special in my life. My 

two sisters are here today. They are seated in the west gallery, 

Edna Irwin and Audrey Thompson. They‟re up to spend a 

couple of days with me, and they usually do this every session, 

so I look forward to having them here with me for a while. So I 

ask all members to join me in welcoming them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join 

my colleague in welcoming the group from Rosthern. I grew up 

in Rosthern, and while I no longer live there and I don‟t have 

the pleasure of representing Rosthern, it is still very much my 

home, and it‟s nice to see familiar faces in the gallery today. So 

I would like to welcome the group from Rosthern to their 

Legislative Assembly. 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

join with my colleague, the member for Wood River, in 

welcoming the students from Wymark School. Wymark, as 

members will know, is very close to the city of Swift Current, 

and early on in my career here I had the privilege of 

representing Wymark. It was in the constituency of Swift 

Current. And mostly to embarrass her, I stood to say a special 

hello to Nicole who‟s in that gallery as well. But I‟d ask 

members again to join with me in welcoming the students from 

Wymark to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m pleased to introduce to you and, through you, to all 

members of this Hon. Assembly Nadia Williamson, 

representing NWL contemporary dress shop in Regina. 

 

May 4 to 10, as Mr. Speaker will know, is Women 

Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan, a time when we 

recognize the significant contributions of business and 

professional women to the province‟s economy. And Nadia is 

an excellent example of a successful young woman that is 

contributing to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

After graduating with a diploma in fashion design from La Salle 

College in Montreal, she has worked for over 10 years in 

Saskatchewan in Canada‟s film industry. Now Nadia has 

applied her knowledge, natural talent, and experience to become 

the owner-operator of the NWL contemporary dress shop in 

Regina. Nadia was a finalist for the 2007 ABEX [Achievement 

in Business Excellence] Awards as young entrepreneur of the 

year for Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. In addition 

Nadia is on the board of the Saskatchewan Motion Picture 

Association. She‟s also a member of the Saskatchewan Young 

Professionals and Entrepreneurs, and Regina Women‟s 

Network. 

 

Women entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker, are a force in the 

province‟s business community, owning and operating 

approximately one-third of Saskatchewan‟s businesses in 2008. 

Thank you to Nadia and all women entrepreneurs in this 

province for the contributions they make each and every day to 

our growing economy. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m very pleased to present a petition on behalf of my 

constituents and the surrounding area in the Five Hills Health 

Region. And it implores the government for improvements to 

health care in our region. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I table this on behalf of residents in Chaplin and 

Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

have a petition that is concerning the growing housing crisis for 

many in our province because of low vacancy rates, 

skyrocketing rental increases, and inappropriate condo 

conversions. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability hold open public consultations for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I‟m presenting 

a petition in support of Station 20. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are mostly 

from the city of Saskatoon, from streets like Avenue O South, 

Isabella, Kingsmere, Guelph, Avenue Y, Avenue N, 5th 

Avenue, University Drive, and I see one from the town of 

Outlook, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today and present 

petitions in opposition to the government‟s Bill 5, The Public 

Service Essential Services Act and Bill 6, An Act to amend The 

Trade Union Act. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Aberdeen, 

Saskatoon, and Langham. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Emergency Preparedness Week 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 4 to 

10 is Emergency Preparedness Week across Canada, and this 

year‟s theme is 72 Hours . . . Is Your Family Prepared? My 

colleague, the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing designated this special week yesterday at Balgonie 

School. 

 

Emergency Preparedness Week is an annual national event that 

encourages everyone to be ready to cope on their own in an 

emergency for at least 72 hours. This enables first responders to 

focus on those with the most urgent needs in the crisis. 

 

Events and activities are happening across the country this week 

with the goal of having every family ready for an emergency. 

Mr. Speaker, being prepared is something all Saskatchewan 

residents should strive to be, as you never know when a flood, 

tornado, or blizzard may happen. Having a plan and the basic 

supplies like bottled water and canned food can help ensure 

you‟re ready if a disaster strikes. 

 

This government believes in keeping our communities safe and 

secure. Emergency planning skills have come in handy in recent 

years in disasters ranging from flooding to evacuations due to 

forest fires to the recent tragic explosion in Nipawin. This is 

why I‟m proud to join with the minister in this proclamation 

and hope all Saskatchewan residents heed this advice too and 

make their own emergency plans. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Raising Awareness about a Saskatchewan-Ghanaian 

Partnership 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today it‟s an honour to make all members aware of an 

informative and collaborative work that is being done here at 

SIAST. Over half a world away, students at the Wa Polytechnic 

in Ghana are the subject of an 11-minute documentary made by 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] students right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Where’s Wa? is a film made to raise awareness about a 

partnership between SIAST and the African school. Wa, home 

to about 80,000 people, is located in the north end of Ghana in 

one of the most underdeveloped areas of the country. Wa 

Polytechnic was established in 1999, and SIAST got involved 

in 2005 with the purpose of assisting the school in developing a 

10-year, strategic planning guide in helping train instructors that 

will teach short and part-time courses. Currently Wa 

Polytechnic offers programs ranging from agricultural 

engineering to business, and in future they hope to offer more 

short courses with SIAST‟s help. 

 

Moose Jaw SIAST Palliser Campus recently hosted a special 

screening of the film which was attended by an instructor from 

Wa Polytechnic. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join 

me in congratulating those at SIAST that are involved in this 

very important partnership and for also highlighting 

Saskatchewan citizens that contribute so much to our province, 

but also around the globe. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Annual Awards Banquet for Professional Engineers 

and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, Saturday evening I had the 

privilege to attend the annual awards banquet for the 

Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan. The 

Outstanding Achievement Award went to Dr. Lee Barbour, 

head of the department of civil and geological engineering at 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. His recent work has 

focused on reclaimed watersheds for the oil sands industry. 

 

Teresa Drew of Regina won the Promising Member Award. Ms. 

Drew‟s recent electrical design projects include the Conexus 

EventPlex at IPSCO Place, the Regina General Hospital 

mother-baby unit renovation and expansion, and the STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] Regina bus depot 

project. 

 

Philip Olson, the chairman and CEO [chief executive officer] of 

Titan Uranium Inc., was recognized with the McCannel Award 

for his service to APEGS [Association of Professional 

Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan] and the 

profession of engineering as a whole. The award is named after 

Roy McCannel, the founding member of the association. 

 

Margaret Kuzyk won the Brian Eckel Distinguished Service 

Award. Among many other endeavours, she has worked as 

Saskatchewan‟s chief building official and once sat on the 

advisory board of the architectural and building technologies 

program at SIAST. 

 

The SRC‟s [Saskatchewan Research Council] geoanalytical 

laboratory‟s high-security diamond facility won the Exceptional 

Engineering/Geoscience Project Award. And the Saskatchewan 

mining explorations guidelines advisory committee was the 

recipient of the Environmental Excellence Award for the 

development of mineral exploration guidelines applicable to the 

mining industry inside this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, I 

would ask all members to thank these award winners and to 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

encourage them to continue to pursue excellence in their 

professional field of service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Avant-Garde’s Annual Show and Fundraiser 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, today is the perfect opportunity to 

speak about an event that I had the pleasure of attending, given 

that it is International Youth Week 2008 — a week to recognize 

the achievements, talents, and contributions that young people 

make to their communities and to the province as a whole. 

 

Avant-Garde‟s 4th annual High Fashion and Hair Show is a 

fundraiser to provide bursaries for students wishing to study 

aesthetics and cosmetology who would otherwise not have the 

opportunity to do so. The students of Avant-Garde, which is an 

owned division of Ehrlo Community Services, work with local 

designers and models to display the latest trends in fashion. 

This year‟s remarkable show was themed Moulin Rouge and 

featured the work of a number of young Saskatchewan-based 

fashion designers with the fashions being presented by models 

with Stages modelling agency. The fantasy competition 

winning entry was Pajara Exotico by teams members Azahel 

Castaneda, Sommer Boswell, Tara Melnyk, and Shayla Fitch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mission statement for Ehrlo Community 

Services is to promote healthy communities in which children 

and families can achieve full potential in environments that are 

safe and nurturing. Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank everyone 

involved with this year‟s event, in particular co-ordinators Lori 

Pawson and Margaret Titanich for providing this excellent 

opportunity to showcase the talents of young Saskatchewan 

people. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Youth Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, last Saturday night I was 

honoured to attend the Youth Business Excellence awards in 

Tisdale. One hundred and sixty-five people were in attendance 

for the seventh annual YBEX [Youth Business Excellence] 

awards which is held yearly in northeastern Saskatchewan. The 

evening is hosted by Newsask Community Futures 

Development Corporation. Newsask, as many members know, 

is a community development organization with the mission of 

being the region‟s leader in fostering job creation. Since 1990 

Newsask has lent out over $6.86 million creating over 870 

full-time and 410 part-time jobs throughout northeastern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In the seven years since the first YBEX awards were presented, 

over 235 grade 6 to 12 students and youth under the age of 30 

have participated. This year saw 29 applications involving 45 

youth. Awards were provided for the creation of a business idea 

and the development of a business plan as well as a business 

venture category. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that evening a record $6,750 was provided in 

youth cash awards, and schools linked to the winners involved 

also received $1,750. Mr. Speaker, there were many young 

people presented with awards. I can say that as a parent that a 

great deal of time and effort went into all their business ideas. 

Not only that but all their businesses were set for northeast 

Saskatchewan proving once again the superiority of that corner 

of the province. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

winners of the YBEX awards. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Elections Canada Investigation 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nobody wants to turn 

on the TV and see footage of their party headquarters being 

raided by the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], but 

that‟s exactly what happened to Conservatives on April 15. 

Elections Canada, an independent non-partisan agency, is 

alleging that the Conservative Party of Canada constructed a 

scheme in an attempt to exceed spending limits in the last 

federal election by over $1 million. The alleged scheme 

involved expenses which Elections Canada claims should have 

been paid for by the national party being shifted onto local 

candidates‟ books. According to Elections Canada‟s 

interpretation, the alleged infraction would have seen local Tory 

candidates reimbursed with taxpayers‟ funds they didn‟t 

deserve. 

 

Sixty-seven Conservative candidates participated in this 

in-and-out scheme as well as claiming a 60 per cent 

reimbursement from the government from the phantom ad 

money. One of those Conservative candidates lost a very tight 

race, Mr. Speaker, decided to move into provincial politics, and 

is now sitting in this House representing Meadow Lake. 

 

We‟re all eagerly awaiting, Mr. Speaker, to hear what comes of 

the Elections Canada investigation. But you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? In the meantime I‟d like to point out that these 

allegations sure are reminiscent of the kind of stuff you‟d 

normally only see being done by governments in what the 

member, in his own words, called banana republics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Saskatoon Food Bank Donation Drive 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, we just celebrated National 

Volunteer Week, and Saskatchewan has the highest volunteer 

rate in the country. This past weekend the Saskatoon Food Bank 

had a donation drive. 

 

The Saskatoon Food Bank on average serves 7,000 people a 

month. And on Saturday they held a city-wide drive for 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

donations. As of today, the food bank has received 18,000 

kilograms of product, and more is still coming in. 

 

I had the privilege of participating in this effort. On my team 

was Daniel Laliberte, a young man from Quebec who is 

participating in Katimavik; Darrel Forman, a businessman from 

Saskatoon; and Christine and Steve Lawson. 

 

Christine and Steve are a young couple with four children: 

Christopher, age 10; Matthew, age six; Julia, five; and Shawn, 

two. These young children fully participated in knocking on 

doors and collecting articles for the food bank. They had a blast 

running up and down the street, carrying food bags to the truck. 

Not only did these children learn to help others, but they got 

exercise doing it. After two hours of walking, they were all 

ready for bed. 

 

This is the second time Steve and Christine participated with 

their children in the food drive. What a wonderful way to teach 

children about social responsibility and serving others who are 

less fortunate, in the true spirit of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 

was touched and impressed by their example, and I encourage 

other families to follow their lead. 

 

I would like the House to join me in recognizing Daniel, Darrel, 

and the Lawson family. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Support for Low-Income Families 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there has been a great deal of discussion lately about 

the rising costs of housing, but we know rising food prices are 

also putting the pinch on Saskatchewan‟s most vulnerable 

people. 

 

In 2005 the Sask Party released 100 Ideas to help grow 

Saskatchewan. Their no. 3 idea was to, quote, “Increase the 

food allowance for social assistance recipients.” To the Minister 

of Social Services: what is she doing to help low-income 

families deal with the rising food prices? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m 

very happy to stand up to answer that question. 

 

The NDP [New Democratic Party] failed the most vulnerable 

people of Saskatchewan when they were in power. They had 16 

years. And their record shows that they failed, and they even 

admitted it, Mr. Speaker. It‟s interesting. A member of the NDP 

Party said, and I quote: 

 

“It is a clear signal that we certainly have not 

accomplished our vision or our goals on making sure that 

no one is . . . left behind. People are being left behind.” 

 

That was said in 2006 when the Leader of the NDP was the 

premier of this province. He admitted that he was leaving 

people behind. 

 

What have we done, Mr. Speaker? Well immediately after 

becoming the minister, we added money or we met with the city 

of Saskatoon to help with discount bus passes. That‟s what 

we‟ve done to help people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have made one of the largest food bank 

donation announcements. We have donated $440,000 to the 

food banks of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well in a 

StarPhoenix article entitled “Priced out of the market,” Linda 

Pritchard says her stomach has adjusted to the feeling of being 

hungry because she‟s having to choose between putting food on 

her plate or the plates of her grandchildren. Her rent is going up 

from $550 a month to $900 a month. That, combined with the 

noticeably higher prices at the grocery store, is making it almost 

impossible for Linda and her family to make ends meet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Linda‟s family is like so many others who are on 

assistance, facing a double whammy of skyrocketing rents and 

rising food prices. To the minister: she has more than a billion 

and a half dollars in the bank. What will she do to help families 

like Linda‟s? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m 

more than happy to address that question. What did she do just 

a short while ago? And that was to give the largest increase to 

the Saskatchewan employment supplement that we have ever 

had in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — That‟s what she will do to help people, 

unlike the previous administration that did absolutely nothing to 

increase funding for the most vulnerable people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know the Minister of 

Health has been busy cutting programs that help vulnerable 

people. And we know the Minister of Social Services‟ only 

solution to the housing crisis so far has been to appoint a 

two-person task force to study the issue. Well while the Health 

minister defends his mean cuts and the Social Services minister 

waits for a report to hit her desk, Saskatchewan residents are 

struggling. While the minister has made some changes that will 

help low-income citizens, her government has made many more 

that will hurt them. 

 

To the minister: will she show that she truly has the best 

interests of low-income families at heart and commit to helping 

families struggling with rising food prices? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose the member 

opposite didn‟t hear the answer to my last question. We just 

gave the most significant increase to the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement that this province has ever seen. That 

is to help families in order to meet the increased costs. So, Mr. 

Speaker, they can use it for food. They can use it for rent. They 

can use it for child care expenses. They can use it as they 

choose to address the issue. 

 

The member opposite mentioned the task force on the housing. 

What did his party do when they were in power? On the eve of 

an election, Mr. Speaker, they had a quiet little committee that 

met people by invitation only. They made proposals. Those 

proposals have not been implemented for six months, and they 

admit that they‟re failing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, municipal leaders across the province knew 

immediately what the Saskatchewan Party‟s budget meant for 

the people of Saskatchewan — property tax increases, huge 

property tax increases. Some communities were predicting 

hikes of up to 10 per cent. But thanks to a public outcry, the 

Saskatchewan Party decided to pry open its $1.5 billion purse 

and increase funding to the municipalities. 

 

This government has had two chances to adequately fund 

municipalities. I don‟t know how many do-overs it will take, 

but to the minister: when is he finally going to get it right and 

properly fund municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve never seen 

such a shameless flip-flop in my entire life. I doubt if anyone in 

this province has. The party that took $300 million out of the 

revenue sharing for municipalities is now demanding it be 

restored. The party that made Saskatchewan‟s municipalities 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The party 

that made Saskatchewan‟s municipalities wait 16 years for a 

better revenue-sharing agreement, and didn‟t get the job done, 

is now demanding an overnight solution. Finally, Mr. Speaker, 

after our new government has worked directly with municipal 

leaders to provide a top-up of the revenue-sharing pool, 

opposition members are clamouring to take credit for it. Mr. 

Speaker, this is indeed a shameful spectacle. It reveals a 

shocking disrespect for municipal leaders and a profound 

misunderstanding of their issues and priorities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the cost of living isn‟t 

getting any easier for the people of Saskatchewan to deal with. 

Daily we see the effects of increases in the prices of 

transportation, food, housing, and of course property tax. It‟s 

getting more and more difficult for the people of the province to 

cope with these costs. Even with that additional funding that 

was finally pried out of the Sask Party‟s hands, Saskatoon is 

still facing a property tax hike of 5.6 per cent and Regina of 2.9 

per cent. And of course that doesn‟t even include the education 

portion, which will probably also increase. 

 

My question is again to the minister. The Saskatchewan Party is 

sitting on over $1.5 billion in cash surplus. When is this 

minister going to get it right and properly fund the 

municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 

member forgets the simple lesson in arithmetic we were trying 

to instruct in estimates yesterday. First of all, we met our 

campaign commitment of an interim increase to the municipal 

revenue-sharing pool of 7 per cent. Then when the opportunity 

presented itself with increased revenues available, we moved 

very quickly and very effectively to more than double that 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

amount to 15 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — That‟s exactly what municipal 

leaders were hoping for. It is most welcome. It is most 

appreciated. And this of course is not all that‟s being done. We 

have already started the discussions on a new and improved 

revenue-sharing deal — something that the former government 

couldn‟t do in 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, people across this province 

are recognizing the failures of this first Sask Party budget, and 

they‟re recognizing it through the inflating costs that they are 

facing. Mr. Speaker, with over $1 billion in the bank, school 

divisions should have been funded sufficiently to prevent mill 

rate increases. 

 

The other side finds this funny; we don‟t. 

 

The people of our province are already facing the increasing 

costs of housing, of food, of transportation, and of course 

property tax. My question is to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member may place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — My question is to the Minister of 

Education. Will the people of Saskatchewan be forced to add 

education mill rate increases to their list of inflating costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

what people in the province are not surprised at, they are not 

surprised at the fact that this government has done exactly what 

it said it would do. It has put education as a priority. Mr. 

Speaker, an increase of $241 million to the education budget — 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s 25 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — For the first time ever, Mr. Speaker, for 

the first time ever this government will be spending $1.18 

billion on education. Mr. Speaker, there are no minus 2 per 

cents and minus 4 per cents across the province like that NDP 

government did during their term in office. Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

recognizing the fact that we need to build this province. And an 

extra $241 million I think is very, very important to boards, and 

it‟s important to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, while our minister can 

shout big numbers really loudly and try to deceive the public, 

the education funding‟s inadequate. The president of 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association has said that because 

of the inadequate education budget, the majority of school 

boards will be forced to raise mill rates. Mr. Speaker, we see a 

proposed 6.5 increase in the Light of Christ and the Living Sky 

divisions; 7.8 per cent in Prairie South. Sun West, Sask Rivers, 

Holy Trinity, Regina Public, Regina Catholic, they‟re all facing 

. . . they‟ve already announced that these increases are coming. 

There‟s so many more to come. 

 

The Sask Party‟s inadequate funding fails school divisions and 

it forces tax increases on our residents. To the minister: will he 

commit today to additional educational funding or is he content 

to stick taxpayers with the bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker — and I‟ll 

speak softly — this government has inherited, this government 

has inherited a mess, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve inherited a mess that 

has resulted in the province of Saskatchewan relying . . . I guess 

I‟ll have to yell. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the people in 

Saskatchewan understand that education funding comes from 

two sources. It comes from the government grant which I‟ve 

just indicated to you, Mr. Speaker, has risen by a total of 241 

million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess I will have to raise my voice because the 

members opposite don‟t seem to understand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — They don‟t understand that the funding 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What am I to do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — That‟s a good question. Order. The minister 

may finish his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan taxpayers contribute the most of any province in 

Saskatchewan to funding of education. That is the legacy of the 

former government. We‟re trying to address that, Mr. Speaker. 

We have provided $156 million to property tax rebates, Mr. 

Speaker, unlike that government over there who continued to 

increase the amount of contributions from taxpayers. 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

That member needs to understand that there are two sources, 

and we have increased our source, but the whole funding of 

education still relies on property tax payers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Funding for the Arts 

 

Mr. Furber: — They gave people a pizza for a rebate, and now 

they want to eat half of it themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, questions remain about the minister‟s plan for the 

arts community in Saskatchewan. She has axed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — We know that she‟s axed $3.45 million slated 

for the Saskatchewan Arts Board — a proven arm‟s-length 

funding mechanism for Saskatchewan artists with a 60-year 

history in our province — and put it back into the ministry so 

she can decide how she can spend it. 

 

Can the minister guarantee that none of this funding diverted to 

the Arts Board will go to former Saskatchewan Party president, 

Saskatchewan Party candidate, and current federal Conservative 

candidate Michelle Hunter or any organization that she 

represents? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — No. Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan has provided the Saskatchewan Arts Board 

almost $6.1 million in base funding, an increase of $60,000 to 

the Arts Board. The Arts Board adjudicates money to support 

arts and artists. 

 

We are following in line with the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Public Policy article, Mr. Speaker. For some time, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan has lacked a framework to support a thriving arts 

and cultural sector. Existing policy tends to be implicit, reactive 

rather than proactive, lacks coordination, transparency, and 

financial support. That is the policy that was under that 

members opposite here. 

 

What we are going to do is take a step back, follow the 

recommendations of the Saskatchewan Institute of Public 

Policy to come up with a framework . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Two things, Mr. Speaker. Clearly, clearly she 

did not answer the question, which is unfortunate. Clearly she 

was reading from a document . . . 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Clearly she was reading from a document. I‟d 

like to have that document tabled in the House, if she would. 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You can have my 

questions. 

 

As I‟ve asked the minister‟s deputy, some interesting things he 

has to say about the Arts Board and the arts community in 

general. Recently he has said he sees something of a 

self-sustaining arts community in our province. Now while all 

Saskatchewan artists desire to become self-sustaining, one has 

to wonder if this statement isn‟t code for something more 

insidious. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is this talk of self-sustaining 

just code for pulling government support for the arts? If not, 

why has she already begun her attack on the Arts Board and 

artists in our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, this government has followed 

through on our commitment to sustain and continue arts funding 

in the province of Saskatchewan. I think it speaks well for our 

province‟s thinking on the arts and they‟re prized and valued in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have provided 1.6 — and I‟ll say it again — million dollars 

in base funding, an increase of over $60,000 for this year to the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board. For that member to suggest that we 

do not have respect and admire the Saskatchewan Arts Board is 

ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. We put our money where our mouth is, 

Mr. Speaker. We value the arts and cultural community in this 

province. Promise made, promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I just remind members to place their questions 

and responses through the Chair. I think it‟ll add to the debate. 

The member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well if she‟s admiring the Arts Board and 

cutting their funding, I‟m certainly glad she doesn‟t admire me 

and the work I do. 

 

We learned yesterday that the minister plans to use some of her 

three and a half million dollar slush fund to become a better 

party planner. She boasted to reporters that she‟s cut funding at 

the Arts Board in order to develop a policy on events planning 

— clearly a tourism initiative. That‟s right, Mr. Speaker, events 

hosting. 

 

The minister is confusing funding that should be going to 

support Saskatchewan artists with money that will go to throw 

really nice parties to which I‟m sure my invitation will be lost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is she taking money out the 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

hands of artists and putting it into events planning? With a 

billion and a half dollars sitting in the bank, why doesn‟t she 

change the name of her ministry to tourism, parks, culture, or 

sport? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to the thoughts of the 

member being expressed across the way is that I had no say in 

what the ministry, the name of my ministry actually is. It was 

provided to me on the day that I was asked to join cabinet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The role of government, the role of government to developing 

policy to support development of the arts and cultural sector: 

we control all public funding that flows to arts and culture 

organizations, and as such government has a primary role in 

how the culture and arts sector functions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that‟s what we‟ve said, Mr. Speaker. We are going to take 

a step back, thoughtful approach, consulting with the arts and 

cultural community to develop a framework, Mr. Speaker, to 

sustain an industry over the long term, Mr. Speaker. Again 

promise made, promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Accountability 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation who we‟ve learned is 

responsible for international trade offices. Mr. Speaker, what 

safeguards are being put in place to ensure that there‟s proper 

oversight of government spending in any new trade offices set 

up by this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I thank the member for the question, Mr. 

Speaker, and I‟d like to inform the member that no new trade 

offices have been opened by this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve come to know Bill 31 as 

the unaccountability Act and for good reason. But this Bill is 

not just about raising the thresholds for government spending, 

Bill 31 is about so much more. 

 

Section 30 of this Act gives the power to cabinet to create 

out-of-province trade offices and appoint whoever they want to 

be in charge of them. And that person can buy and sell property 

of up to $150,000 per year without approval from cabinet. The 

unaccountability Act indeed, Mr. Speaker. Why should 

unelected, unaccountable person appointed to these offices use 

hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxpayers‟ money to buy 

and sell property without the approval of cabinet and without 

the transactions being made public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my hon. 

friend is trying to have a debate with the straw man. He‟s set up 

a bit of a straw man argument. Unfortunately it looks like the 

straw man is winning, Mr. Speaker. This is an interesting line of 

questions. I would say this, I would say this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I would say this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Okay. We‟ve already been very clear that 

all the thresholds that exist currently with respect to cabinet 

approval and reporting will be maintained until we get an 

opinion from the Provincial Auditor with respect to this Bill. No 

decisions have been made with respect to trade offices or 

officers. 

 

Though I will say this, Mr. Speaker: this government is 

absolutely committed to continuing the economic momentum 

we see, momentum that includes 500,000 people working in the 

province, Saskatchewan leading in building permits, 

Saskatchewan leading in earnings for Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟ll continue the momentum that means more people 

in the province, more jobs, and more opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — And the longer they‟re in office, Mr. 

Speaker, the more people are having trouble making ends meet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the Premier needs no 

reminder about the fiascos of the trade offices in the dying days 

of the Devine government. He was chief of staff to John Gerich 

who was the minister responsible for those offices. But let me 

remind the rest of the House of some of the abuses of the trade 

offices at that time. 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

One of those offices cost taxpayers $23,000 per month for a 

19th floor office with curved glass bay windows overlooking 

the Hong Kong harbour. One of these trade officers, a former 

Tory cabinet minister, bought a luxury condo with a swimming 

pool, ocean view, and 24 carat gold taps. 

 

Again my question to the minister or to the Premier is: what 

safeguards are being put in place to ensure . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Speaker is having difficulty 

hearing the question. The member may place his question. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Again, my question to the minister or the 

Premier is: what safeguards are being put in place to ensure that 

there is proper oversight of government spending in these new 

trade offices? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I guess, I guess 

it shouldn‟t surprise us at all that, as we get closer to the end of 

session, the NDP are trying to invent issues now in question 

period. Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Could it be that they want to 

change the subject, that they want to change the subject from, 

for example, the trade, labour legislation that we have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, could it be they don‟t want to 

talk about the fact that they are so far offside with the people of 

this province when it comes to labour legislative changes 

proposed by this government? Could it be the fact that they 

want to change the subject from polling that came out just prior 

to this session that showed them mired, mired to below where 

they were prior to the last election? Or could it be they don‟t 

want to talk about the positive news, about the fact that we lead 

Canada in population growth . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. Final comment to the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That we lead, Mr. Speaker, in 

unemployment, in the lowest unemployment rate; in wholesale 

trade, in retail sales, in construction permits; that this 

government is advancing the interests of this province, has the 

support of the people of Saskatchewan doing that. That‟s why 

they‟ve got nothing left with a week to go in this session, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide 

(Holodomor) Memorial Day Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my privilege this afternoon to move that Bill No. 40, The 

Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day 

Act, be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that Bill No. 

40, The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) 

Memorial Day Act, Bill No. 40, be now read the first time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to accept the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall the Bill be read a second 

time . . . oh first reading of this Bill, pardon me. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 34, The Graduate Retention Program Act with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the . . . When shall this 

Bill be considered in Committee of the Whole? I recognize the 

Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill and its amendments be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 34, The 

Graduate Retention Program Act and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may now read the 

amendments the first time. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

now be read a first and second time. 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

that Bill No. 34, The Graduate Retention Program Act be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair responsible for 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill 23, The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2008 

with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 23, and that the Bill and its amendments be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 23, The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2008 be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair responsible for 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 33, The Active Families Benefit Act, without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee. I recognize the Minister Responsible for Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 33, The Active Families 

Benefit Act. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. I recognize the Minister Responsible for Tourism, 

Culture, Sports, and youth. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 33 — The Active Families Benefit Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 

33, The Active Families Benefit Act be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair responsible for the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report Bill No. 18, The Public Service Amendment 

Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Highways has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 18, The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly . . . Pardon 

me. Members are agreed. The member may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways that Bill No. 18, The Public Service Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 17, The 

Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the 

Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Highways that Bill No. 17, The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

government I‟d like to order questions 616 to 627. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 616 to 627 ordered. 

 

[14:30] 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 24 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I had an opportunity the other day to stand and make a 

few comments on The Trade Union Amendment Act (2) or 

more commonly referred to as the oops Act. And while people 

that are just tuning in to watch session today may not 

understand why it‟s called that, I‟ll give them a quick review. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much of the legislation — and I have to say 

especially the labour legislation — that‟s been tabled by this 

government is full of errors, inconsistencies, and actually does 

not speak well for labour relations and activity . . . and our 

labour market activity in the province of Saskatchewan in the 

future, and that‟s for a number of reasons. 

 

There was never any public consultations that were done. There 

was never any input from a variety of stakeholders. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s truly what builds a good piece of legislation is 

when you have the community and the province as a whole be 

able to make comment and have their thoughts and intentions 

when it comes to a piece of legislation, their understanding of 

how it should work, how it would best work. That was never 

done with either or any of these pieces of legislation. 

 

And the current government has continued to refuse to look at 

public consultations and to take the legislation out and about. 

So with that start, we know that there are going to be problems 

to follow and that‟s really what brought about The Trade Union 

Amendment Act (2), commonly referred to as the oops Bill or 

Bill 24. 

 

Because clearly what this does, the government had gone ahead 

and made some changes at the Labour Relations Board. They 

had signalled to all in the media what their plans were for the 

Labour Relations Board and how they were going to change 

from one Vice-Chair to . . . or from two Vice-Chairs to only 

have one Vice-Chair. But then they forgot that the legislation 

didn‟t allow them to do that. And while they had already tabled 

one set of amendments to The Trade Union Act, then when 

they‟d also talked about what their plans were for the board and 

they were told that they couldn‟t do this by in fact the 

legislation that was currently there. We had to point it out to 

them that it wasn‟t possible to structure the board the way they 

were telling everyone what their plans were because the 

legislation didn‟t allow for it. The legislation said that there 

needed to be two Vice-Chairs — a chairperson at the Labour 

Relations Board and two Vice-Chairs. 

 

So what we had a couple weeks later was the oops Bill — or 

Bill 24, which is The Trade Union Amendment Act (No. 2) for 

this session — to straighten out and make the legislation align 

with the views of the Saskatchewan Party government. And this 

is a problem. There‟s a number of cases that are going to be 

referred to the Labour Relations Board in some of the 

legislative changes that are before this legislature in this 

session. There is going to be more work at the Labour Relations 

Board. The work is going to be of a different type, but still there 

is a concern that adding more work to a board that‟s been 

reduced in size is going to mean problems down the road. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what this speaks to, I think, even in a bigger 

context and broader context is the lack of thought and foresight 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

that was put into any of the labour legislation that‟s been tabled, 

when we have to, within weeks, have additional pieces of 

legislation tabled to correct errors, omissions, mistakes . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . That‟s right, after they were pointed 

out to them, as my colleague from Regina Dewdney quite 

clearly points out. These errors and omissions had to be pointed 

out to the current minister, and he had to go back and redo the 

legislation and bring forward amendments which we‟re seeing 

in Bill No. 24. 

 

So this really points to a number of things. It points to a number 

of areas where we question who wrote the first couple of pieces 

of legislation, when you need to have corrections tabled right 

away. That‟s also an issue. If you have had an outside third 

party that is in fact somewhat biased to one side or another, that 

is a problem. It‟s a problem right across the province for a 

variety of people that never had input into the legislation or a 

chance at actual public consultations, in the true sense of the 

word. 

 

So it brings up many issues. It brings up a number of concerns. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think more and more this Bill really points 

to what‟s been an issue this whole session. It‟s been a fiasco — 

I said this yesterday — this labour legislation since it‟s been 

tabled. Who said what? Someone contradicts themselves within 

days. Legislation‟s tabled that needs to be corrected within a 

couple of weeks. It just goes on and on. And I have to say, it 

would almost be a comedy of errors if it wasn‟t so drastic in the 

effects that it will have on the labour market situation in this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier just got up and spoke during question 

period in one of his answers, and talked about a booming 

economy, how we‟re just number one in so many areas here in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, all that was 

achieved in the current labour market. All that was achieved in 

the current, under the current labour legislation that exists in 

this province. 

 

The people who have built the economy have worked under this 

legislation. The employers have worked with this legislation. 

There has been a stable environment in this province, and here 

we are in these booming times to pay back what‟s owed, to do a 

favour for someone — I‟m not sure what it is — but we‟re 

having legislation that‟s been tabled in this House that 

obviously, within days it‟s obvious how faulty it is. 

 

And this government — that‟s fine, they‟re re-elected — have 

dug in their heels and said, we‟re not listening to anybody but 

our friends. Come whatever and high water, we‟re going to pass 

this legislation . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And you know 

the members are heckling and hollering from the side, but I‟ll 

bet you not one of them can stand up and they can explain this 

piece of legislation to me. 

 

We have gone through hours and hours and hours in committee 

and have not got a straight answer or an explanation to the 

extent and the impact of this legislation. The minister cannot 

even explain it, but yet he is saying the people of Saskatchewan 

should be happy. They should sit back and say, well isn‟t this 

wonderful this new government is doing this great legislation. 

But not one of them can explain it, not one of them can talk 

about the implications, not one of them can explain why it is so 

faulty, and the areas of concern. They give long, lengthy 

answers, carry on in some very flowery, extravagant language 

— not particularly eloquent I would say, but extravagant 

language — and, Mr. Speaker, it‟s inappropriate. 

 

I will always go back to a very good friend of mine who I‟d sat 

and had a conversation with and we had talked about 

legislation, the legislative process, and how you go through 

public consultations, how you have the discussion with the 

broader public, and the need for discussion with the broader 

public because, Mr. Speaker, as government, you can pass 

pretty well any law you like. 

 

You can put any piece of legislation to become the law of the 

land in the province of Saskatchewan, but if you haven‟t 

carefully discussed this with the public, if you haven‟t had the 

debate and the public consultations with stakeholders and those 

beyond direct stakeholders, if there isn‟t a clear understanding 

— and it doesn‟t have to be agreement, Mr. Speaker, there does 

not have to be total agreement with what you‟re doing — but if 

there‟s an understanding as to why the government is making 

this move, an honest, upfront explanation as to why the changes 

need to be made, then there is an acceptance when you put these 

laws in place. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you jam through a piece of legislation 

and two weeks later you‟ve got to start fixing your mistakes 

already, there‟s a worry. And when people don‟t understand the 

new legislation there will be a difficulty with following it. And 

there will be push-back, and that‟s a worry. And it doesn‟t 

matter if we‟re talking about this legislation or any legislation, 

that will always be the case. But, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number 

of things that I can say on this piece of legislation, this Bill 24, 

trade union Act amendment (No. 2) . . . And that tells you, Act 

(2). 

 

Well the member from Moose Jaw North says no sense. Well 

you know what? I wish the member from Moose Jaw North 

would meet with some of his constituents who have wanted to 

meet with him over these various Bills and maybe he would 

have a better understanding. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of my colleagues 

that would like to have some input into this Bill 24. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I will end my comments and turn the floor over to my 

colleagues. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to take part in this debate. Just previously we had a 

member from Moose Jaw North talking about how, in response 

to challenges from the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 

about actually meeting with his constituents around Bills 5 and 

6, and of course the son of Bills 5 and 6 — the perhaps 

ill-begotten son — No. 24. 

 

And of course I was reading with great interest in the Moose 

Jaw press the other day about how there had been a protest over 

at the member‟s office. And it turns out it was during the lunch 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

hour, but the member missed it because of course he was out to 

lunch. And I guess it sort of sums . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . The member from Moose Jaw North of course, because the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow is very diligent in meeting 

with her constituents. 

 

But it‟s kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker. On a number of 

occasions we‟ve challenged the members opposite to take this 

out to public consultation, to take Bills 5 and 6 . . . And again 

this is the progeny of Bill 5 and 6. And this is very interesting, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟ve got more to say for the member from 

Kelvington, if she wants to carry on in this regard. But perhaps 

we can get to the body of my remarks. 

 

It‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when the Bill was first introduced 

— the amendment to The Trade Union Act — part of the 

rationale was to speed up the process. And of course in 

speeding up the process they wanted to do in the Vice-Chairs. 

And of course they realized, you know, after it was pointed out 

to them by members on this side, that in fact that was wrong. 

They needed to change their, to amend their amendment to 

make sure that it was square by the law. 

 

And if their rationale was really about speeding up the process 

and ensuring that people had a timely resolve to matters brought 

before the Labour Relations Board, of course eliminating 

Vice-Chair positions would make less sense if you wanted to 

expedite proceedings under the Labour Relations Board. 

 

But oh no, they thought this was historic. They thought this was 

great stuff. They thought it was fair and balanced, Mr. Speaker, 

which of course is the tag line for Bill O‟Reilly‟s show on FOX 

News in the States, The O’Reilly Factor, and that of course is 

about as fair and balanced as Al Franken made it out to be in 

the book Lies (And the Lying Liars Who Tell Them). 

 

I guess it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, if they wanted to expedite 

the process under the Labour Relations Board, they could have 

done a lot of different things. But instead of putting in changes 

that actually helped expedite the process, helped to bring earlier 

resolution to certain of the cases, they went about this botchery 

of a misadventure around the Vice-Chairs, and of course now 

we have to debate Bill 24 to correct that. 

 

And I think about my constituents who actually have cases 

before the Labour Relations Board, Mr. Speaker — people 

whose very lives are affected by this, whose ability to draw an 

income and to provide for their family, to put bread on the table 

and who have had . . . You know, I think of one gentleman in 

particular who‟s had a case before the Labour Relations Board 

and the kind of uncertainty and fear that was injected into his 

life by the changes that have been made here. And then now we 

see a continued sort of botching of the attempts that the 

government has made in their approach to the Labour Relations 

Board. 

 

And I think about that, Mr. Speaker, and I think, you know, 

what were they thinking? What would have them act in such a 

precipitous manner? What would have them, you know, not get 

their facts correct? Why would they go off so half-cocked and 

so refusing of outside counsel or, you know, advice from the 

broader public? Outside counsel of course is no problem 

because they‟re quite happy to bring people in to help them 

draft the legislation, but in terms of engaging in a broader 

public consultation process like the kind that we‟ve talked about 

in this legislature these past weeks. 

 

And I guess the thing is, Mr. Speaker, in this regard they just 

wanted to lock it in. They just wanted to ram it home. And in 

terms of whether or not this is going to make the Labour 

Relations Board more efficient, more effective, again I think the 

proof is in the pudding in terms of the kind of mass confusion 

and fear that has been injected into the work of the Labour 

Relations Board as it stands right now. 

 

But in terms of the overall situation with the Labour Relations 

Board, in terms of what‟s happening, Mr. Speaker, it‟s sad that 

we‟ve had a process where the Chair had been chosen through 

an open, objective process; where the Vice-Chairs have been, 

had gone through a competition in that regard. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen the minister say one thing one day, 

another thing the next, and again that‟s, that‟s part of a pattern, 

Mr. Speaker. But you know, this is a circumstance where, 

where actual detail, where the error for margin for people is not 

that big so they need to know the facts. 

 

So what happens to the cases that were, were being tried and 

how those proceed, Mr. Speaker? Whether or not this actually 

expedites the process, again I think there‟s been a lot of time 

lost in terms of the taking it sideways. 

 

There have been a lot of aspersions made about whether or not 

the Labour Relations Board was balanced in the first place and I 

think of, you know, Justices that sit in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that have said that yes, in fact the Labour Relations 

Board was fair and balanced. So that the Sask Party knows 

better than the judge, Mr. Speaker. I find, I find kind of 

interesting that they want to use fair and balanced which is of 

course this tag line for Bill O‟Reilly, also kind of interesting, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess there‟s more to be said on this Bill and there‟s more 

work to be done in terms of going out and talking to people to 

gather more information, more counsel on this. But again it‟s at 

its base, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation, Bill 

24, is the misbegotten exercise that arises from a need to correct 

the mistakes in the first place that were made by the members 

opposite. So in the interests of going out to gather more 

information, Mr. Speaker, in terms of talking more fully with 

the stakeholders and getting a broader sort of take than has been 

demonstrated on the other side that they‟re not interested in, I 

now adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

 



1210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

[15:00] 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

The Chair: — The item before Committee of the Whole today 

is a main vote for Executive Council. I would ask the Premier if 

you would like to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And may I just say 

in advance of the questions and answers, I‟m sure we‟re going 

to have an animated discussion about some issues and some 

other exchanges that will be about discovery and information 

provision. And let me just say in advance, I want to indicate my 

appreciation to the Leader of the Opposition for the questions 

that will come and perhaps other members opposite who will 

also engage in the estimates that we have. 

 

It‟s a pleasure to introduce officials that have joined me today 

for Executive Council estimates. To my immediate right is the 

deputy minister in Executive Council, my deputy minister, 

Garnet Garven. To my immediate left is my chief of staff, Reg 

Downs. We have senior policy adviser in Executive Council, 

James Saunders, and our director of corporate services, Bonita 

Cairns, has also joined us. We look forward to the exchange 

that will follow. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 

And with the Premier, I want to welcome the officials who have 

joined us and all of the members who are present for committee 

this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Chair, I appreciate the Premier‟s commitment to engaging 

in the process this afternoon. I‟m sure his willingness to provide 

answers to the various questions that will arise. I‟m hoping to 

spend some time with the Premier this afternoon on the areas of 

process and decision making in the government that he now 

leads. Other members of our caucus will have a variety of 

issues they will want to raise with the Premier in what I believe 

is a period of three hours that we have allotted for us. 

 

Let me begin, Mr. Chair, with engaging with the Premier in a 

little discussion around the decision-making processes in your 

government, whether it‟s to establish policy or legislation or, 

for that matter, financial and budget considerations. I wonder if 

the Premier could walk us through the process that is followed 

by his government. Let‟s begin with legislation. What process is 

followed to bring a piece of legislation to this House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Two parts to the 

answer to this question. As a brand new government, there was 

a compelling need to be able to deal with platform promises that 

we had made in the election campaign. 

Some of those election campaign promises involve pretty 

straightforward legislation. For example, fixed election dates, 

which I hope members opposite are in support of, although I 

was alarmed to hear some questioning from the member from 

North Battleford that would lead me to believe that they‟re not 

actually in favour of this very transparent change that is needed 

in the province towards fixed election dates. 

 

However, that commitment was made in the campaign, and so 

the legislation of course was driven by the promise, as was the 

case with respect to used-car tax. We didn‟t wait for the 

legislation, Mr. Chair, with respect to used-car tax. We moved 

on that shortly after the election on the 7th, and we in fact have 

signalled our intent to move towards fixed election dates as well 

on the day after the campaign. 

 

There are other elements of the legislation we‟re dealing with in 

this session, the process for which again the genesis of it 

certainly was the election campaign. The genesis actually would 

have been the policy development we underwent as a political 

party well before the election campaign. There was discussion 

on trade union Act amendments in our party and policies 

adopted. Certainly The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act, driven 

again by the platform. The graduate retention program, which 

received third reading today in this Assembly, also driven by 

the platform. 

 

So throughout this process, we also engaged members of our 

caucus who provided some assistance and review with respect 

to legislation. In the future, where we are not perhaps facing the 

compressed timelines as a result of an election in November as 

we were this year — in other words, for the session coming up 

— you know, the usual processes will be followed as we have 

seen from other governments. 

 

And those include, for example, listening to stakeholder groups, 

sometimes individual ideas with respect to the genesis of an 

idea of a legislation, taking that forward through to our MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], sometimes brought 

forward by the MLAs to cabinet or a cabinet minister where the 

legislation can be championed at that level, reviewed obviously 

back down through the process back up to the cabinet. That 

actually happened on a number of cases here with respect to 

legislation that we‟re dealing with in this session. 

 

It‟ll be a bottom-up process certainly, but it will be a process 

that is driven by the promises we made in the campaign. We 

fully intend to keep them to the extent they require legislation to 

do that. There was promises to be kept, but that legislation will 

come forward in due course. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it‟s not quite the answer that I 

expected. I‟m trying to search out from the Premier for the 

public‟s information — because the public has an interest in 

this — precisely how a piece of legislation appears in this 

House moving from an idea, whether it happens to be an idea in 

the platform or in fact an idea that was not in the platform, in 

fact an idea that may in fact violate what the Sask Party 

platform indicated. 

 

So let‟s use a more specific example. Let me begin with then 

the Executive Council Act — the Act, the legislation that 

appeared in this legislature which proposed to increase the 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1211 

spending limit that this government would allow itself without 

public reporting through an OC [order in council] process. That 

legislation appeared in this legislature. Now I will argue that it 

was in fact a contradiction to what was in the Sask Party 

platform when the platform called for increased accountability 

and transparency. Now we can have that debate. I don‟t think 

it‟s really debatable. This is a bad piece of legislation. 

 

So let me be perhaps a little more specific with the Premier in 

terms of the development of legislation. So someone had the 

idea for this Executive Council Act. First of all, whose idea was 

that? 

 

Was it an idea generated by the Executive Council? Was it 

generated somewhere else in government? Was that Act 

reviewed by a legislative review committee? A cabinet 

committee of ministers, for instance, who would give it a 

serious review. Was it reviewed in total by the cabinet? Was 

that piece of legislation then reviewed by the caucus? Did that 

legislation have any external review? Did that piece of 

legislation in fact have any opinion from the auditor before it 

was tabled? 

 

So I‟m asking the Premier if he can answer the very specific 

questions about that piece of legislation and in those answers 

then further explain the process that occurs within his 

government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. A couple of points 

with respect to this specific Bill, with respect to Bill No. 31. As 

I have said quite publicly, the intent of this Bill, it‟s 

administrative in nature. It seeks to make some administrative 

changes. Some the hon. member has referred to; others he 

hasn‟t, including removing the unnecessary step of reappointing 

legislative secretaries every year. 

 

There are some common sense changes here that include 

changes to the responsibilities of members of the Executive 

Council with respect to tabling documents that are 

housekeeping in nature. And so the administrative changes were 

considered — including the threshold issue — considered by a 

government that did make a promise with respect to 

transparency and accountability and is keeping and will keep 

that promise with respect to transparency and accountability. 

 

The intent of this legislation was to move government towards 

efficiency. I remember when the hon. member raised some 

questions about this in the Legislative Assembly, raised some 

good points about the merit for changes in the threshold, but 

also went on to I don‟t think quite accurately characterize what 

other provinces do because we know that in some cases with 

respect to grants, for example, some provinces require no orders 

in council at all. Ministers have that authority, as long as it‟s in 

the budget, approved in the budget. Some orders of government 

. . . The national government, for example, has much more 

stringent thresholds, including $10,000. And so the intent of 

this Bill was to improve the efficiency of government. 

 

It was interesting to me to note at the cabinet meetings, at early, 

early cabinet meetings that we were approving the kind, scope, 

and nature of fish filters being used by the Ministry of the 

Environment. We think the Environment officials are probably 

the best ones to make that judgment together with those experts 

who provide fish filters and that cabinet rather could be talking 

about things like, well, for example, ensuring that our economy 

is ready for growth, could talk about the competitiveness of our 

economy or how are we ensuring that those most vulnerable 

among us are participating in the prosperity that we‟re seeing 

and ideas to achieve that. 

 

So we sought some efficiencies, Mr. Chair. When it was 

pointed out though that changing the threshold could also have 

an unintended consequence of reducing the speed with which 

these initiatives are reported to the media and therefore to the 

public — which is, they have a right to know in terms of the 

spending of their monies — we said as a government that we 

would simply refer the matter to the Provincial Auditor, that 

none of the thresholds would change until we got advice which 

we would make public from the Provincial Auditor, asking for 

that advice as we seek to balance both efficiency and 

accountability and transparency. 

 

So that‟s the nature of the origins for the Bill. We‟ve been over 

that. The Provincial Auditor is going to review the provisions 

that have been raised, quite rightly I would say, by the hon. 

member. And when the auditor reports back, we‟ll have a 

public discussion about this balance between efficiency and 

accountability. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I‟m not here, we‟re not here 

debating Bill 31. I‟m asking some very specific questions about 

how a piece of legislation like that, which is so obviously 

flawed and which so obviously breaks a campaign promise, 

could arrive in this legislature. Maybe I‟ll just ask the questions 

one at a time to the Premier. He should be able to answer 

without consulting anyone. Does he, in organizing the function 

of his government, have a legislative review committee made 

up of cabinet ministers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that different 

governments are ordered and organized differently, and we 

know the hon. member presided over a government that was big 

on committees. There were OC committees and reg review 

committees and policy committees of the cabinet. Maybe it‟s 

because the cabinet just kept getting bigger and bigger, and so 

that‟s how they organized. And I would argue that sometimes 

that would have worked for the cabinet, the previous cabinet. 

Sometimes it didn‟t. I don‟t think there‟s any perfect 

organization or system. 

 

We have a cabinet in the province of Saskatchewan smaller than 

what existed prior to, prior to the election campaign, and the 

cabinet considers legislation, as it did in this regard. And we 

also have policy committees of our caucus because in our party 

we want to make sure that caucus is included into the decisions 

that are taken. And as we go forward, as we move further away 

from an election where the timelines were compressed, there 

will even be greater involvement on the part of policy 

committees, standing policy committees of our caucus that hear 

from groups and also come up with their own ideas and propose 

those to the cabinet. 

 

It‟s interesting. I think there‟s going to be a publication in the 

province of Saskatchewan coming up very soon. I think the 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

author or at least the compiler, the editor that is compiling it is 

Mr. Howard Leeson. And I think he‟s made an invitation to 

perhaps to the hon. member to talk about his views of policy 

development, and he has also made the same invitation, I 

believe, to our government and to myself, and so we‟ll be able 

to compare very fully what are obviously differing views. 

 

Clearly the views that that member has about the importance of 

committees, of orders in council committees and cabinet 

committees, can cause some dramatic failures in the 

government. Witness, for example, the government‟s intention 

— previously the NDP government — to increase nursing home 

fees by 90 per cent, Mr. Chair, by 90 per cent. I think people 

were asking at that time, who approved this? Was there a 

committee process? Who thought that was a good idea? 

 

Now quite rightly, after a withering attack from Saskatchewan 

people and after consistent questioning from the then opposition 

Saskatchewan Party, quite rightly the government backed away, 

changed its mind. And at the time, I think if you consult the 

record, the opposition of the day began its next comment with, 

that was the right thing to do, something you acknowledged was 

a mistake because your processes let you down. All the 

committees that you have perhaps at the time let you down, but 

you did the right thing. 

 

I have noted when our government, in this particular instance, 

has given credit to the opposition — the current opposition — 

with respect to their concerns on the Bill, when we have said, 

you know they make a good point, we‟re going to refer this to 

the Provincial Auditor, you will hear no such grace coming 

from members opposite. You‟ll hear no such acknowledgement 

that this is perhaps how the system should work. 

 

So if the hon. member wants to spend his time in estimates 

talking about processes in cabinet, none of which are perfect, 

we can go down the list, and I will go down the list of those 

spectacular policy failures that his government experienced 

with all of its committees and processes. 

 

Or we can get on perhaps — I hope — to the substantive issues 

that face Saskatchewan today including the economy; including 

our efforts to rebalance the labour legislative environment; 

including, I hope, the federal-provincial relationship that we 

want for the province; including our efforts to ensure that those 

vulnerable among us are enjoying and sharing in the prosperity 

that we see right across this province. If he wants to talk about 

cabinet committees and process we‟ll do that. I hope we get to 

these issues as well, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, let me ask another simple question. 

Let‟s hope the Premier can spare us the five-minute answers. 

Did this legislation, this Bill 31 that betrays a Sask Party 

promise, that would hide accountability of spending, did it go 

before the caucus of the Saskatchewan Party government for 

approval or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, as I‟ve said, cabinet 

looked at this particular Bill. There was discussions that 

involved members of the caucus, and the Bill was introduced in 

the legislature. We‟re now saying we‟re going to refer this piece 

of legislation to the Provincial Auditor for example for his 

counsel on the balance that we seek between, between 

efficiency and accountability, which I think is how the system 

should work. No system is perfect. 

 

I wonder for example, Mr. Chair, if the hon. member can say in 

good conscience that the Murdoch Carriere settlement was 

approved by his caucus. I wonder if the hon. member would be 

able to stand in his place and say that the most available hours 

debacle presided over by the current member for Wakamow 

when she was the minister, I wonder if he would say that was 

approved by the caucus or the cabinet or all of these other 

processes. Well the hon. deputy leader is nodding her head, 

which I think is actually says something even more alarming 

about the decision-making ability of the previous government 

and explains why they suffered the fate that they suffered at the 

poll and apparently have yet to learn the lesson that 

Saskatchewan people provided for them on November 7. 

 

So the Bill, this Bill 31 will be referred to the Provincial 

Auditor for his advice with respect to a balance between 

efficiencies that we seek and, Mr. Chairman, and transparency, 

and that report will be public. We‟ll be able to go through that 

piece of legislation, pass that legislation, make whatever 

changes we need to ensure that government‟s moving along 

efficiently, but that we are also transparent and accountable. 

And you know it‟s an example of the system working. I salute 

the hon. member for raising his concerns about the Bill because 

they will lead to, I think, a better outcome, and that‟s how this 

place should work. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, when the Saskatchewan Party 

was elected by the people of Saskatchewan, the people of 

Saskatchewan believed what they said. They said they would 

bring accountability and transparency and competence to the 

decision making of government. Well the Premier‟s now 

admitted that they don‟t have a process within to judge 

legislation or to test legislation. Obviously from his answer, 

members of his own caucus were not aware of this, wasn‟t even 

brought to the attention of his entire caucus. Something this 

wrong, this flawed, was not even brought to his caucus. 

 

I would recommend to the Premier, he‟s got backbenchers who 

would have told him that this is in fact is wrong -headed 

legislation, wrong-headed legislation. And this is not the only 

example, Mr. Speaker, that we‟ve already seen in a matter of 

months of a government who introduces without proper 

consultation or without proper internal process, decisions which 

then have to be immediately reversed and retrieved from. 

 

That a budget, a Minister of Finance that‟s already had to 

amend his budget, that‟s rare, Mr. Chair, rare that a member of 

Finance in his first budget with this kind of financial resource 

would have to amend that budget even before it‟s passed by this 

legislature. What? The Minister of Social Services took to the 

Treasury Board a four-year plan for Social Services. I assume 

the Treasury Board approved it. But maybe not, maybe no one 

read it, not even the minister because as soon as the plan is 

unveiled, they have to retreat from it because it‟s so wrong. 

 

Then what‟s next? Well the minister of municipal government, 

Municipal Affairs, he goes all around the province saying, 

we‟re going to do our campaign commitment. We‟re going to 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

do our campaign commitment. It‟s 7 per cent and you‟d better 

get used to, you better get used to tax increases. Now they sit in 

the House, the minister claps for tax increases which he‟s 

forcing on the municipalities and the property tax payers. Well 

as soon as there was a little bit of push back, they have to 

change the plan. But did the minister of government affairs 

know anything about this? Did he know that the Premier‟s 

going to stand up in the House and change the plan? Did the 

Minister of Finance know? We suspect not, Mr. Chair. 

 

This is government on the fly. This is not government which is 

competent, and that is the conclusion, by the way, of the 

editorial board of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix who makes the 

same observation. If this is how decision making is being done 

in this government now, in these first five months, I tell you it‟s 

a very bad omen for the future of the people of Saskatchewan, 

their treasury, and their public policy — a very bad omen. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, let‟s talk about another issue which I know the 

Premier is fully informed on and shouldn‟t take a lot of 

guidance from his officials on this matter. I want to talk about 

their approach to the senior public service of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government chose, upon its election — fair 

enough — to retain some very good public servants. And I‟m 

here talking about the most senior level of public service, the 

deputies. They chose to retain some very good, qualified 

deputies. They also chose, Mr. Chair, to terminate without 

cause other very qualified, experienced deputies. 

 

I would like the Premier to explain to this legislature and to the 

people of Saskatchewan what criteria was used to terminate 

long-term public servants, valuable public servants, or to keep 

those long-term, valuable public servants. What was the criteria 

on the termination without cause of deputies, and on the other 

hand, to keep deputies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well in his preamble, Mr. Chair, the Leader 

of the Opposition made some comments that I think deserve a 

response, and so I intend to do that today. 

 

You know, it‟s interesting with respect to the decision the 

government made on revenue sharing for municipalities. It‟s 

interesting to note that as the budget stood on budget day, the 

municipal revenue-sharing portion that we had committed to, 

the increase in spending represented the keeping of an election 

promise. We promised that we would increase revenue sharing 

by 7 per cent, and that was in original budget. That promise was 

kept, along with 50 other promises in that particular budget 

document also kept, but we kept that commitment. 

 

What happened, what intervened, Mr. Chair, if you remember, 

is a record, a record land sale in terms of oil and gas rights for 

the province. That was an intervening event. And maybe, 

maybe for the hon. member who now characterizes an 

adjustment as just managing on the fly, maybe that‟s an 

indication of the fact that he would simply do nothing with a 

windfall of that revenue. 

 

Here‟s the magnitude of the oil and gas sale that intervened in 

this regard. Last year in the province of Saskatchewan, it was a 

record year for oil and gas land sales in Saskatchewan at a 

quarter-billion dollars for all of last year. In the last two months, 

because I think in part of the powerful message this government 

has sent about royalty consistency, about a business-friendly 

approach to the economy, because of that, in the last two 

months we saw a $265 million land sale in two months. Now 

for this government, for this government that is a material 

change. That is a significant change that happened after the 

provincial budget was tabled, Mr. Chair. 

 

Now if you are used to how the previous outfit used to run 

things, you would know that they made very few of these 

mid-course adjustments. They would rather simply hoard the 

money, especially early in their term. And they were masterful 

at this, but of course the people of the province saw through it. 

They weren‟t buying it anymore. They wouldn‟t provide any of 

that additional resource at the beginning of their term. At the 

end of their term, why they were throwing promises and money 

like they were boxes out of the back of a truck. That was 

exactly what was happening in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government intends to be transparent, intends to be 

different. And when there is a quarter-billion dollar change in 

two months in the affairs of the province, we say then to the 

municipalities not only will we see our promise from this 

current year, but we‟ll raise it next year‟s promise and we‟ll get 

to that own-source revenue sharing formula, Mr. Speaker. And 

I‟ll tell you — Mr. Chairman — and I‟ll tell you the reason that 

they sit over there today is because they tried to practice that 

old style politics. 

 

[15:30] 

 

They‟d sit on their mountain of money for months and months 

at the beginning of their term thinking the people of the 

province can be tricked. At the end of our term, why then we‟ll 

promise everything. Then finally we‟ll increase the minimum 

wage. And more on that in a moment in terms of comments 

from his own people about his motivations for finally increasing 

the minimum wage just before an election campaign. 

 

We‟re not going to operate that way, Mr. Chairman. We going 

to provide proactive government. We‟re going to be there to 

meet the needs of a growing economy. We are going to be 

ready for growth. We will sustain the momentum in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

He has led off in this session interestingly with why it is a 

government would change their position. Well I hope that he is 

prepared to comment as to the 90 per cent fee hikes for seniors 

in our province in nursing homes which he backed off of quite 

rightly. Wonder who all vetted that. Wonder who came up with 

that. It sounds like something that the member from Nutana 

would think of — a 90 per cent increase for seniors in their 

nursing homes — because you see there‟s always a lot of talk 

from that member about helping people in need but the actions 

all belie the words more often than not. 

 

I wonder if the hon. member will stand up and say why they 

flip-flopped spectacularly on most available hours or as some 

people called it, the job killing monster, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I wonder if the hon. member will stand in his place and explain 

to the province of Saskatchewan and in particular nine women 

who‟d like to hear how they arrived at a decision to provide an 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

out-of-court settlement — over $200,000 — to someone who 

was convicted of harassment and fired for assault. I wonder if 

he‟ll stand up and explain the decision-making process around 

that. 

 

With respect to the senior civil service of this province, Mr. 

Speaker — and we‟ve answered this in a written question — we 

have made changes as a new government would. Some senior 

civil servants — many have been retained, some have been 

changed. Those that have been changed, we have let go without 

cause and are negotiating settlements, Mr. Chairman. We have 

followed the course in fact in a few moments, because I expect 

there will be another question, we have followed a course that 

was much more civilized and, frankly, much more caring for 

the individuals involved than we ever saw from that party 

opposite in 1991 at that transition. 

 

And I look forward, Mr. Chairman, to the next question because 

I expect I will be able to expand on that comment. Thank you, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Premier‟s got one thing 

right. There‟s going to be another question because he didn‟t 

come anywhere close, not anywhere close to the question that I 

just asked, which I think is a very significant and important 

question. 

 

But it is telling, it is telling when the Premier does not want to 

answer questions. He‟ll go into flights of rhetoric as he used to 

do as the leader of the opposition. We‟ve heard all of those 

speeches. He won the election. He is now the Premier. He is 

responsible to answer the questions for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s a very simple question: what criteria was used? He is the 

Premier. He is responsible for the senior public service. What 

criteria was used to choose which deputies would remain in the 

service of the people of Saskatchewan and which deputies 

would not remain in the service of the people of Saskatchewan? 

Or was it simply a random choice? Or is it, as his Deputy 

Premier has said to the public, that those senior deputies had to 

agree with quote, “the philosophy of the Premier.” I‟m asking a 

very straightforward, simple question to which this legislature 

and the people of Saskatchewan deserve a straightforward 

answer. What was the criteria used in choosing which deputies 

would remain with the public service and which deputies would 

be terminated without cause? 

 

The Chair: — I would ask that officials not get involved in 

debate and the members also not engage them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I see the hon. members are now engaging 

officials in debate. Is that where we‟ve got to? I would say to 

the chairman and to the member for Nutana, is that where we‟ve 

gotten to? I have a mind to ask the Minister for Advanced 

Education to answer a few questions here and stretch the 

proceedings out a little bit perhaps . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . That‟s right. The questions are . . . 

 

Mr. Chair, in answer to the question, I think it‟s important to 

look at what previous governments perhaps have done, what 

criteria his party has used for changes they made. And then we 

can discuss whether or not they reflect the views of this current 

government with respect to transition. 

 

I note for the record, and I‟ll be happy to table it, the hon. 

members should really go over this before he asks these 

questions either in estimates or in question period. Leader-Post 

Regina, Tuesday, 3, 1991, here‟s a quote, “But Premier Roy 

Romanow insisted Monday the government is well within its 

rights to replace Crown executives and senior civil servants 

without finding fault in their work.” Let‟s repeat that, Mr. 

Romanow said that “. . . the government is well within its rights 

to replace Crown executives and senior civil servants without 

finding fault in their work.” That‟s what he said. Mr. Romanow 

said that. 

 

But he said . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member for 

Athabasca just said from his seat, Romanow‟s a smart guy. And 

I‟m glad he said that because there‟s more about what Mr. 

Romanow had to say on this date in the Leader-Post. He also 

went on to say, and I quote: 

 

“I think that arrangements of personnel can be made by 

governments for as little or as big a reason — depending 

on your point of view — that the persons affected doesn‟t 

fit in with the general approaches and directions of your 

government.” 

 

That doesn‟t fit in with the directions of your government — 

that is what Mr. Romanow said. That‟s the opinion of the NDP. 

But he said something else on the October 23, 1991. Again Mr. 

Romanow, who the member for Athabasca venerates and holds 

in great esteem, maybe even pines for the days when Mr. 

Romanow, maybe he‟s pining for the days when Mr. Romanow 

was the leader of the party . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 

think he did. I think the member for Kindersley is right. No 

wonder he loves him so. I think it was Mr. Romanow that 

recruited him to the party. And I‟m sure he‟s a little bit 

disappointed with respect to what he sees today. 

 

Mr. Romanow said also on the 23rd of ‟91 on this very issue, 

we are going to do with these people — this is the senior civil 

servants and Crown executives: We will “„do with these people 

what we are doing with everybody else, which is based on 

competence and political affiliation . . . ‟” He said, if a person is 

not politically compatible with an NDP: “He said if a person is 

not politically compatible with an NDP administration, „it 

makes the person not competent to carry out the job,‟” Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

These are the views of that party. These were the views of the 

former leader. These are the views of the former government 

where he sat in Executive Council. I want to tell you the 

question was of our government. These are not our views. 

 

Yes, we‟re going to make changes with respect to the senior 

civil service. Yes, we will want to ensure that the agenda of the 

Saskatchewan Party, that which we campaigned on — those 

things that we promised — become a reality, become reflected 

in government policy and action. But, Mr. Chairman, we will, 

with much greater civility and a sense of fairness, proceed with 

making changes in the civil service, including the retention of 

senior civil servants and Crown executive — some, some 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

changes without cause to civil servants and Crown executives; 

some transfers and transitions within the civil service. 

 

We will do those things professionally, Mr. Chair. We will 

respect the individuals involved. And those who are let go, we 

will thank them for their service, and the process to negotiate a 

settlement will be undertaken as it is in the case of those 

changes that this brand new government has made. Thank you, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, apparently we now know 

what Mr. Romanow thought about this question 20 years ago. 

My question and the question of the people of Saskatchewan 

and the question of the public service is, what does the Premier 

think? What is the Premier‟s opinion? 

 

He is no longer leader of the opposition. He is now Premier. He 

has a responsibility to explain his decisions, not by quoting Roy 

Romanow of 20 years ago, at the time when he was working in 

this building or had very shortly left this building in the 

employment of the Devine government. We don‟t need to talk 

about that. We need to talk about what he‟s responsible for 

today. 

 

This Premier made a decision to terminate without cause some 

very long-standing public servants. I don‟t need to read their 

names into the record again today. He says that people like John 

Wright, that people like Lily Stonehouse should be treated with 

respect. That‟s what he just said. Well if he wants to treat those 

public servants with respect, why is it that a number of them 

now are having to revert to the courts, having to go to the courts 

to sue his government to get a fair severance? 

 

So let me ask this question, Mr. Chair. What has the Premier 

budgeted in the budget of Executive Council for the payment of 

severance to those valuable public servants which he fired with 

all their years of experience? How much does he estimate this 

severance bill is going to be? And why should it be that some of 

these public servants now feel they have to go to the courts to 

get a fair settlement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of comments 

generally with respect to the issue of transition. First of all, I 

will say this. The Leader of the Opposition is clearly not 

listening because the last half of my answer was precisely the 

views of this current government, my views with respect to 

changes that are going to be needed when a new government 

comes in. 

 

On November 7 the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

voted for change. It ought not to surprise anyone. I know it 

surprises members opposite. They have not gotten over 

November 7. There is no contrition. There is no admission that 

they were way off base, that they no longer reflected the values 

of Saskatchewan people. We see that in their tirades against 

common sense labour legislative changes that 70 per cent of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan support. We see that 

every day in their line of questioning, Mr. Speaker, weaker and 

weaker, and more inside and more inside every single question 

period, unable to reflect the values of Saskatchewan people. So 

it ought not to surprise us that they are still having trouble with 

the fact that on November 7 people voted for change. 

 

In fact it‟s interesting because their own supporters . . . and I‟m 

going to quote from The Commonwealth magazine which is an 

NDP Party publication, from 2007, where it says . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the hon. member just asked, I guess to 

take a bit of a shot, is this the premier? I want to say to that hon. 

member this. I want to say to that hon. member this. If he wants 

to review previous Executive Council estimates, he will note 

the fact that it was the rare occasion when he ever answered a 

question. Every one so far this afternoon has been answered. 

Moreover it isn‟t your choice. It isn‟t the choice of the member 

for Nutana. It isn‟t the choice of The Commonwealth magazine 

or the NDP who will be the Premier, who will be the member of 

the Executive Council, who will sit on the government side of 

the House. That choice rests with the people of this province, 

and they made it in on November 7. They made it on November 

7. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — This member is getting up and saying, well 

the Premier didn‟t answer the question, when the Premier 

exactly answered the previous question. So I think it‟s germane 

as to what his own party has said with respect to the changes 

needed when a new government takes over or when a new 

government is elected. I think that‟s the question. I think that‟s 

the question. 

 

So here‟s what his own party said in The Commonwealth: 

 

After the 2003 election and in spite of high public 

expectations, [and I‟m quoting] the Calvert government 

seemed to stumble right out of the blocks. There was 

much talk about change in the bureaucracy but instead of 

bringing in new deputy ministers and putting its own 

stamp on the government, the new NDP government 

instead chose to shuffle the deck and simply redistribute 

the existing pool of talent. 

 

Now that‟s the view of The Commonwealth, not the 

Saskatchewan Party government, not the opposition 

Saskatchewan Party, but it goes to the point that we‟re 

discussing. We believe that when people vote for change, there 

ought to be an expectation that change will happen. 

 

The severances that are going to be afforded to deputy ministers 

and Crown executives, those budgets remain with the ministries 

and the Crowns, and we‟re not going to release them because, 

for example, we are currently negotiating with some of those 

individuals. When the severances are complete — for Executive 

Council, for leaders in line departments of government — they 

will be fully disclosed. But it speaks to the fact that this hon. 

member just seems to not get it, that he would want this number 

to be disclosed by the ministries now when negotiations are 

underway, when court proceedings are underway. It‟s a 

ridiculous question, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I asked a very specific question to 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

which we have not received an answer. My question is simply, 

how much has been budgeted for the purposes of severance of 

senior public servants? How much has been budgeted, Mr. 

Chair? Why is it that senior public servants, who the Premier 

says his government wishes to respect, are forced to go to the 

courts to find justice? How is it we are now six months from 

November, almost, and there is no settlement? Why is that, Mr. 

Chair, Mr. Chair? 

 

Now the Premier wants to quote The Commonwealth. Fair 

enough. I appreciate that he reads The Commonwealth. He 

should read more of that magazine. It would do him some good. 

Now I‟ll read a quote that‟s not from The Commonwealth. In 

fact it‟s from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, from the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix, dated not years ago or months ago, but dated 

March 29, dated March 29. This is the view of the editorial 

board of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, and I quote: 

 

If, as is generally the case, the Saskatchewan Party used 

its first budget to set the tone for its administration, the 

province has a growing list to worry about. 

 

This is what The StarPhoenix says about this new government: 

 

Rather than appear to be competent managers of the 

public purse, Premier Brad Wall‟s team has been 

extravagant in its spending, ham-handed in its 

communications strategy and incompetent in its delivery. 

 

Now that‟s the opinion of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. Perhaps 

the Premier would like to get up and wax eloquent on that 

opinion of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. 

 

Mr. Chair, to move to another area of responsibility that falls 

directly under the Premier and under Executive Council and 

that‟s the matter, Mr. Chair, of contract negotiations with the 

public sector. Now this matter will consume — as it will 

consume every government — a fair bit of attention because it 

is through the arrangements with working people across this 

province that public services are delivered, in some cases 

directly through agencies of government and in many other 

cases through third party funded programs like SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] and health 

care like our community-based organizations. 

 

So I‟m going to ask the Premier: how has he and his cabinet and 

his government established the mandate for what will now be a 

round of bargaining that proceeds over the next several months 

and years? How does this government achieve its mandate 

direction, both for itself in its own negotiations and for those 

third party agencies and organizations which are funded? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I guess we could exchange 

quotes from . . . and recent ones. The hon. member seems to not 

care about what his own party paper said about him, and maybe 

we‟ll get into some of these other quotes from Fraser Needham, 

the editor of The Commonwealth from just in December of ‟07 

where he points out how the government failed to address 

racism, failed — the NDP government — failed on the 

environment, failed with respect to the Murdoch Carriere 

scandal, failed on social issues. Actually he gave credit here to 

the Saskatchewan Party for prodding that old NDP government 

to finally move on the minimum wage, did his column. 

But that‟s . . . Well the hon. member from Walsh Acres is 

laughing at Fraser Needham, and I don‟t she ought to treat with 

such disdain a supporter of her party who publishes the NDP 

newsletter. But there it is on the record, there it is on the record. 

The member for Walsh Acres deriding members of her own 

party because of course no one is, no one is as smart as the hon. 

members opposite in terms of all things frankly, Mr. Chair; 

that‟s quite clear. 

 

But there are some interesting quotes in today‟s paper from 

columnists, and I guess we could get into that. Columns that 

question the relationship between the hon. members opposite, 

the NDP, and the Saskatchewan union leaders and whether or 

not it has clouded their judgment, whether or not it has made it 

the fact that the hon. member and his party are so out of touch 

with, with Saskatchewan people, not just as it relates to labour 

legislation, but certainly that‟s part of it. 

 

The bargaining mandates for the province are certainly . . . The 

process used will not be, I don‟t think, dissimilar to the process 

used by the previous administration in terms of bargaining 

committees, a Treasury Board process, and then up to cabinet. 

This is the way that, that for the most part bargaining has 

occurred. The bargaining mandates have been developed in the 

province and it will be followed by our new government as 

well. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, let me ask the Premier, have they 

established a bargaining mandate for this round of negotiations? 

And if so, can he provide to the legislature the broad parameters 

of that bargaining mandate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, by the way it‟s interesting to 

note — and on to the hon. member‟s question in a moment — 

that in 1991, for example, the average severance package paid 

to the Crown presidents for example was $222,500:1991 

dollars, Mr. Chairman. And so there is, there‟s certainly details 

available in terms of 15-year-old, 15-year-old transition 

payments made to fired executives of the Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Chair, we have inherited a situation in the province, and let 

me talk specifically about nurses first of all with respect to the 

bargaining, with respect to the question on the bargaining 

mandate that our government is going to adopt. We‟ve inherited 

a situation that is almost unprecedented in Canada, certainly 

unprecedented in the Prairies in terms of the deleterious state of 

nurse recruitment and retention left to us by the former 

government where other provinces . . . 

 

Now we should back up. In the early 1990s a lot of 

governments who were seeking to balance the books did so at 

the expense of training seats. They cut training seats. A lot of 

nurse training seats were cut in Saskatchewan. But to be fair, a 

lot of nurse training seats were cut in Manitoba. So round about 

the mid-1990s, a little bit later, other provinces with other 

governments — it‟s not a partisan statement, some of them 

NDP, some of them not — but other governments in other 

provinces woke up in the mid-‟90s and said, we have created 

for ourselves a future disaster in the making because the cuts 

went too deep and we will not have enough nurses to keep our 

hospitals open, to keep beds open. 

 

Other provinces moved on that. They sat down with their 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

nurses. They sat down with the stakeholders in the economy to 

try to develop a plan to make up for the massive cuts in the 

early ‟90s. That happened in Manitoba. It happened to an extent 

in Alberta. Did it happen in Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair? No, it 

did not happen here. 

 

And nurses have been saying for years that the result of that is 8 

to 5 emergencies in rural Saskatchewan. If you have an 

emergency after 5 o‟clock, tough luck because we can‟t keep 

the facilities open. The result of that, I mean code red every 

other week it seems at a hospital in our tertiary centres. The 

results of that incompetence and that neglect on the nursing 

issue has meant that we have among the longest waiting lists in 

the country for certain kinds of procedures. 

 

So that‟s the situation we‟ve inherited . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . We‟ve also inherited code burgundy, the hon. 

member is offering as a correction. It‟s very kind of her. It‟s 

very kind of her to do it without the tone of derision in her 

voice as well, Mr. Chair. 

 

I will say this about what we then need to do with respect to 

nurses. As an example, we need to be able to compete with 

Alberta. And so that‟s part of what‟s being negotiated now. And 

we‟re not going to do it on the floor of the legislature. But the 

contracts that we‟re going to seek to negotiate with all the 

public sector employees of the province have to reflect the fact 

that we need to keep up, obviously, with the cost of living. We 

need to be able to be competitive in areas where there are labour 

shortages. We need to make sure that we are recruiting and 

retaining the people that we need to provide good public service 

to the province. This will govern our bargaining mandates for 

Saskatchewan This will govern the process. 

 

Maybe the hon. member will stand up and advocate 0, 1, and 1 

again like he did for everyone, a cookie cutter that he then must, 

that he then must change midstream because he knows it‟s not 

working. And he had to offer, I think it was called the 

light-at-the-end-of-the-tunnel clause, Mr. Chairman. They had 

to do all of these midstream adjustments. The hon. member for 

Cannington points out that that light at the end of the tunnel 

may have been a train. And he may be right with respect to 

November 7. 

 

This is the view of the NDP — mandates for every sector, every 

public sector worker, regardless, regardless of shortages, 

regardless of whether or not we‟re competitive with Alberta. 

We don‟t view things in that way. We take a common sense 

approach to bargaining. We take a common sense approach to 

developing a bargaining mandate that would reflect the fact that 

there are shortages in certain areas of public service where we 

need to do a little bit more to recruit, that we need to be able to 

compete with the province next door in some areas. In some, by 

the way, we are competitive. In fact our wages in some areas of 

public service are higher than Alberta. 

 

So we come to this place. We come to the people of 

Saskatchewan with a common sense approach that says our 

bargaining mandate will reflect reality and will be driven by 

results, the outcomes we desire which, of course, is the 

provision of public service, and in the case of health care, the 

provision of timely health care. This will be the bargaining 

mandate, policy development process we have followed and we 

will continue to follow, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I asked if he‟d set a mandate. 

He has not answered that question. I‟ve asked him to give us the 

broad parameters of the mandate. He hasn‟t answered that 

question. He wants to spend more time talking about the time 

we were in government than his responsibilities, Mr. Chair. 

 

Let me try it again. With the nurses — the Premier wants to talk 

about nurses — has the government provided to SAHO a 

bargaining mandate? And within that mandate, does SAHO 

have the parameters to deliver the memorandum of 

understanding that his Minister of Health signed with nurses? Is 

it a parameter that‟s provided to SAHO for bargaining with our 

nurses? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, is the Leader of the Opposition 

. . . You know, I think we kind of gave him a pass on a question 

earlier when he was saying, how much have you budgeted for 

these out-of-court settlements or the court-directed settlements 

that may come from the severances that have occurred. I kind of 

thought, well that would just give him a pass. He surely can‟t 

mean we‟d provide those numbers to the public, but rather that 

we would report it fully afterward, so that there is a bargaining 

position on behalf of taxpayers. This is, after all, taxpayers‟ 

money we‟re talking about, Mr. Chair. 

 

Now the hon. member wants us to say, here‟s what our 

bargaining mandate is. Here‟s what we want. Here‟s the 

bargaining mandate we‟ve given to SAHO for the nurses. Here 

are the numbers. Well that‟s not very respectful of collective 

bargaining, Mr. Chair, is it? I don‟t think. Well they‟re kind of 

laughing. They want to know what the mandate is on the floor 

of the legislature. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Chair: — I enjoy a good debate, but there‟s getting to be 

some constant bickering going back and forth, and it‟s kind of 

interfering with that. I would ask the members to respect the 

members that have the floor. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the 

Opposition who sat here in this chair for some period of time, 

who was the minister of Health, wants us to say on the floor of 

the legislature what the bargaining mandate we‟ve given to 

SAHO is, to show our hand in a negotiating process. It‟s 

taxpayers‟ dollars first of all; secondly it‟s spectacularly, it 

would be spectacularly incompetent for anybody to do that. It 

may be that for someone to ask that a government would do it, 

someone who has the experience of sitting in this chair to spend 

time in estimates saying, will you release the . . . would you 

release your secret bargaining mandate that you‟ve given to 

SAHO. 

 

The answer to the hon. member, the answer to the hon. member 

is no, we won‟t. But we will bargain in good faith with nurses. 

We will bargain with them as the minister did when he 

developed a recruitment and retention partnership with nurses, 

historic not only to the province but to the country, respectful of 

nurses and respectful of the fact that we have a huge hole — an 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

NDP hole — to dig out of when it comes to trying to ensure that 

we can recruit and then retain nurses for the health care system 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, one more time I‟ll try to get an 

answer from the Premier. The answer was a very specific 

question. Have they established a mandate for bargaining? Have 

they established a mandate that has been provided to SAHO, the 

broad parameters of that mandate, and does that mandate 

accommodate the memorandum of understanding which the 

Minister of Health was so proud to sign with our nurses? 

 

Because, Mr. Chair, if the mandate does not encompass the 

memorandum of understanding, then I tell you what: the health 

districts are not going to be able to meet the requirements of 

that MOU [memorandum of understanding]. 

 

Will the Premier, will the Premier today assure this legislature 

that a mandate has been established, that the broad parameters 

of that mandate will in fact encompass the provisions of the 

MOU that the Minister of Health now shouts from his seat 

about, Mr. Chair? A very simple question, and to this we would 

appreciate a very straightforward and simple answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the hon. member, the hon. member 

from his seat, the hon. member from his seat just said, after his 

question he said, these are the questions that nurses are asking. 

I‟ll tell you about the questions that nurses are asking. They‟re 

asking why an NDP government, a social democratic 

government ignored SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] for 

years and years and years and let this problem build up. And if 

he wants a number, I‟ll give him one today on the floor of the 

legislature. The number is 800. That‟s how many nurses we‟ve 

committed to recruit for this province, to retain, and we intend 

to keep that promise, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I‟ve got another number for him. Another 

number is 300. That‟s how many nurses the hon. member for 

Regina Qu‟Appelle and the health regions have gone to the 

Philippines to recruit, some of whom are arriving even now in 

the province of Saskatchewan. There‟s a number. 

 

Mr. Chair, in the hon. member‟s question, in the hon. member‟s 

question he says, well you know, I just want to know if there‟s a 

bargaining mandate. I don‟t really want to know what‟s in the 

mandate, but is the nurses‟ partnership agreement in the 

mandate? It‟s incredible. It‟s incredible. 

 

First of all, of course a mandate has been provided. Secondly, 

Mr. Chair, we will not be negotiating on the floor of the 

legislature. We will not be disclosing the people‟s position on 

behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan on the floor of the 

legislature. It just doesn‟t make any sense. I‟m trying to be as 

kind as I can, but we‟re not going to talk about what‟s in the 

mandate. 

 

And if this is, by the way, is how the hon. member negotiates 

deals, no wonder we got the Domtar deal we got in the dying 

days of that government. If this is how that hon. member 

negotiates deals, no wonder this is how we got SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], Mr. 

Chairman. If that‟s how that hon. member negotiates, Mr. 

Chairman, no wonder we got dot-coms in Georgia and 

Tennessee. 

 

The new government, Mr. Chairman, doesn‟t operate that way. 

People voted for change on the 7th, and we intend to provide it 

for them, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To begin, could the 

Premier please provide us with his definition of what is a mall. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, malls can take a 

number of different forms, so what we‟ll endeavour to do is 

immediately provide that definition to the hon. member. We‟ll 

send it across the way as soon as we can write it out in proper 

form and encompass all the different aspects of what a mall 

might be. 

 

And I look forward to the next question, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I look forward to 

the tabling of those documents indeed. 

 

I‟ve gone to Swift Current a few times. I‟ve had the opportunity 

to travel there, and I‟ve had actually the opportunity to do a 

little bit of shopping in Swift Current. More than once I‟ve 

visited the Swift Current Mall, and in the Swift Current Mall 

there are quite a few stores. There‟s a flower shop, some 

clothing stores. There‟s a wedding shop, a music shop. I assume 

that since this is, this mall, the Swift Current Mall is in the 

Premier‟s constituency, that he‟s had the opportunity to shop in 

this mall. And I would assume also that since he would frequent 

this mall, that this would be his basic understanding of what a 

typical mall is. 

 

In explaining to the media why the Sask Party axed Station 20, 

the Premier suggested that he could not support the 

development of a mall, and this was his explanation as to why 

he killed Station 20 as it was designed at that time. Clearly to 

anyone that is involved with Station 20, there is the 

understanding that Station 20 is not a mall and that to 

characterize it as such is a misrepresentation of what Station 20 

is. 

 

Why did the Premier so meanly and so inaccurately describe 

Station 20 as a mall, and why did he use this ill-informed 

understanding as a reason to exclude so many people in 

Saskatoon from experiencing the benefits of our economy, 

especially when the Premier is sitting on $1.5 billion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well first of all I don‟t know what the hon. 

member has against malls to characterize something as a mall is 

somehow bad. I have said to those who have organized Station 

20 that when . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well and I‟ve said 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

to those Station 20 supporters that certainly no offence was 

made with respect to their efforts to put together this 

development. I understand the motivations for the people that 

support Station 20. We don‟t agree that this is the best result, 

the best outcome for what is needed in that particular area, and 

there will be much more to talk about in the days ahead on that 

I know, Mr. Chair, and maybe in subsequent questions. 

 

We‟re not in the business of building . . . I mean if the hon. 

member wants to get into it, some malls have offices, and some 

malls have retail outlets. And this particular Station 20 as a 

development was going to have both of those things — a clinic 

and offices and a store, a co-operative grocery store meant to 

meet some needs in the area. There were also some very 

attendant concerns with this development that were ignored by 

the previous government, not the least of which was the 

concerns of the auditor about the funding. 

 

I know the previous government didn‟t seem to really care 

much about the Provincial Auditor‟s concerns with how they 

spent taxpayers‟ money. That‟s perhaps their experience and 

their view. It is not our view, Mr. Chair, and we took very 

sincerely and seriously the concerns the auditor had around 

Station 20. 

 

Additionally, I would say that we believe it‟s important in that 

particular area of Saskatoon that Station 20 is to serve, was to 

serve, there are a number of First Nations people. There are a 

number of First Nations people that come under the care and 

auspices of the Saskatoon Tribal Council, in fact I would say a 

significant portion of the population there. Let us consider then, 

Mr. Chair, what that hon. member seems to want to ignore and 

ignored apparently if he had a hand in the development of the 

proposal. 

 

The Chief, Joe Q., the tribal chief for the Saskatoon Tribal 

Council, said this: 

 

Although new construction in the core area of Saskatoon 

is normally welcomed, the . . . [Saskatoon Tribal Council] 

has watched in dismay as the planning and the direction of 

the project was wrested away from the community by 

service agencies operated and/or run by non-resident, 

upper middle class proponents with strong political ties. 

 

I‟ll read it again for the hon. Member. He may be, I‟m not sure 

if he‟s being referred to. “. . . upper middle class proponents 

with strong political ties.” Not our words, the words of the 

chief. 

 

Well the member for Elphinstone is laughing. And no wonder, 

no wonder, Mr. Chairman, that the chief of the Saskatoon Tribal 

Council is a little offended with the attitude this government 

had on Station 20 because he wasn‟t asked for his opinion 

though his people live in the area, Mr. Chair, and now that he 

has put his views on the record through a member of this 

Assembly, their response, the member for Elphinstone, is to 

laugh, Mr. Chair. No wonder a lot of people on the Station 20 

issue are having a hard time taking, increasingly are having a 

hard time taking those members opposite seriously. 

 

The chief goes on to say: 

 

The Station 20 project proponents made it very clear that 

our involvement would be at best, token . . . 

 

Let‟s repeat that because the member for Athabasca may not 

have heard it. Here‟s what the chief of the tribal council said: 

 

The Station 20 project proponents made it very clear that 

our involvement would be at best, token and „advisory‟. 

 

Well, Mr. Chair, the hon. member for Athabasca, he just makes 

light of that. He makes light of the fact that the chief of the 

tribal council, who wrote to the government on the issue of 

Station 20, believed that First Nations people, that a duly 

constituted, duly elected First Nation tribal council — the 

Saskatoon Tribal Council — felt as though they were treated as 

token by that government. And the member for Athabasca is 

still chirping from his seat. And he doesn‟t seem to care, and 

it‟s all a big joke. And, Mr. Chairman, that‟s why he is sitting 

over there, and that‟s why they‟ll be over there for a long time 

to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think the hon. member ought to maybe get 

his member under control because we are talking about a 

serious matter. What is desired by both the proponents of 

Station 20, by the Saskatoon Tribal Council, and by the 

Government of Saskatchewan is that we would best address 

issues in the core area. And that is access to health care, and 

that is access to nutrition, and it is proper education, and it‟s 

dealing with issues in the core areas like addictions. 

 

And that‟s what our budget was all about, and that‟s why we 

will continue to work in that area and why our government will 

put its investment where its commitment is with respect to 

improving, improving that area and achieving the objectives 

and the goals. 

 

We‟ve also heard from urban Métis association, by the way, 

who shared the views of the tribal council, who said they 

weren‟t consulted. So was this truly just a last minute 

commitment, promise by the government to try to shore up 

support, or is it the best possible way to achieve what we all 

want to achieve in the Riversdale community on the west side 

of Saskatoon? 

 

We believe it‟s important. We believe, on this side of the 

House, it‟s important to find the right solution to these, to these 

issues. And we intend to do that. It may not be the way that was 

contrived by the members opposite. It will involve consultation 

with stakeholders. We subscribe to that radical notion, Mr. 

Chair. And no one ought to doubt however our resolve to deal 

with the issues that face that core area and core neighbourhoods 

right across our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, you must, you must 

understand, when the Premier‟s giving his reasons as to why 

Station 20 was not supported by his government, the confusion 

that occurred with the people in Saskatoon and the people in 

this province because we had a very, a very scattered response 

from different ministers. 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

We had the Minister of Health suggesting that it was because of 

other spending concerns with fire alarms, and it was an either-or 

situation. We had the Finance minister suggesting that they 

were unable to support Station 20 West, based on 

misinformation that he had according to how much funding had 

been already raised to that point in time. And then we had the 

Premier almost making an off-the-cuff remark about not 

supporting a mall. 

 

And I think most people have seen that the types of responses, 

the varied responses made it clear to everyone that the true 

reason was not the reason that was being represented because if 

the true reason was being put forward, then we would have had 

a uniform response by all the ministers involved, and we 

wouldn‟t have had one story here, one story there, and another 

one over there. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The makeup of the Station 20 group, as well . . . I didn‟t happen 

to see the Premier at the march that occurred where media 

reports suggest that there were over 2,500 people at that march. 

I didn‟t actually see any of the Sask Party members there. 

 

It‟s important to recognize that the people that support this 

initiative do indeed come from across the city. There are people 

from the east side of the river; there‟s people from the core 

neighbourhoods. And this is represented every day by the 

petitions that we present in this legislature, Mr. Chair, that 

people across the city, regardless of political stripe . . . This is 

the interesting thing. I‟ve spoken to people from all parties who 

clearly see that the Station 20 project was a good idea, and they 

clearly see that the Sask Party has missed the mark on this one 

by not supporting it. 

 

So the Premier suggests that while the Station 20 model as it 

was originally put forward was not a model that his party could 

support and he suggested the mall rationale as the reason why 

he could not support it, but he claims that he is still, that his 

party is a supporter and defender of the core neighbourhoods 

and Saskatoon in general. 

 

We know that in the core neighbourhoods the Westside 

community clinic plays a very important role. And we also 

know that the Westside community clinic is a very busy place, 

and that it‟s in fact bursting at the seams with all the activity 

that‟s going on in there. In fact, I think it was just last night the 

Health minister in estimates made some comments about when 

he was touring, how he saw how full the community clinic was. 

There was some cooking activity going on. And it is a busy 

place, and it‟s in need of expansion. 

 

So at this time, will the Premier commit to funding either the 

expansion or the relocation of the Westside community clinic? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, there are a number of agencies 

in that particular neighbourhood that provide excellent services 

to people who need them, and our government‟s going to be 

working with all those agencies to ensure that they‟re properly 

resourced and can provide them. 

 

Certainly we‟re aware there‟s a need for, for resources in terms 

of the Westside Clinic. There‟s a need for resources at the food 

bank. That‟s why our government in its budget kept another 

campaign promise to increase funding to food banks and 

community-based organizations for life skills training and 

employment skills training of $5 million. So, Mr. Chair, there 

are also other agencies that continue to be funded by this 

government, and CBOs [community-based organization] as 

well, in addition to the Westside community clinic. The White 

Buffalo Youth Lodge is another one. 

 

The initiative, the student wellness initiative community health 

program, or SWITCH [student wellness initiative toward 

community health], is another one. KidsFirst is involved. The 

building health equity program is another resource. 

 

I would also say this, Mr. Chair. We believe that — and we‟re, 

we‟re certainly receiving this feedback — that St. Mary‟s, 

which is right in the former, the former premier‟s constituency 

has been in long need of some attention from government in 

terms of the Saskatoon separate school. We know of the huge, 

the very important community services provided at St. Mary‟s, 

including health care, including programs to ensure that, that 

kids do not go hungry. There needs also to be support there for 

the fact that this particular school has been allowed to 

absolutely run down to not a very good state for anyone who 

has been there. 

 

I had the chance, along with the former member, Mr. Merriman, 

to serve a lunch there with Care & Share, another agency 

providing a great service to that area and other areas of 

Saskatoon. And this is years ago, and then it was pretty clear 

that the school was in need of some, some significant 

investment. So the hon. member ought not to doubt this 

government‟s resolve to deal with the issues in the area. 

 

It may not be about building a building. Let‟s remember this 

Station 20 decision was announced by the former premier in his 

own riding at the very, very end of the government, at the very, 

very end of the government, of its life. And that‟s why a lot of 

people were questioning the motives in the first place not of the 

people and the partners involved but of that party. They had 

seen too many announcements in those six months prior to the 

election being called in October, too much thrown off the back 

of a truck by that very, very desperate government of the day 

trying to hang on, to cling on to power. And so the motives 

around this particular announcement I think were doubted by 

people — not the motives of the partners involved certainly but 

of the party in power. 

 

And so the question with respect to all the agencies, including 

the Westside Clinic, is a valid one. These are groups that are 

providing excellent service. They need the support and the 

resources of government. And for those groups in Saskatoon on 

the west side and around the province, our government is going 

to be there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have a 

short question for the Premier. Is it the intention of his 

government to provide any kind of assistance over and above 

the $6 million that has been announced for water wells in the 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

southwest part of the province to assist those farmers that are 

facing their fourth year of drought? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well first of all, the premise of the hon. 

member‟s question is, as usual, incorrect because there is much 

more that producers in the Southwest are receiving from the 

government, as are producers across the province. It is true that 

we are not going to ignore those producers, as the previous 

government did. And that‟s why in the budget, the government, 

the new government has highlighted, as the member pointed 

out, has committed to a $6 million farm and ranch water 

infrastructure program. 

 

There is work that is needed with respect to obviously the wells, 

just generally speaking with respect to RMs who are in a third 

or fourth year of a drought on the infrastructure piece. And I 

have noted actually with interest the support for this initiative 

from producers in southwest Saskatchewan who, when it was 

announced by the minister — I think last week — were very 

public in their support for this kind of initiative. And of course, 

the long-term solution here — no surprise, it is always the case 

— is going to be co-operation from the weather. 

 

For the hon. member — since she may or may not know this, 

living in Saskatoon — some good news on that front in the 

Southwest, obviously much, much more is needed in terms of 

rain, but there‟s been some progress. But with respect to the 

premise of her question being wrong, let me just say this: we on 

this side of the House, in the election campaign, promised to 

significantly increase the rebates, the education property tax 

rebates for Saskatchewan people, for all property owners in the 

province. 

 

Interesting, interesting on this point, Mr. Chair, that the NDP 

also made their promise with respect to the education portion of 

property tax which weighs heavy on producers regardless of 

where they live. And guess what, Mr. Chair? If the NDP had 

won the election and were sitting over here, there would be no 

additional property tax relief for Saskatchewan producers either 

in southwest Saskatchewan or anywhere else. There would not 

have been also the review and the improvements already made 

to the crop insurance program and the follow-through on the 

commitment we made to review it with a view to improving 

coverage. 

 

Neither, I don‟t think, would there have been any progress with 

respect to the issue of gophers, which are very attendant to the 

drought in southwest Saskatchewan. And rather than, rather 

than have to drag our government to the right decision with 

respect to strychnine, as producers in the area had to do with 

that government because they simply seemed to stop caring 

about rural Saskatchewan, rather than that we acted proactively 

and the Minister of Agriculture made some significant 

announcements. 

 

Now the situation in the Southwest today is that producers are 

still coming out of, hopefully coming out of a very long-term 

drought. The government has committed to improve property 

tax rebates for all producers, to important crop insurance 

improvements, and also to this specific $6 million identified in 

the budget for the area. 

And, Mr. Chairman, our minister has been to the area, toured it 

early in the spring, has committed that after the session he will 

be going back to the area and watching it very closely to see 

where the situation is at, to see what‟s happening with respect 

to weather. 

 

But as my hon. member for Kindersley has said, thankfully in 

Saskatchewan we don‟t lose, we haven‟t lost a crop in May. 

And so we will be monitoring the situation very carefully. Our 

member for Wood River is doing that now. Our Minister of 

Agriculture is doing it. The Minister of Highways is from 

Cypress Hills; he is as well. And certainly as a resident of Swift 

Current I‟m very aware of the situation as well, Mr. Chair. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, through you to the Premier. It is 

true that we do have a water program that was announced and it 

is appreciated. It is true that in one part of that region this 

morning they had about a millimetre of rain and in another part 

of that southwest drought area they had about a half an inch of 

rain last week. But the conditions there are very, very dry. Very, 

very dry and people are concerned. 

 

One of the things that the minister or the Premier will know is 

that people have the opportunity to move their cattle out of that 

region. And I‟m wondering, given the commitment of the 

government to rural Saskatchewan, and so many people in that 

party that come from a farm background, are they prepared, 

given the escalating costs of transportation, to assist in any way 

those ranchers in that area in moving their cattle through some 

assistance for transportation? 

 

As he knows, the price of cattle are down. They are having a 

difficult time with feed costs, as he will know, and now they 

have to move cattle. Is there anything that his government 

might have in the offing to assist those ranchers and producers 

in that region? 

 

[16:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the hon. 

member for the question. I mean it is a serious issue. It‟s why 

— and I thank her for pointing out — we‟ve also, the minister 

also announced the initiative to assist producers in moving 

cattle to other less affected areas, areas where the pastures are a 

lot healthier. 

 

And I can say, well the hon. member keeps asking the question. 

I‟m going to answer her question. Yes. I‟m going to answer 

your question. The Minister of Agriculture tells me that uptake 

on the program has been very strong, that it‟s nearly fully 

subscribed in terms of available pasture — that‟s the case now 

— without any assistance on transportation. I will say this, as 

the minister has said in question period and as our government 

has said, we are going to be carefully watching what goes on 

there because although the recent moisture‟s been welcomed, 

we‟re a long ways away from dealing with what is a three-year 

drought, to be sure. 

 

The other issue for us as a government is that we inherited a 

situation where crop insurance had not been attended to, had not 

been maintained. That‟s why you saw us put $25 million into 

that crop insurance program to make sure the coverage was 

there. We inherited a situation where the government had not 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

done enough with respect to the weight of funding education 

that falls on producers. 

 

The government had, up until that point — and mind you, there 

was an intervening election — had not moved with respect to 

the cattle situation which was certainly, which was certainly 

getting difficult before the campaign was called. They chose to 

do nothing. We, within weeks, Mr. Deputy Chair, moved on 

that issue as well, providing a loan program for those who 

produce hogs and cattle in our province — which, as has been 

noted, what stakeholders asked for — even though we 

understand that for some, another loan isn‟t always the best, the 

best situation. 

 

In our budget as well there is a significant investment for rural 

infrastructure. We also inherited a situation where — would be 

the case in southwest Saskatchewan and elsewhere — where the 

state of our health care facilities, the state of our school 

facilities, had just been left. They were living on depreciation 

on that side of the House. They weren‟t keeping up with 

demands in terms of infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan. So 

that too was a centrepiece of our budget. 

 

With respect to the Southwest, we are going to be carefully 

watching what‟s going on down there. And we have taken steps 

for all producers and specifically for producers in the Southwest 

that we will deliver on. And again everyone‟s hopeful that the 

weather‟s going to co-operate and we‟ll have a crop there, and 

in areas that are flooding, we‟ll have improvements there as 

well so all farmers in Saskatchewan can look forward to very 

high prices, a bountiful harvest. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Through the Chair to the 

Premier. The Premier will know that while there are high 

prices, there are also escalating costs for inputs — herbicides, 

chemicals, fertilizer. In fact fertilizer costs have practically 

tripled. And that‟s what farmers are facing this year. At the 

same time, we have companies that are certainly enjoying 

record profits. 

 

But to the Premier: it is true that we, you know, you‟ve never 

lost a crop at this time of year. But one year ago his Minister of 

Agriculture said in this Assembly that farmers and producers 

were making their decisions in the southwest part of the 

province, and was the government prepared to offer a per acre 

payment. This is also a Minister of Agriculture that called for 

loans. And obviously the previous government had many 

short-term loans at various times for producers. But we also 

had, as a government, per acre payments. And we also had per 

animal payments, certainly in the northwest part of the province 

when there was drought. 

 

And I‟m wondering whether his government — by mid-June if 

the situation is still as serious as it presently is — is his 

government prepared to make a per acre payment even with the 

changes to crop insurance? I acknowledge those changes. Is he 

prepared to also consider a per animal payment as was done in 

the northwest part of the province when that part of the 

province experienced very significant drought? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the answer to the member‟s 

question is that we are going to be watching the situation very 

carefully. It‟s where we live. I can tell you even in the city of 

Swift Current — where obviously there are actually many 

farmers that live there but not everybody in Swift Current‟s a 

farmer — everyone understands in my hometown the 

importance of what‟s going to happen and unfold this spring. I 

would take it from the hon. member‟s question that her position 

has changed because you see . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

well she says not at all. Because her position is that she does not 

support per acre payments for this particular disaster in the 

Southwest. Her position is that she doesn‟t support acreage 

payments for those affected by the drought in southwest 

Saskatchewan. Well she‟s nodding her head. Then why didn‟t it 

happen, Mr. Deputy Chair? She sat in the cabinet. She was a 

senior minister in this government when those individuals came 

to the legislature when the drought was on for three years, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. Did she support payments then and if so, did she 

say anything to her colleagues at all? Because I remember the 

Agriculture minister simply was steadfast. The answer was no. 

 

Was there any money even for infrastructure, $6 million for 

water infrastructure, from that government? The answer was no. 

Was there any money for property tax rebates for farmers in the 

Southwest or around the province in addition to what had 

happened from the government? The answer was no. Was there 

any more investment to crop insurance to improve the program 

by the $25 million this government has committed? The answer 

is no. 

 

I mean the member‟s raising important questions. They are 

important questions. We will monitor this situation. But I‟ll tell 

you what — well, I‟ve given her the answer — I‟ll tell you 

what. Her position has obviously changed when it comes to 

helping producers in southwest Saskatchewan or anywhere else. 

Well I‟ll tell you what, Mr. Deputy Chair. In this budget is 

specific investment for southwest Saskatchewan. In this budget 

is more investment for crop insurance. In this budget is 

proactive moves with respect to gopher controls, something 

they never understood about, something they laughed about in 

this Legislative Assembly. In this budget is investments for 

property tax rebates for producers in southwest Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, this party, this party has kept its 

commitments with respect to rural Saskatchewan. And when 

that member sat in a very senior position in the cabinet, she did 

not support, she did not support help for southwest 

Saskatchewan producers who were facing a drought. She didn‟t 

support them because nothing happened for those producers 

under that government. Nothing happened. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Chair, we welcome the questions. We invite her 

to . . . I‟m sure she will be monitoring what happens this spring 

to see the effect of the program that has been announced by the 

Minister of Agriculture. We will be doing the same thing 

together with the RMs, the reeves, the leaders, and the 

producers in southwest Saskatchewan where we live, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

find this very interesting. I was listening with interest to the 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

Premier who has talked a lot about consultations and how proud 

he is about the style of consultations that he takes. 

 

I‟ve stood many days in this House presenting petitions about 

people asking for full public consultations on the task force on 

housing affordability, and not a word from the other side. So I 

find this very interesting. The Premier today has the nerve to 

stand up and talk about the great consultation processes that 

he‟s committed to. But my question is about this. And I see that 

actually we have a member from the task force on housing 

affordability in the House today. So this is an important 

question, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: we know that there is no 

brand new money for housing in this budget, no brand new 

money for housing in this budget. We also know that the task 

force for housing affordability will report on May 30. Will he 

commit, on behalf of his government, to provide the resources 

to meet or to support the recommendations that this task force 

will give, that we do not have to wait a full year until the next 

budget? They have $1.5 billion. Clearly we can do something 

over the summer months, make some commitments. Is he 

prepared to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, first of all, the hon. 

member raises a very important issue. The issue of housing in 

Saskatchewan right now is obviously very important. We see 

very, very strong housing markets right across the province, and 

not just in the major centres. We see them in places like 

Moosomin. We see them in places like Humboldt. We see them 

in places even like Alida, notwithstanding the neighbours that 

you might have to live beside, and I‟m only referring to my 

hon. friend who sits down the aisle. 

 

It is an issue, the result of a strong housing market and of 

growth. One of the attendant consequences is that prices have 

gone up and rents have gone up. And it‟s why, by the way, our 

government has undertaken historic new investments with 

respect to increasing, record increases to help those who are 

employable but require further assistance. It‟s also why the 

minister responsible appointed a task force to deal with this 

issue of housing and to report very quickly. 

 

And I also acknowledge one of the members of the task force 

who‟s joined us today, a distinguished former member of this 

Assembly, Mr. Pringle, and he is joined in his efforts of course 

by another distinguished member of the Assembly, Mr. 

Merriman. They have been . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — They have been travelling the province and 

they have been undertaking a very significant consultation, and 

for that hon. member to somehow suggest that they‟re not doing 

their job, that they‟re not getting around the province of 

Saskatchewan, that they‟re not getting around the province of 

Saskatchewan to get their consultation done, I think it‟s 

disrespectful to both of those individuals involved who are 

working very hard, who are working very hard to bring back a 

report — just now in a matter of weeks — to the government on 

this, on this very important issue. 

 

Interesting to note in the situation we inherited, there was some 

development and some progress being made by Sask Housing 

and the Ministry of Social Services, but really nothing in the 

platform that existed from the NDP in the election on this issue 

of housing, which are now . . . the member has characterized as 

the most, the most pressing issue facing the province. 

 

Nonetheless I want to say to the hon. member that 856 social 

housing units are currently at various stages of development. 

They‟ll be on stream over the next 18 months. Many are in the 

inner-city neighbourhoods of Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 

Albert. Across the province 26.4 million is available for 

Aboriginal off-reserve housing trust, and another 24.2 million 

allocated for the affordable housing trust. 

 

The member will also want to know that in Saskatoon, 506 

affordable housing units are in progress, 275 scheduled to be 

available this year in 2008. Total value of affordable housing 

projects in progress in Saskatoon is $42.7 million. 

 

With respect to the situation that, that‟s going to unfold into the 

future, I will say this to the hon. member: we are looking 

forward to the report of the task force. We know that more 

needs to be done on this issue for both affordable housing and 

just generally to look at the issue of, you know, the number of 

apartments that are available in our province. What can be done, 

for example, to encourage those who develop apartments, not 

necessarily only affordable housing now, not exclusively 

affordable housing, but apartments which will ease some of the 

demand crunch as well? What can be done to provide an 

incentive perhaps that these will be built? 

 

Options are going to come forward from the task force. I think 

it would be, I think it‟d be irresponsible for any member of this 

Assembly to say, we are going to fund all of those 

recommendations. We haven‟t seen them yet. We don‟t know 

what they are. We don‟t know if the recommendations will 

have, if they will have exact dollar values attached to them, or 

whether or not that will need to be researched. Surely the hon. 

member, surely the hon. member is not advocating that we 

would just say today, whatever is in the report is going to be 

completely funded, when we don‟t know if the task force is 

going to be able to come with exacting numbers even on what 

they‟re recommending. We do look forward to the report. And 

that member and members of this House ought not to doubt our 

resolve to ensure, Mr. Deputy Chair, that while we ensure that 

the Saskatchewan economy continues to . . . Mr. Chair, while 

the Saskatchewan economy continues to grow, while we want 

to continue to experience growth, that we will deal with the 

challenges of growth. 

 

[16:45] 

 

We will make sure that people in this province are benefiting, 

all people in this province are benefiting. We will deal with 

issues that affect the core areas. We will be dealing with issues 

around housing for the province, for people in Saskatchewan. 

This is the commitment of the government. And I want to 

assure that member that I think he‟s going to welcome what he 

sees on this front in the future, just in generally from this 

government on our desire to have a growth agenda that does not 

leave people behind, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It didn‟t take long for the 

softer side of the Sask Party to disappear. Station 20 cuts, I 

won‟t go into that since my colleague from Massey Place has 

covered that pretty well. Vulnerable workers‟ health benefits 

cut. But the one I do want to talk about today is the children‟s 

dental sealant program that was cut. All of these have health 

implications. 

 

The dental sealant program was targeting children in grades 1 to 

7 and screened them in their community schools. The Minister 

of Health said at the time that the cut was announced that these 

children could be more cheaply served by accessing their own 

health, the dental health benefits program and going to the 

dentist, basically. And the fact is many of these children simply 

don‟t go to a dentist. Eventual costs of the lack of dental care 

far exceed the preventive costs of a dental sealant program. 

 

SAHO, the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, 

commended the establishment of the dental sealant program and 

in fact wanted more services for children, for dental health for 

children. And they had some compelling background 

information that they shared in some of their resolutions at their 

recent convention. 

 

They said that: 

 

. . . reports suggest that 25 percent of children in 

Saskatchewan have no coverage for dental care, or have 

barriers to using existing plans. Families that have 

workplace dental plans such as First Nations Inuit Health 

Branch or Supplementary Health, often do not access 

dental services due to such barriers as the location of the 

dentist, extra billing, paying “up front”, and cultural 

sensitivity. 

 

Dental caries is the most preventable chronic illness in 

children. Dental pain and/or infection negatively affect 

children‟s eating and sleeping, as well as their ability to 

concentrate. Oral health of children is a significant public 

health concern, as it is an indicator of overall health status 

. . . 100,000 school days are lost each year [across 

Canada] because of dental disease. [And] in the long term, 

poor oral health can be linked to adverse pregnancy 

outcomes, and heart and respiratory diseases. 

 

. . . Early Childhood Caries [or cavities], which can be 

prevented by proper mouth care and feeding practices, 

have continued to increase over the last 10 years . . . [and] 

rates for kindergarten and grade one children from low 

income neighbourhoods were triple . . . [the rates for 

children] in all other areas . . . children of ages five and 

the general prevalence of . . . [cavities] is three to five per 

cent in the general population,  

 

And there also, there also . . . Well the Minister of Health 

can yell at me all you want. I wrote this myself and I do 

know about this. And my question, Mr. Chairman, is to the 

Premier: why did you let your mean-spirited, vindictive, and 

extremely short-sighted political agenda get in the way of 

good public policy and obviously — and targeted vulnerable 

children — by axing a program that has clear and evident 

benefit? And the children‟s dental sealant program, why did 

it have to go? I think it was purely your political agenda and 

good public policy was totally ignored. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well you know, Mr. Chairman, the hon. 

member points out that there are thousands of people who need 

this service. And certainly for her to try to pass off as fact that 

now there is simply no dental sealant services available to kids 

is simply not the case. It‟s a question of location — schools 

versus a dentist office. Her question, which the premise of 

which is about the thousands of people, of kids who will need 

the sealant, belies the fact that this program up until the end of 

March is benefiting 225 kids. It‟s an average cost of $1,000 per 

child. The sealant is certainly . . . The services are available to 

those who need it and, Mr. Chairman, for her to indicate that the 

services are not necessary, or are not available to kids, is simply 

not the case. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I 

just wrote another one. Exactly. 

 

I think it‟s easy to characterize that these children that are . . . 

the pilot project that was put in place would cost $1,000 per 

child in the initial stage. That has nothing to do with what will 

happen. And as the preventative benefits come forward, 

SAHO‟s background information — which I won‟t read any 

more of — but the children that are served now that have to go 

in for dental surgery, and there‟s a significant number of them 

in the province, that has a huge cost. This is preventative. It 

may cost $1,000 in the pilot project to get the pilot project up 

and running, but you have forgotten the out years and what will 

happen when you put dental sealant on children in grades 1 and 

5 or in grade 1 and 7. 

 

They‟re not going to go to the dentist. They don‟t have 

middle-class parents. They don‟t have middle-class access to 

transportation and services. They don‟t go. This was a 

preventative program put in place to deal with inner-city issues 

in community schools. And to pass it off as being cheaper to do 

it some other way is simply ignoring the facts of what this 

would have done for these children. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I didn‟t hear a question there, Mr. Chair. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Okay. My question then — the 

Premier didn‟t hear a question — the question is, will he restore 

the program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, the answer to the hon. 

member‟s question is that the dental sealant is going to continue 

to be available to kids in the province of Saskatchewan, not as it 

was constructed under this $1,000-per-child initiative that the 

hon. member refers to. 

 

I will also say to the hon. member that this government will 

also, Mr. Chair, we will also continue to do things like 

providing the largest increase in the history of the province to 

the Saskatchewan employment supplement that helps 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

low-income families, 80 per cent of which are single moms. 

This government, this government, Mr. Chair, will continue to 

do things like a half a million dollars in increased funding to 

school-based, anti-child-hunger programs. We‟re going to 

continue to do that. 

 

This government will continue to provide actual addiction 

treatment beds for people who need them instead of press 

releases and rhetoric. This government, this administration will 

continue to do things like provide a 15 per cent increase in rates 

in terms of foster parents in our province — an issue that was 

completely ignored by those members opposite. This 

government will continue its commitment to kids, whether they 

need dental sealant, whether they need proper education, 

whether they need, whether they need to be fed, whether they 

need to be supported in later years with education so they can 

be a participant in the prosperity of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I thank the hon. members opposite for the cue. 

I‟ve got a question for the Premier. I wish it was a shorter 

question. Unfortunately their bungling of the Domtar file is so 

substantial and so comprehensive, it‟ll take me a while to get 

through it all. 

 

Why is it that the Minister of Energy and Resources had no idea 

of the results of the task force chaired by the member from 

Batoche? Why is it the same minister has no idea what‟s in the 

Saskatchewan Party platform as it pertains to forestry? Why is 

it that the same minister claimed to have had talks with Domtar 

when clearly no talks had taken place? Why is it that the 

Minister Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation has no ideas 

of the responsibilities directly prescribed for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan regarding the forestry industry? 

 

It seems that nothing that was promised for this industry has 

been carried through — their own promises — by this 

government. I‟ll quote from my hometown paper of December 

3, 2007. Again question to the Premier, quote, “Was it just lies, 

Brad Wall?” 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Would the hon. member repeat the 

question? 

 

The Chair: — Sorry. Would the hon. member . . . We were 

even having trouble. Maybe turn your mike or push your mike 

up a little bit. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Start from the start? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sure. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Good stuff. Good stuff. I like to get on the 

record two or three times with this stuff. 

 

I wish this question was shorter. Unfortunately their bungling of 

this file is so substantial and comprehensive that it‟ll take me a 

while to get through it all again. Why is it that the Minister of 

Energy and Resources has no idea as to the results of the 

forestry task force chaired by the member from Batoche? Why 

is it that the same minister had no idea what was in the 

Saskatchewan Party platform as it pertains to forestry? Why is 

it that the same minister claimed to have had talks with Domtar 

when clearly no discussions had taken place? How is it that the 

Minister Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation has no idea 

of the responsibilities directly prescribed for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan regarding the forestry industry? 

 

It seems that nothing that was promised by this government — 

their own promises — has been delivered on for this industry. 

So I‟ll quote from my hometown paper, December 3, 2007, 

where they said, “Was it just lies, Brad Wall?” 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — What is your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of 

Committees. The members can‟t do indirectly what they can‟t 

do directly. The member is inferring that the Premier is lying in 

his statement. That is not appropriate for this House. All 

members are assumed to be honourable members, and therefore 

everything spoken in this Assembly is assumed to be the truth. I 

ask that you ask the member to withdraw that statement and 

apologize unequivocally. 

 

The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I heard the 

same comments that the member from Cannington heard. The 

document that was quoted from has just been sent down to the 

Table. It is a newspaper report in which a simple question is 

being asked. The member from Prince Albert Northcote has 

simply read from a newspaper in a community affected by a 

decision and a question was posed. The member from Prince 

Albert Northcote is just posing the question posed by the 

newspaper. I think, Mr. Chair, you would find it in order. 

 

The Chair: — It was a little difficult for me to hear which we 

had stated before, but I will do rule 50, subvote: 

 

(o) quote anything that if stated directly would be contrary 

to the Rules and practices of the Assembly, except that in 

reading an extract the use of a Member‟s proper name 

may be permitted; 

 

(p) use any display, prop, demonstration or exhibit of any 

kind to illustrate his or her remarks. 

 

I would ask that the member not do something indirectly that he 

would not do directly. I could not hear all of his remarks, so I 

will leave that up — I can always check Hansard — but I will 

leave that up to the member if he wishes to apologize. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I withdraw the statement and apologize to the 

House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The hon. member 

raises the issue of Domtar which was the source of some 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

discussion both prior to, during, and then after the election 

campaign this fall. The then opposition Saskatchewan Party was 

very, very clear. As soon as this deal was announced by the 

hon. member for Riversdale, that this deal was not driven by 

what was good for the forestry industry . . . It was not driven by 

what was good for the city of Prince Albert. It was not driven 

by what was good in the long term for those who worked in the 

mill. It was not driven by what was good for taxpayers who — 

thanks to this deal — could have had $100 million risked in 

what very, very possibly could‟ve been another SPUDCO, Mr. 

Chair. The deal was driven simply by their desire to try to cling 

to power, to try to hang on to both seats in Prince Albert and 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

[17:00] 

 

And even with the deal, Mr. Chair, even with the 

announcement, the people of Prince Albert and area and the 

people of the province saw through it. They saw it for what it 

was. They saw it for the pulp fiction that it was in terms of good 

economic sense for the province or for the use of taxpayers‟ 

dollars. That‟s why there‟s a member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers sitting over here and a member from Prince Albert 

Carlton sitting right over there, Mr. Chair. They saw through it. 

They saw through it. 

 

In addition, Mr. Chair, when this deal was announced shortly, 

shortly after this deal was announced . . . Here is some of the 

reasons why we know it was done very, very hastily by the 

NDP who wanted quickly to get to an election, who thought this 

was their answer, their secret weapon in three constituencies 

around P.A. and including Saskatchewan Rivers. We know they 

were in a hurry because, Mr. Chair of Committees, they didn‟t 

consult with First Nations in the area who are actually partners 

with the government, partners with respect to some of the assets 

involved. 

 

In fact, Mr. Chair, I‟ll tell you this, I remember driving from 

Swift Current to Regina the day after this agreement was 

announced — or maybe it was two days after this agreement 

was announced — and getting a call from the chief of Montreal 

Lake. I think actually I called him to find out what he thought. 

Did he support this great announcement that was ballyhooed by 

the former premier, the current member for Riversdale? And do 

you know what he said? We don‟t know anything about it. No 

one has consulted with us — the Montreal Lake First Nation 

that has a role to play, obviously that has a traditional area 

that‟s affected by the forest. 

 

In fact, Mr. Chairman, when they finally did get a copy of the 

agreement that this government almost got away with signing 

with respect to this particular asset, this $100 million 

agreement, when they finally got a copy of the agreement to 

find out how it would affect the Montreal Lake First Nation, do 

you know where it came from? From the Saskatchewan Party. It 

came from the opposition, who thought that maybe these 

partners in this arrangement, those who have heard the rhetoric 

of the member for Riversdale about his intention to partner with 

First Nations meaningfully, those who probably heard the 

rhetoric from the member for Prince Albert Northcote certainly 

heard the rhetoric from his predecessor, certainly heard the 

rhetoric from his predecessor that they weren‟t consulted at all. 

Here is what he had to say Chief Lionel Bird . . . 

Well now the hon. member asked a long question. He had to 

ask it twice, and now I think he‟d want to be interested in the 

answer, including, Mr. Chairman, quotes from . . . Well he‟s 

getting very angry. He‟s getting very angry, Mr. Chairman. I 

can‟t help, I can‟t help the fact, I can‟t help the fact that he 

holds this deal and all the trouble it has caused him against his 

leader. I can‟t help that that‟s the case. 

 

I can‟t help the fact that he‟s had more positions, Mr. Chairman, 

on the issue of Domtar than there are seats over on that side of 

the House, although increasingly that‟s not a big challenge. I 

can‟t help but note that not just a few weeks ago, I think, he was 

now out in the rotunda confessing to the media that he, and 

maybe he alone — he might be out of step with his leader — he 

doesn‟t even think there should be any government money that 

goes into the mill. That‟s what his position is now, even though, 

even though he ran under a banner that said we‟re going to put 

government money in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So I know why he‟s angry, Mr. Chair. He‟s 

angry because this was exposed, Mr. Chairman. This deal was 

exposed for the $100 million risk, the $100 million last-minute 

political election gamble of the leader, the member for 

Riversdale at the expense of what was right for taxpayers, what 

was right for Prince Albert, and what was right for the forestry 

industry, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Here‟s what Chief Lionel Bird had to say: 

 

“There‟s a legal requirement for [the NDP government] to 

consult with us,” [This was in The StarPhoenix September 

13] Bird said, adding that the province has proceeded with 

its plans “without any care or desire to deal with any 

concern [from] the Montreal Lake Cree Nation . . .” 

 

That‟s his former government. That‟s his party. Chief Marcel 

Head said on September 13 in Shoal Lake he said, “„There just 

doesn‟t seem to be any co-operation‟ . . . „We‟ve [been kind of] 

left in the dark about this.‟” This is about the Domtar deal. 

That‟s the question that the member has asked. Well on 

September 14 on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 

news, a Domtar executive, Mr. Rathier said, “„We feel that it is 

premature at this time to give people false hope and to say to 

them by next summer . . .‟” which was a promise that he made 

and a promise that that member made . . . 

 

The Chair: — The debate has been very good, but I would start 

to ask the members to direct your question through the Chair 

and to keep the debate good. And I notice it‟s been getting a 

tiny bit personal. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I‟m reading quotes, 

including the quote from Domtar themselves who said that they 

didn‟t want to see anybody giving people false hope, and what 

he was referring to of course was a commitment made just on 

the eve of an election by a very desperate leader of a desperate 

political party with respect to the Domtar arrangement. 

 

And so, Mr. Chairman, I could go on. Shawn Williams is a 

former mill worker and a current Prince Albert city councillor 

who said, quote, “I‟m a union guy, but I can see reality.” And 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

that was in my mind; that is a terrible deal. This is a councillor 

and a union member, a terrible deal “To invest that much 

money for the province? I don‟t know. It just was an election 

gimmick.” Which brings me back to my first point, the people 

of Prince Albert saw through the deal. 

 

Here‟s what the new Government of Saskatchewan is doing 

with respect to this particular issue. The new Government of 

Saskatchewan is engaged in negotiations with Domtar. We are 

engaged with other players in the forestry industry, because 

certainly the forestry industry is hurting. Our Minister of 

Enterprise and our MLAs from those affected areas are engaged 

with a consultation process on how $34 million of federal 

dollars, meant to provide transition for those in the forestry 

sector, will be distributed — including that member‟s 

constituency of Prince Albert. 

 

I will note this, Mr. Chair, we‟ve seen, and as far as I know — 

and maybe the Minister of Energy and Resources or the 

Minister of Enterprise can correct me — we‟ve seen no 

correspondence, no ideas coming forward from that member 

who purports to represent the people of Prince Albert Northcote 

on what we should be doing with these significant resources we 

have to provide transition. We hope that he‟ll do that, because I 

think that would be the responsible action on the part of a 

member that‟s concerned, as he no doubt is, for people in his 

constituency. 

 

In the meantime, we‟re going to work with Domtar and other 

players of the industry to try to get that mill up and running, to 

try to provide some answers to this question that do not involve 

picking winners and losers to the tune of risking $100 million 

taxpayers‟ dollars on a last-minute, desperation deal signed by 

the member for Riversdale — one that was so transparent that 

the people of P.A. and all across the province saw it exactly for 

what it was. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman or 

Deputy Speaker. Just got one question, but before I get to my 

question I want to make a couple of points. I want to first of all 

point out to the hon. member that the incoming government has 

such a tremendous opportunity to do so many things, and I 

don‟t believe in the history of Canada any incoming 

government had such tremendous wealth and opportunity 

inherited by them and presented to them by an outgoing 

government. 

 

And I want to point out, Mr. Deputy Chair, that in terms of 

some of the work that was done by the previous government 

very quickly on population growth, I would give A plus plus. 

On revenues from oil and gas, I‟d give it an A plus plus. 

Revenues from potash, A plus; revenues from taxes, A plus; 

revenues from gas taxes, A plus; revenues from employment, A 

plus; and of course revenues from wheat, barley and all the 

other good amount of income that they enjoy, it‟s been A plus 

plus all over the place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I wanted to point out one of the funniest things I ever heard 

in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, when a couple of the members 

of that government got up and they said we now see the 

population growth up 50,000, I think was the figure that they 

used. And I could be corrected on that figure. 

 

And they wanted to give the impression to the people of 

Saskatchewan that there is these 50,000 people all lined up at 

the border from Manitoba and Alberta, and then on November 7 

the election came on and the Sask Party won and they said, hey 

everybody, let‟s go into Saskatchewan. The Sask Party won. 

You know, that‟s the impression that they give. So we have 

these 50,000 people hanging around our borders waiting for 

these guys to win, and the rest of Saskatchewan is kind of 

basically laughing their heads off. And of course they‟re going 

to say all these great things that happened it was because of us. 

 

Well I just wanted to give these guys an update that all the great 

news, all the great news that you guys are currently enjoying, a 

big, big message — you had absolutely nothing to do with it, 

but you‟re welcome. And that is from the NDP government that 

worked this province for a number of years. 

 

Now after we‟ve given ourselves . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. I‟m having trouble hearing the member 

that‟s on his feet. I would ask that the members respect the 

member that has the floor. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, after we‟ve seen this 

government inherit billions of dollars, sitting on 1.5 billion in 

the bank, and really I think that member has the easiest job in 

the world, just go around spending money. Anybody can do 

that. But somehow, somehow, Mr. Chair, they‟re making a 

mess of many, many things. And I‟ll give them my report card 

on what they‟ve messed up so far. 

 

Have they done anything on the rising cost of food? A big fat F. 

On addressing some of the rent problems that people of 

Saskatchewan are facing, the cost of housing, a big fat F. On 

addressing taxes, a big fat F. On dealing with the cost of 

medicine, a big fat F. On the high prices of gasoline, a big fat F. 

On helping families with power, with heat costs, insurance 

costs, a big fat F. On the Domtar deal, they ripped it up, a big 

fat F there. On essential services, a big fat F. Municipal 

financing and funding, a big fat F. And on the environment, a 

big fat F as well, Mr. Chair. 

 

So look at what they have done. In the five or six months that 

they‟ve been in government, they really have not done 

anything. All they have done is spend money that they inherited 

from the people of Saskatchewan. And every file that they have 

touched, they have messed up, Mr. Chair, every file. 

 

So I want to point out again, I want to point out again, the North 

is also looking at what this government does. They‟re looking at 

what this government does. So once again we‟re going to check 

what they do. Whether it‟s Indian and Métis Affairs funding 

cuts or whether it‟s Northern Affairs cuts, we‟re going to see 

what they do in the North. 

 

So my question I have for the Leader of the Saskatchewan 

Party. When we began, when we began the effort in northern 

Saskatchewan to do the one road that was really important to 

the Northwest, was to connect Fort McMurray into our region 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

— the La Loche, Fort McMurray road — our former premier 

took the initiative on three or four occasions to sit down with 

the then premier, Ralph Klein, and get Premier Klein to commit 

to have this road done. 

 

Now we all know Premier Klein was ousted. He was ousted. 

And now they have a new premier. And, Mr. Chairman, the 

point of the matter is there was discussions that happened in the 

States, I believe. There was discussions happened in Ottawa, 

and a variety of other locations that our former premier 

undertook with the Alberta premier to get this road done. And, 

Mr. Chair, it‟s only 70 kilometres, 70 kilometres to build a road 

into Fort McMurray, to see all these wonderful opportunities, in 

particular for the people of La Loche, and more in particular for 

the people of northwestern Saskatchewan, and really for all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So the question I have, with all the wealth that you have, all the 

money you have . . . And a significant point I would make is 

that when we were in power the first 13, 14 years was cleaning 

the mess left behind by those guys over there. So now that these 

guys have all this money . . . People are working. They‟re 

getting record revenues. We‟re saying, give it back to the 

people. Give it back to these priority areas, and you haven‟t 

been able to even do that correct. 

 

So my question, the single important link for the northwest part 

of Saskatchewan besides the Far North road is the connection 

from Fort McMurray to La Loche and Buffalo Narrows and on. 

Will that hon. member undertake a personal initiative as our 

former NDP premier did, and get a commitment from his 

counterpart, the Alberta Premier Stelmach, to get that road done 

— yes or no? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well a couple of comments before we get 

to the member‟s question, which is an interesting one, given the 

fact that the commitment was made and I‟m sure the new 

government — which is the same party — will maintain the 

commitment that was made. 

 

But interesting that the long preamble to that question, Mr. 

Chairman, involved the member almost dislocating his arm 

patting himself on the back. He forgot, he forgot one A for 

them, an A for arrogance. Can you believe the preamble to the 

question? Can you believe it, Mr. Chair? That party, that party 

on November 7 was rejected by the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. What was the popular vote — 37 per cent of the 

support at a time of unprecedented growth in the . . . 37 per cent 

support, 37 per cent support. 

 

[17:15] 

 

Have we heard any contrition from members opposite? Have 

we heard them say you know what we made some mistakes, 

and we got it wrong, and we‟re going to listen to the message 

from Saskatchewan people and we‟re going to learn from them, 

we‟re going to learn a little bit of humility? Mr. Chairman, have 

we heard any of that? No. And leading that grade, leading the 

parade of arrogance is that member for Athabasca who says, his 

conclusion must be, look I‟ve given ourselves all A‟s so all of 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan are wrong because 

they chose to boot us out of office, and I am right. 

 

Imagine, imagine, Mr. Chairman, everyone‟s shock that that 

party still fails to connect with Saskatchewan people with that 

kind of attitude. Imagine, imagine the fact, Mr. Chair, imagine 

the fact, Mr. Chair, that they remain mired, mired way down in 

the polls, way down in the polls, Mr. Chair, with that kind of 

attitude. You know, Mr. Chair, I know it‟s counter to the rules, 

so let me apologize in advance for referencing the fact that the 

hon. member‟s left the Chamber — asked a big long question 

about the road and walked out. 

 

The Chair: — We have a tradition here of not mentioning 

members either in the Chamber or outside of the Chamber. I 

would ask that that rule be observed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the heckling comes from this member 

from Massey Place about whether something‟s classy or not 

when this is the behaviour of his hon. member who was asking 

a question, purportedly on behalf of the people of Athabasca. 

Mr. Chairman, first of all, I apologize for the reference that I 

just made to the fact that the member left the Chamber before I 

had a chance to answer the question. 

 

I will say this, I will say this, that there‟s another report card 

that is worth noting, and other comments from groups right 

across Canada that are worth noting, with respect to reviews on 

our government and what we‟ve been able to achieve in only 

five or six months. The Royal Bank provincial outlook says that 

Saskatchewan will lead all provinces in economic growth, not 

just this year but next year. The Canada West Foundation 

annual economic profile and forecast states the outlook for our 

economy is excellent, that our GDP [gross domestic product] 

will grow at 3.6 per cent. We‟ve seen editorials only a few 

weeks ago in the Leader-Post from columnists in Edmonton 

who note that the new growth oriented governments in 

Saskatchewan and BC [British Columbia] — the new growth 

oriented governments here — are going to give Alberta a run 

for its money. 

 

We see BMO Financial Group predicting Saskatchewan will be 

Canada‟s economic leader in 2008. We see references in the 

London Financial Times of not just the economy, but the brand 

new government in the province of Saskatchewan making the 

right steps in terms of balancing our labour legislative agenda, 

sending the right signals on royalties for our province. And by 

the way, I note that the member, I think, for Regina Coronation 

Park just yesterday was advocating the NDP‟s position on 

royalties, which is that they should go up. 

 

What would happen to the growth that is fuelling jobs and 

opportunities in our province if ever they were in charge again, 

if ever they were allowed to squander the momentum, to 

squander the growth that we see in the province? 

 

Here‟s some more of our report card. With respect to population 

growth, we are as of May ‟08 — our checklist — second in 

Canada. Average economic development growth, first in 

Canada. Average weekly earnings, second in Canada. 

Unemployment rate — in terms of being low — third in 

Canada. Number of people employed, we need to do some more 

work there because we‟ve got a labour shortage. Wholesale 

trade, first in Canada. Retail sales, first in Canada. Construction 

overall, in terms of building permits, second in Canada. 

Residential building permits, second in Canada. New vehicle 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

sales, third in Canada. 

 

There‟s been other reports recently in the media about what the 

people of the province think of this government when they‟ve 

been asked by pollsters and those who seek the opinion of 

people in Saskatchewan. They asked the people of the province 

what they thought about the labour legislative changes that we 

are making. Seventy per cent, on the substantive measures and 

The Trade Union Act amendments and essential services, 70 

per cent of the people of this province support what this 

government is doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We‟ve seen other polls just before the 

session which indicate that even though we were over 50 per 

cent on November 7, we‟ve actually moved up. We know 

there‟s more work to be done. We know we have to continue to 

earn that support. We‟re going to do that. 

 

One of the ways we will earn that support is to make sure that 

there are opportunities for development in the North. And so the 

province certainly will continue with the remaining about 8 

kilometres or so of the road on our side of the border. The 

answer to the question is, will we be raising it with the Alberta 

government, the fact that their work needs to happen? The 

answer to that is yes. We can‟t obviously control what they do, 

but the point will be made. 

 

Interesting though, the premise of the question, the premise of 

the question was that so Saskatchewan people can leave his 

constituency and find work in Fort McMurray. I don‟t think 

he‟s been reading the newspapers or following what‟s been 

happening with our economy or looking at the opportunities of 

oil sands development, and in the case of his constituency, also 

particularly of new mineral exploration and mining 

development in his own backyard. Because you know what? 

The rest of the province is talking about — not the member and 

not the NDP — but the rest of the province and the rest of the 

country is talking not about how people are leaving 

Saskatchewan to go elsewhere but how people from other parts 

of Canada are coming to Saskatchewan to seek opportunities, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the 

opportunity to weigh in on the Premier‟s estimates here. You 

know, it‟s been a long day — I have to say — here listening to 

our Premier spin and twist and carry all sorts of messages by 

snagging a message from the member from Regina Elphinstone 

and twist it into something else or grab something from the 

member from Athabasca. But if that‟s how he chooses to carry 

himself as our now newly minted Premier, I guess that‟s his 

choice. 

 

I will definitely offer him the chance here to display, display 

something he was just talking about. And I guess he was talking 

about contrition. He was talking about admitting mistakes, and 

he was talking about humility. And I think that he will have the 

opportunity, if he‟s the statesman that I believe the province 

expects our Premier to be, to be able to extend and display all of 

those things in the answer to my question. 

 

It‟s well known that under our Premier‟s leadership, our now 

Premier‟s leadership — the then leader of the opposition — that 

this party criss-crossed this province making promises all over 

the place about school closures. They would go out to town hall 

meetings and would share all sorts of statements about where 

these should be staved off, these shouldn‟t be happening, and 

that the NDP government was failing on this end. 

 

And I guess people expected an awful lot of this new 

Saskatchewan Party government and rightfully so. Not because 

the people of the province aren‟t intelligent. Quite the opposite. 

Because they listened to these folks opposite, the members 

opposite, and they trusted them. 

 

And I guess I‟ll just maybe share a statement from one year ago 

that was our opposition leader at the time, the opposition leader 

at the time, our now Premier. And this is from the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald on April 18, quote: “Wall said the party would 

end closure for most of 50 schools by designating funds to 

schools of opportunity and schools of necessity.” So we‟re 

talking about most of the schools there. Now that‟s the majority 

of school closures would be closed. Well we‟ll get to it in a bit, 

a little bit more here, but we know that that‟s certainly not 

happening. We‟re maybe talking about a couple of schools 

being staved off for a couple of years. 

 

But again I guess the people of this province aren‟t stupid to 

believe that this party was going to stave off on school closures. 

The people of this province had high expectations for good 

reasons. And they‟re incredibly intelligent. And they had good 

reason to. When we have our now Minister of Finance, the then 

Education critic, on June 21 issuing press releases with, and I 

quote, and this is from the Sask Party press release: 

 

Gantefoer said he understands that keeping schools slated 

for closure open will cost money, and promised those 

funds will paid-out retroactively, should the Sask Party 

form government. 

 

And this is just a . . . I mean, I have stacks of quotes here that 

could validate again why the people of this province had 

rightful high expectations of this government, but this 

government‟s failed to deliver on this end. The facts are this. 

The facts are that the legislation that was presented was status 

quo. It held what‟s going forward . . . or what‟s been in the past 

with some minor tweaks. There‟s not significant changes here. 

 

We‟re talking about insufficient funding across the board for 

school divisions. And when it comes down to school closures, 

funding might be one of the biggest factors, of course also 

declining enrolments, but insufficient funding across the board. 

We‟re talking more than 20 out of 28 school divisions that have 

seen insufficient funding. This is a real hurt on education in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Off-loading of the technology-supported learning program on to 

school divisions without providing any resources or any 

capacity to do this, well this has been a tool that rural 

Saskatchewan has utilized in remote areas for many, many 

years, amongst others to ensure that they had equal access to the 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

course and programs that were going to allow them to be able to 

go forward with all the different future ambitions that you 

would in a larger centre — another attack on rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we want to talk . . . And I know the minister‟s proud of 

adding transportation funding, increasing the funding on 

transportation. Well you know what? I think each of us pay, Mr. 

Chair . . . Sorry, through you, Mr. Chair, we each go to the gas 

pump every day, and we know where that extra transportation 

funding‟s going, and it‟s certainly not for the betterment of the 

school division. It‟s being eaten up at the pump just like every 

single resident in this province knows, so we‟re not even 

keeping up with the cost of gas. 

 

Then we want to look at the facts on this issue — terrible, 

inequitable, inequitable communication. We have the member 

from Thunder Creek two months ago out, you know, offering 

promises and commitments in his constituency. 

 

We have the Premier two months ago out in his offering all 

sorts of commitments, saying we‟re going to have a much more 

rigorous process — something that hasn‟t happened. Two 

months ago the Premier thought we were going to see a much 

more rigorous process. We haven‟t seen that. Two months ago 

when the Premier said that, he challenged the autonomy of 

school divisions across this province. He dismissed and 

disrespected the process that school boards have gone through 

in the past and that were engaged in at the time. 

 

What else do we see? We see $1 million, a measly million 

dollars for schools of opportunity, and the member from 

Kindersley says, a measly. That‟s right, $1 million is a lot of 

money, but it‟s certainly not a lot of money for looking at trying 

to address, if we‟re trying to address the needs of school 

closures. When we have a Premier who said a year ago that he‟s 

going to address most of the school closures through school of 

opportunity — $1 million goes nowhere for that. 

 

I guess we‟re getting to the point here. The Premier and his 

cabinet have the knowledge, they have the authority, they have 

the resources to follow through on their many, many promises. 

They‟ve chosen not to. They‟ve chosen to break those promises. 

 

I guess my question to the Premier is: why the change of heart? 

What does the Premier have to say to all those he broke 

promises with, and why is rural Saskatchewan, education in 

rural Saskatchewan struggling under his leadership? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Order. There‟s been a little 

more increased chatter going on. I know that we‟ve been here 

for a while and Premier‟s estimates are a little more vocal, a 

little more intense, but it‟s starting a little loud and even when 

the question isn‟t being asked, I would like a little more quiet 

here, so the people on the floor and the people that are talking, I 

can hear both the questioner and the answer that‟s being put. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, thank you to the hon. member 

for the question. We will be . . . I‟m not sure if it‟s happened 

already because I promised to table my definition of the word 

mall. We‟ll also be tabling our definition of the word measly in 

a moment for the hon. member‟s benefit. It might be a million. 

It might be less or more than a million, but we‟ll get that 

definition to the hon. member. 

 

He raises an important question with respect to rural education 

in Saskatchewan. And we have seen, we have seen under the 

NDP government previously, as we have in so many other 

areas, a real disrespect and a disregard for the realities of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Certainly true of . . . And we talked a little bit, frankly, about 

agriculture policies of the government. They would never fully 

fund their share of the farm safety net programs, for example. 

They refused to deal with crop insurance issues and while the 

hon. member who was now the premier made several promises 

with respect to property tax, doing something with respect to 

the education portion of property tax, he never did it. He wasn‟t 

able to keep his promise. 

 

Part of the reason why they lack credibility on education, on 

real issues right now today — and I‟m speaking of course of the 

NDP — that is a fact notwithstanding the very animated 

questioning from the new member from Regina who‟s just 

asked the question on The Education Act. 

 

[17:30] 

 

What is pretty clear though is that he hasn‟t read the Act. What 

is pretty clear, Mr. Chair, is that he has not or he‟s chosen either 

to . . . He‟s not read the Act or he‟s chosen to ignore the parts of 

the Act that clearly demonstrate the promises made by the 

Saskatchewan Party prior to the election have been kept. 

Promises for schools of opportunity designation and funding 

have been kept. Promises that the FOG, the foundation 

operating grant, needs to be reviewed, 

 

And this is what it says in the platform. Let‟s just go through it. 

Here‟s what we campaigned on: 

 

Revising the Education Act to improve consultation and 

assessment process before changes are made to school 

facilities; 

 

Here‟s the definition of what the Act will do. The Act will 

include a school review committee of a maximum of nine 

members. This committee will include four members of the 

school community council, two members from the immediate 

community, two members from the surrounding municipality, 

in addition to one member from a First Nation reserve if the 

reserve has at least one pupil attending the school. The time for 

them to do the work to explore every other option, every other 

option, instead of that school closing, the time extended for that, 

the process extended for that is in this Act. Revise The 

Education Act to improve consultation and the assessment 

process before significant changes can be made to a facility. 

That‟s a promise made in the Act. It‟s a promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You‟ve got to read the Bill, I‟d say to the 

hon. member. He‟s got to read the Bill and he may want to read 

the platform. We can table that as well, because if you go to the 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

next point in the Saskatchewan Party platform “Securing our 

Future,” it says: 

 

Providing dedicated provincial funding for schools that 

meet stringent [and they should be stringent] criteria as 

schools of opportunity . . . 

 

That‟s in the platform; it‟s in the Act. A promise made and a 

promise kept, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Revise the foundation operating grant. The work‟s under way. 

It‟s a promise made and a promise kept, Mr. Chair. 

 

So I guess, I guess the member thinks that standing up and 

saying something often enough will just make it true. I think 

he‟s going to find as he spends more time in this Assembly that 

what better makes things true is the truth. What better makes 

things true is actually reflecting the Act that‟s before the 

legislature right now, The Education Amendment Act. 

 

And while he‟s reading it again and reconsidering his position, 

while he‟s doing that, Mr. Chairman, I think he may also want 

to reflect on a couple of questions. Why in government for 

years and years, but especially of late when school boards were 

working to close, were looking at school closures, why did they 

propose no such changes? Why did they not commit to rural 

Saskatchewan and the entire province that they would ensure 

that there was a process in place that would ask every single 

question, that would explore every opportunity before the 

irrevocable decision of a school closure is taken? 

 

They had a chance to do that, Mr. Chair. They sat over here. 

They sat at the cabinet table. They had their processes for 

developing legislation. They could have stepped forward and 

ensured that there was that process, that consultation, that 

scrutiny of these decisions so that irrevocable school closures 

weren‟t taken unnecessarily in the case of a community that 

was growing. But they chose not to do it. 

 

Our government, Mr. Chairman, has kept its promises. Our 

government has signalled to school boards, by the way, that 

they ought to wait. They ought to wait on decisions that they‟re 

taking with respect to school closures until the results of the Act 

are shown, until that opposition helps us pass that Act. And if 

that happens, Mr. Chairman, I‟m very pleased to report more 

announcements like that of May 6, 2008 where the Prairie 

South Board of Education has defeated a motion to close the 

Eyebrow School at its regular meeting that was held today. And 

they‟re going to take . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — They‟re going to take a look, they‟re going 

to take a look at opportunities provided under this Act. 

 

I remember I was on an open-line show not long ago and I 

remember getting a call from a gentleman from Eyebrow prior 

to the Act being tabled — the Act that that member opposes, the 

Act that that member rants against in this Assembly and did the 

same here. And do you know what he said, do you know what 

he said, Mr. Chairman, this caller to the open-line show? He 

said Eyebrow is growing. There is oil and gas activity in the 

area. There are other agricultural-related opportunities. This is 

not the right time to close the school. We think new families are 

coming to Eyebrow now and will continue to come in the 

future. There will be more students for the school. We think this 

is a school of opportunity. 

 

And my response to him was, we made a promise in the 

campaign around schools for opportunity. He‟s going to see a 

Bill introduced in the legislature that will keep that promise. 

The promise was kept. The board has made their decision with 

respect to Eyebrow. Now it‟s up to a demonstration of growth 

for two years. Thereafter that school may close still if growth 

doesn‟t happen, but for two years if it is designated a school of 

opportunity, as per the promise we made, there will be another 

chance for that school. There will be another chance because 

the people of Saskatchewan on November 7 said the province 

deserves more than just arrogance and ignoring a problem. It 

deserves some action with respect to school closures, and it 

deserves a party that in power keeps its promises. And that‟s 

what we‟ve done, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. The hour is 

drawing to a close when we will conclude the Premier‟s 

estimates, and I know other members on this side have other 

questions. I have several questions which I . . . one or two. I do 

not expect the Premier perhaps to have the information here, but 

if he would commit to provide the information, we would 

appreciate that. 

 

And they are these two questions: will he commit to provide to 

the opposition the numbers of staff now employed in each 

minister‟s office, no. (1); and no. (2), the total number of staff 

now employed in Executive Council. Would he commit to 

provide those two answers? 

 

An. Hon. Member: — And their names. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And their names. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. 

member for his question. We will furnish the member with that 

information. In the very near future we‟ll send over a letter with 

all the attached information. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I thank the Premier for that 

commitment. I want to also address a question to which I think 

the Premier will be able to answer today. We had a short 

discussion about this the last time we were doing some 

Premier‟s estimates. And it had to do with a question that arose 

from an article which appeared in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix on 

March 18, a column by Mr. Randy Burton, in which he makes 

this comment. It was a happy article from the government‟s 

point of view. It showed the government apparently enjoying 

some fair public support. In any event the article indicated by 

Mr. Burton that, quote: 

 

An internal poll conducted for the government recently 

shows the government is still enjoying a honeymoon with 

voters. 

 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

I asked the Premier in our last estimate experience if this poll 

had been paid for by Executive Council. He said it had not been 

paid for by Executive Council. And so I ask him now if he‟s 

had, in the intervening time, has had time to discover where in 

fact this poll was paid for as an internal poll conducted for the 

government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the answer is the same as it was 

when we discussed this in supplementary estimates and that is 

that although Mr. Burton very, very often has most everything 

right in his columns, whether they may take some opportunity 

to criticize the government or not, this is an occasion where the 

reference to this particular . . . these numbers that were in the 

column, his reference to this being an internal government poll 

were simply incorrect. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So then to be clear, is the Premier indicating 

that Mr. Burton — well he‟s just said Mr. Burton was wrong in 

what he reported — will he then say to the House, as the leader 

of the party, was this poll paid for by the Saskatchewan Party? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question 

from the member. I think it‟s Executive Council estimates and 

so any issue before the Government of Saskatchewan, whether 

it‟s in Executive Council, whether it‟s writing to other 

ministries, I think is something that is certainly available here 

for scrutiny. 

 

I will say this: the numbers that I saw in the article looked very 

much like party polling that we have undertaken that do show I 

think the number was 53 per cent support for the government of 

the day, and those numbers are very similar to research that we 

have done as a party. 

 

And I think that‟s . . . although we understand, although we 

understand, Mr. Chair, that this is just very early on in the life 

of our government, we have a lot of work to do — to keep 

promises that we‟ve made; to earn the support that we received 

from the people on November 7 — certainly to the extent that 

these were very similar to party polling, that was encouraging. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I assume from the Premier‟s answer that in 

fact the poll referred to by The StarPhoenix was a Sask Party 

poll and that‟s fair enough. But we‟ll want to confirm with Mr. 

Burton that in fact his information is wrong. Because there is a 

very serious question that will arise if in fact government funds 

were used to do this kind of political polling. 

 

That said, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve listened with interest to the Premier 

this afternoon. I‟ve listened with interest to the Premier this 

afternoon. I want to pick up on one point because it is very 

close to my home. And before the Premier gets up and rants and 

raves and say you had 16 years to do it and didn‟t do it, I admit 

we didn‟t do it. But he has the opportunity, Mr. Chair, and the 

money to provide for the community of Pleasant Hill in 

Saskatoon a new St. Mary‟s School. He spoke rather glowingly 

of the school. I mean, his comments this afternoon, he spoke of 

his understanding of the need for a new St. Mary‟s School. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, I want him to go that one step further and 

explain how it is with the kind of resources available to this 

Premier and this government . . . You know, we talk about 1.5 

billion in the bank. Well it‟s growing at a rapid rate, Mr. Chair. 

With the kind of commitment that he‟s made to infrastructure, 

knowing that we have completed a new W.P. Bate School, two 

new high schools, but have not completed the new St. Mary‟s, 

will the Premier today . . . On behalf of those residents of 

Pleasant Hill, I ask the question: will he commit to a new St. 

Mary‟s School? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, hon. 

member, for the question. This school is very important, and it‟s 

in a sad state. And so certainly it, along with a number of other 

facilities, are a priority of our government. I want to say that to 

the hon. member. I also want to say that there are other 

facilities, both health care and education facilities in this 

province that are suffering from neglect, many, many years of 

neglect. And the hon. member says, you know, don‟t go back 

over the 16 years. 

 

Well the truth of the matter is, especially in health care and in 

education, we have inherited . . . and in highways. But in these 

two areas, the questions on a school . . . We have inherited a 

huge, huge infrastructure deficit. It was the choice of this 

government . . . When tens of millions were needed, hundreds 

of millions were needed for education facility infrastructure 

investment, they put in over the years, you know, a fraction of 

that. The same is true for health care. 

 

In this budget the billion dollar ready-for-growth initiative 

changes that. And can there be more? And should there be 

more? Is there still more deficit, infrastructure deficit to deal 

with, to overcome? Absolutely there is. We cannot fix years of 

neglect in six months. 

 

But I want that member to know, with respect to St. Mary‟s and 

with respect to educational facilities in this province and health 

care facilities in this province, that we are serious when we say 

we have taken the time to learn from the experience of other 

jurisdictions who have seen rapid growth. We‟ve learned from 

Alberta who said, make sure you‟re taking care of the 

infrastructure deficit across your province if you want to sustain 

the growth. That includes health care and education. 

 

We have heard it loud and clear. The budget that was 

introduced by the Minister of Finance put those words into 

action. There is still more to be done and no one ought to doubt 

resolve of this government to get that work done, to learn those 

lessons, and to deal with issues that we‟ve inherited like the St. 

Mary‟s School in Pleasant Hill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[17:45] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and I did not — 

I‟m not sure if other members did or any of the viewing public 

in the Premier‟s response — hear a commitment to a new St. 

Mary‟s School. I did hear a commitment to further work and 

I‟m sure that the residents of Saskatoon and Pleasant Hill and 

the separate board in Saskatoon will want to pursue this 

discussion further, as I will. 

 

You know, Mr. Chair, the Premier talks about the infrastructure 

deficit, and fair enough to say there are needs in infrastructure 

in this province than when we were in government. We 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

recognized that. We recognized the need, for instance . . . we 

recognized, for instance, Mr. Chair, the need for infrastructure 

in his home city of Swift Current where we constructed a brand 

new regional hospital. We recognized the infrastructure of 

transportation in the southwest of this province where we 

completed the twinning of the No. 1 Highway. 

 

Now the Premier is trying to base his entire approach to dealing 

with growth on infrastructure and he talks about the billion 

dollars in this budget. Well you know what the calculations 

have shown, Mr. Chair, that when it comes to the Highways 

budget, this new investment we‟re told will result in 28 new 

kilometres of paved road. Well that‟s important, Mr. Chair, 28 

new kilometres. The budget document talks about twinning the 

No. 1 Highway. Well for goodness‟ sakes, Mr. Chair, Highway 

No. 1 has been twinned by the former government except the 

little space down at Moosomin that needs some road signs. 

 

Mr. Chair, we have watched now a government come to office 

with a fair significant public support and a large majority. As 

my colleague from the North has pointed out in the debate this 

afternoon, no other government in the history of Canada has 

come to office with the kind of fiscal and financial resources 

that have been left behind by our government for this 

government to work with. No government coming into power in 

the history of Canada has come into that situation with an 

economy that is stronger and more functioning than the 

economy of Saskatchewan is today and was when they in fact 

assumed office. That‟s just the plain fact. 

 

They have done little, if I may say, Mr. Chair, this Premier and 

his government have done very little, very little that would 

encourage and sustain economic growth — 28 new kilometres 

of highway. Now they‟ve committed to maintain the royalty 

regime that we had in place — committed I guess to leave it 

there for 16 years, it‟s so good. They‟re benefiting from the 

changes we made to the potash industry and they have inherited 

well beyond even their own dreams because in the interim we 

have all watched how resource prices have climbed. 

 

So that oil barrel that‟s coming out of Saskatchewan soil today 

is providing $120 in value and it‟s hard even to imagine the 

kind of financial resources now available to this government. 

So how is it, Mr. Chair, how is it that in this circumstance of 

economic strength and fiscal capacity and wealth of the Sask 

Party government, that we‟re debating issues like no support for 

the renters of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Premier‟s talked about support for property tax payers — 

as small as it is, at least it‟s something — but there is no support 

from this government for the thousands and thousands of 

families in this province who rent. No support from this 

government, from a billion five and more, for people who live 

in the inner city and have devoted years of work to a Station 20 

project. They don‟t need the advice of the Premier on what to 

do. Mr. Chair, that project grew from the community. It wasn‟t 

a government project; it grew from the community. 

 

Mr. Chair, why is it with this kind of wealth, they are cutting 

benefits from vulnerable workers? Health benefits. Why is it 

that they‟re ending a dental sealant program? And why, Mr. 

Chair, with this kind of wealth available to them, are they not 

seriously taking on the questions of the environment and the 

reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in our province? 

 

They adopted our targets. They recognized, they recognized the 

worth of the targets that we set, but what they did not recognize 

is $320 million dedicated to that purpose from the sale of the 

upgrader. What did they do with that money? Well they‟ve 

squandered it. They‟ve simply dumped it into general revenue 

funds and out it goes. It‟s gone. This one-time sale is now gone, 

Mr. Chair. And they are left with targets, but no capacity and no 

plan to meet those targets for the future of this province and its 

people. 

 

Mr. Chair, we‟ve read headlines about this government that 

read something like this: “Government‟s actions signal trouble 

ahead.” We‟ve read headlines in this province‟s newspapers in 

the first five and six months of this government that read in 

bold letters, “Hypocrites,” referring to the kinds of things that 

were being said before the election and the kinds of things 

we‟ve seen since the election, Mr. Chair. 

 

This government is early in its life. It‟s early in its mandate. It‟s 

only five and six months old. But, Mr. Chair, we‟re beginning 

to see a very troublesome pattern. A pattern. a pattern of 

incompetence. Incompetence in decision making — we‟ve 

witnessed that again today — and a pattern that says this 

economic boom and financial benefit that they‟ve inherited is 

not going to be shared with the many in our province. That 

people are being left behind today and will further be left 

behind in the future. 

 

Mr. Chair, this Premier and this government has an opportunity, 

an opportunity to do the right things for the people of 

Saskatchewan, to do the right things for people who are in 

low-income circumstance, the do the right things for families 

across this province, to do the right things for farming families 

in our province. They have a capacity unlike any other 

government that has ever come to power in this province. 

 

Now today we‟ve listened to the Premier at length — at length 

— and those who I think have watched objectively would agree 

with me that what we have watched is an individual who has 

not given up the position of leader of the opposition. 

 

We have heard a great deal of criticism of the former New 

Democratic Party government. We have heard very little from 

this Premier in way of substantive answers to specific 

questions. We have not heard from this Premier much of his 

agenda for the future of this province and we have heard even 

less about his agenda for the families and those who are bearing 

some of the costs of the boom. 

 

And so, Mr. Chair, I take my place and I expect the Premier 

will rise and perhaps give us some further time for questioning. 

But let me say this, a very specific question to the Premier: with 

the resource revenues that are now flowing into the treasury, 

what precisely, what precisely is the fiscal balance today as a 

result of increased resource revenues? How much money today 

does the government have available to them as a result of the 

change in resource revenues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the finances of the province 

will be reported in due time when the next quarterly report is 

released and I know the hon. member will want to comment at 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

that point about the state of the finances. So will the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

I‟m actually looking forward to that comment from the hon. 

member and from his party because I know what we didn‟t talk 

about here today in this legislature, and there is some historic 

economic momentum occurring in the province to be sure, right 

now in Saskatchewan. It‟s happening. The beginnings of that 

momentum happened prior to the last election. There‟s 

economic momentum. We have seen it step up, I would say, 

since the election. I‟ve already pointed out commentaries that 

highlight the fact that our announcement with respect to 

royalties were part of the reason for this record quarter-billion 

dollar land sales we‟ve seen in the last two months. I will point 

to the fact that labour legislative changes are also part of a 

growth agenda that are contributing to the momentum that we 

received. 

 

But there is momentum right now in Saskatchewan. And there 

is certainly revenue streams coming into Saskatchewan, into the 

province. Everybody can understand, everyone understands and 

watches what happens to the price of WTI [West Texas 

Intermediate]. When the price of oil goes up, obviously 

revenues to oil generating jurisdictions goes up as well. 

 

And so I find it passing strange that at this historic time in the 

province‟s history, when we had three hours available for the 

hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition, and myself to talk 

about the future, to talk about what it is that we should do with 

these revenues, to compare perhaps the challenges of current 

infrastructure demands with a desire to reduce debt for future 

generations, Mr. Chairman, we could have had that debate here 

today. That would have been a useful debate. 

 

Last year we had a debate about nuclear power. As it turns out 

then, the then premier said, well we can‟t really even have a 

discussion about nuclear power because it doesn‟t make 

economic sense. Well I‟m not sure, I said at the time, we‟re not 

sure if that‟s the case. What about small reactor technology? 

And we had a bit of a back and forth. 

 

And he had his position and I had mine, but it was a substantive 

discussion about an important issue. We have 23 per cent of the 

uranium production in the world, sometimes up to a third, and 

we want to seek to see this resource benefit future generations. 

We want to add value to it. We want to create opportunity in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We could have had that discussion today. It‟s an important 

debate. There are people that feel strongly on either side of that. 

We could have talked about royalties. Our government has 

made a decision that we will not increase oil royalties, and 

we‟ve seen the result of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Increasingly we hear from the NDP, they 

don‟t support it. At their convention they passed a resolution 

that said no, we want to increase royalties. And they quickly 

tabled that resolution, but it‟ll come back and they‟ll talk about 

it again. And every time they do, oil companies here and 

outside the province and hundreds of people who work for 

service companies cringe because they know, heaven forbid, 

there‟s at least a thin chance that that outfit could form the next 

government. And we would see, then, royalty policies back to 

the 1970s that chased our industry to other places, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

We saw yesterday in the Legislative Assembly the hon. member 

for — I think it‟s Coronation Park, I think it‟s Coronation Park 

— hon. member for Coronation Park in a question in question 

period say, why is the Saskatchewan Party government 

promising corporations a royalty tax freeze while at the same 

time promising the people of Saskatchewan a power rate 

increase? What, what if . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, 

and the Hon. Leader of the Opposition says, good question. The 

premise of it is that they don‟t want to see these royalty rates 

stay the same. 

 

Now there are those — and I‟ve talked to them in this province 

— who say no, we should be increasing royalty rates right now. 

And if that‟s their view, fair enough. This would be the place to 

have that debate and discussion. This is where we can talk 

about the future of the province of Saskatchewan. But he chose 

not to do that. He chose to do what he did and those aren‟t 

important questions. And Executive Council estimates are about 

answering questions that the opposition asks and I did that. 

 

But I‟m just pointing out, I‟m just saying, Mr. Chairman, that 

what a great opportunity was lost because the hon. member 

opposite doesn‟t want to talk about oil sands development 

where he now is protesting against them even though he was 

granting permits. Doesn‟t want to talk about the duty to consult 

and accommodate, maybe the most important issue facing First 

Nations and development in the province. Didn‟t talk about, 

didn‟t mention First Nations once in a question, or this issue of 

the duty to consult and accommodate. Didn‟t talk about nuclear 

power. Didn‟t talk about whether or not we should take this 

opportunity to pay down some debt in the province or look at 

what we‟re doing with respect to taxes on people who have the 

lowest incomes in our province. That would have been an 

interesting debate. 

 

We could have talked a little bit about how under the NDP in 

Saskatchewan, how under the NDP in Saskatchewan they taxed 

low income people at the highest rate of any province in 

Canada. Maybe it‟s time to fix another NDP mess. Maybe we 

could have had that discussion today. But the hon. member did 

not choose to do that. 

 

I want to tell that member opposite though that these are the 

issues the people of Saskatchewan are talking about. You bet. 

They‟re talking about the cost of housing. They‟re talking about 

the cost of living. They were talking about the amazing growth 

they see in the province. They‟re asking questions about what 

do we do with this revenue. Should we pay down some debt? 

They‟re asking questions about nuclear power. But they would 

have watched today and throughout this session an NDP focus 

on themselves mostly, focus on their own declining interests. 

 

That‟s why they‟re sitting over there, Mr. Chair, because they 

do not reflect the interests and the values of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And what are those values? Well I 

don‟t think people in Saskatchewan expect too much of 

whoever their government is. I think one of the . . . at the top of 

the list of what they expect from a government is that a 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

government would do what it said it would do, that a Premier 

and a cabinet would do what they said they would do. 

 

And so as we wrap up estimates I think it‟s worth a review. If 

that‟s an important measure of a government, and I believe it is 

— whether or not you keep your promises — let‟s see how the 

new government is doing, knowing that we can always, we can 

always do better. We can always improve. We can always learn 

from mistakes that we make. 

 

Well the promise was made for a smaller cabinet. The promise 

was made. The promise was kept. The promise was made to 

eliminate the NDP used car tax. That promise was made. That 

promise was kept. A promise was made to cancel a Domtar deal 

that was a disservice to taxpayers and the people of Prince 

Albert. That promise was made. It was also kept. And now 

we‟re working with Domtar to get that operation moving again 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

[18:00] 

 

We made a promise to get tougher on drunk drivers. One of the 

first acts of this government, of the Minister of Justice, was to 

keep that promise. Mr. Chairman, we promised the creation of a 

new public-private partnership to take the politics out of 

economic development called Enterprise Saskatchewan. One of 

the Bills we introduced was an Act to create Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. It was a promise that was made and a promise 

that was kept. 

 

We promised to end the games, playing around, when elections 

are in this province. And we‟ve seen that NDP party play those 

games with Saskatchewan people. We promised fixed election 

dates. We promised them in the election and we delivered them. 

And, Mr. Chairman, there are many, many more promises yet to 

come. And I‟m grateful for the opportunity to go over them just 

now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, as a wrap-up, 

we also promised legislation for trade union Act amendments 

that 70 per cent of the province supports. We made that 

promise. In about a week from now, we will keep that promise, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We promised, we promised, Mr. Chair, 

better cancer care for Saskatchewan people. We promised more 

funding to those fighting cancer. Promise made, promise kept, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We promised that we would stand with 

those who were fighting colorectal cancer by funding the drug 

Avastin. We made that promise in the election because we fully 

intended to keep that promise after the election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We promised to get rid of the wiener roast 

tax the NDP imposed. We kept the promise. We promised to 

invest in our parks and in regional parks. We kept that promise, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

We promised, Mr. Chairman, to engage Saskatchewan people to 

ensure that they can help us go green, to give them a break to 

buy hybrid cars, and to do the right environmental things in 

their houses. A promise made and a promise kept, Mr. 

Chairman. We promised more police officers . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We promised more police officers in the 

budget. We made that promise during the election because we 

planned to keep it after the election, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, we promised an aggressive youth retention strategy, 

a plan where young people could earn their tuition back if they 

would just stay in this province and help build it. We made that 

promise. Today, third reading, the promise was kept, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

And I could go on and on and on. I could go on and on. But 

allow me to just say this. We campaigned, Mr. Chairman, we 

campaigned on commitments that we made to Saskatchewan 

people in this platform. We intend to keep those promises. We 

intend to make sure that the prosperity we see today in 

Saskatchewan is sustained through infrastructure investments, 

through responsibility in the fiscal management of the province, 

through competitive taxes, through a competitive regulatory and 

labour environment, and yes, by ensuring that those most 

vulnerable among us are also participating in the prosperity. 

 

And I‟m prepared to say this early on in our government. By 

these measures, we will be prepared to be judged on election 

day on the 7th of November in about three and a half years from 

now. We all know the date because we kept that promise. We 

intend and welcome the chance to be judged by those 

commitments, by our vision, because these things we intend to 

do, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we seem to have extended the hour. 

I have several more questions, Mr. Chair, with your permission. 

Mr. Chair, I take it we‟ve extended the hours; therefore I have 

several other questions. 

 

While the Premier is on the subject of keeping promises, what 

about the promise that his Minister of Health made to health 

care workers in this province that there was no need for 

essential services legislation? What about the promise he made 

to get rid of the fiscal stabilization fund? What about the 

promise made by members opposite all across the province that 

they would keep your schools open? What about the promise 

made to farmers for acreage payments? What about those 

promises, Mr. Chair? Where does the Premier put those on his 

agenda? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, first of all with respect to 

essential services, and I guess we will go this one additional 

question even though we are past the time. And I think if we . . . 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2008 

Actually, Mr. Chairman, I think if we refer to the record, we‟d 

find out that last year I think the wrap-up by the hon. leader, the 

then premier, took us a little bit behind — minutes as we are 

now — beyond the exact time agreed to by both sides. But 

apparently it was okay then. It‟s okay then, but not now. 

 

The answer to the question . . . The hon. member will know that 

in January about a year ago, my preference for investigating 

essential services legislation for the province, in the wake of a 

threat by plow operators —. or not by the plow operators; they 

were never in support of it, I don‟t believe — but by SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees‟ Union] 

leadership to withdraw snowplow operators from servicing the 

province. In the wake of that, I was on the record as saying we 

ought to look at essential services legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, there did not appear to be any more 

compelling need for specific statements on that regard. And 

what the hon. member, what the current Health minister said, 

was true. What happened in between the time that he made 

those statements was a strike affecting — how many? — 400 

people a day in terms of their health care, a CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees] strike where there had been no 

essential services provision. 

 

So should a government learn from that? Should a government 

take a look, another look at that and say, you know what? We 

better reconsider the need for essential services legislation. We 

better put the needs of Saskatchewan people first. We better put 

those who need cancer care ahead of any workplace 

interruption. We better put public safety ahead of our friendship 

that we may have with union leaderships, Mr. Chair. 

 

And so we made that adjustment. And the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan stand by the adjustment we‟ve made. The polling 

in the weekend paper shows they support essential services. 

They want us to choose health care and public safety over any 

work stoppage, and that‟s exactly what this government will do, 

Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to take this opportunity on 

behalf of our entire caucus, and I‟m sure on behalf of all 

members in the legislature and the public who observe, to thank 

those officials who have served the Premier well today. He has 

drawn on their expertise on a number of occasions. And 

because these officials who join us in the Premier‟s estimates 

do head the public service in Saskatchewan, I want to, through 

them, thank the entire public service, both at its most senior 

levels and at its very front lines, for the very, very committed 

and quality service they provide to the people of Saskatchewan. 

So our thanks to the officials who were here today to serve the 

legislature, and through them to all of our public service in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — The question before this committee is Executive 

Council, subvote (EX01) for the sum of 4,651,000. Is that 

agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. The next subvote is (EX07) for a total 

of 533,000. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Order. Next subvote is (EX04) for the subtotal 

of 1,442,000. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Next subvote (EX03) for the total of 

1,531,000. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Next subvote (EX08), 454,000. Is that 

sum agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Next subvote is (EX06) for the total of 

$105,000. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Before the committee: 

 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 

months ending March 31, 2009 — Order! — the 

following sum for Executive Council, $8,611,000. 

 

Is that sum agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[Vote 10 agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — That concludes the business before the 

committee. I would recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. I 

want to thank first of all the officials who have joined us today 

from Executive Council. I appreciate the effort they‟ve put into 

the preparation of information prior to the estimates, the 

Executive Council estimates, and of course their support and 

their help while we went through the estimates today. 

 

I certainly want to agree with the Leader of the Opposition that 

now is the perfect opportunity through the deputy minister to 

the Premier to extend our thanks to the civil service of the 

province who have been a great source of help with respect to 

our efforts in transition as a brand new government to begin to 

implement our agenda, and so I want to take this opportunity to 

thank all of them. 

 

May I also, Mr. Chair, thank all members for their questions 

that were asked today, for the exchanges that occurred after 

that. We are here because we have strong opinions about the 

future of the province and our communities, and we don‟t agree 

on everything. But on the principle objective, which is 

Saskatchewan‟s success, we agree. And so I acknowledge and 



May 6, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

thank the members opposite who have asked questions out of 

their commitment to the province and to service here in 

Saskatchewan and in the Assembly. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as well for your leadership through 

this committee process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟d 

like to move that we rise, report progress and ask leave to sit 

again. 

 

The Chair: — Government House Leader has moved that we 

rise and report progress. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I am instructed by the committee to rise and 

report progress. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 18:12.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1195 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1195 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1195 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1195 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1196 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1196 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1196 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1196 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1196 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1196 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Emergency Preparedness Week 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1197 

 Raising Awareness about a Saskatchewan-Ghanaian Partnership 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1197 

 Annual Awards Banquet for Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1197 

 Avant-Garde’s Annual Show and Fundraiser 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1198 

 Youth Business Excellence Awards 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1198 

 Elections Canada Investigation 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1198 

 Saskatoon Food Bank Donation Drive 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1198 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Low-Income Families 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1199 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1199 

 Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1200 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1200 

 Funding for Education 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1201 

 Funding for the Arts 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1202 

 Accountability 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1203 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1203 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1203 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1206 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1204 



 

 Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1205 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1205 

 Bill No. 23 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1205 

 Bill No. 33 — The Active Families Benefit Act 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 

 Bill No. 18 — The Public Service Amendment Act, 2008 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1206 

 Bill No. 17 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1207 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1207 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1207 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1208 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1210 

  Calvert ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1210, 1231 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1218 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1220 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1222 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1224 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1225 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1227 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1229 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 1225 

  Taylor (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 1225 

  The Chair (point of order) ..................................................................................................................................................... 1225 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


