




















































Hansard: April 24, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 32A  THURSDAY, APRIL 24, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1087 

 April 24, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you I’d like 

to introduce the first school group that I’m hosting as an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], 25 wonderful students 

from Lawson Heights School, their teachers Christine Rayner 

and Heather Luce, with chaperones Diane Thiessen and Don 

Erker. 

 

I’m looking forward to meeting with them later and having a 

picture taken with them — although I’m not sure that they will 

want their picture taken with me — and having an opportunity 

to talk with them and share a little bit about my passions with 

social justice. Please welcome to our Assembly, young people, 

and try to excuse some of our behaviour for the next 45 minutes 

or so. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I see that in your gallery this morning we’re joined by 

a few gentlemen that do a great deal of work in our province — 

right across the province, no restrictions. And today I would 

like to welcome and have the House welcome Laurent Mougeot 

and Allan Earle from SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], and also Jim Hallick and Ken 

Engel from SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. Thank you very much for joining us today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 

the government’s privilege to introduce to you and through 

those members previously introduced, representing the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 

Vice-president Jim Hallick who also happens to be the 

councillor for the rural municipality of Keys No. 303 and, their 

executive director, Mr. Ken Engel. 

 

SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, is 

represented today by its president, Allan Earle who is also the 

mayor of the town of Dalmeny and has been since 1991, and 

Mr. Laurent Mougeot, their executive director. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again ask that members from both sides of the 

House welcome these guests to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also 

like to welcome Allan Earle to the Assembly today. Mr. Earle is 

the mayor of Dalmeny, one of the many growing towns in the 

constituency of Martensville that I represent. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity recently to meet with Mr. Earle and the 

town council and go over some of their concerns as their 

community is experiencing a great amount of growth. And I 

want to thank him for his dedication, not only to the town of 

Dalmeny, but to the province of Saskatchewan, and welcome 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure I rise to present a 

petition on behalf of my constituents in Moose Jaw. And the 

petition addresses the unceremonious closure of the South Hill 

liquor store and the effect it’s had on South Hill businesses. 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

in opposition to Bills 5 and 6, the essential services Act, and 

Bill 6, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Kindersley, Saskatoon, 

Weyburn, Yorkton, Regina, Wolseley, Bruno, Humboldt, 

Churchbridge, Melville, Esterhazy, Waldheim, and Tisdale. I so 

present. 

 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition concerning the Sask Party’s 

decision to axe Station 20 West. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon, from a variety of neighbourhoods and a 

variety of constituencies on both sides of the river. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

A New Era in Canadian History 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a well-known fact people 

across Canada are talking about Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I had no idea that people around the world were also 

talking about Saskatchewan. 

 

Earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, our Premier met in Washington 

and New York with major players in the international energy 

industry. He talked about Saskatchewan as a conflict-free 

source of energy. Our Premier also raised concerns that 

Saskatchewan had. Upon return, he reported that these meetings 

were both productive and positive. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we now know just how productive and 

positive those meetings were, based on reports coming out of 

Vienna this week. The United States, Mr. Speaker, has 

announced they are going to abandon efforts to ban the sales of 

uranium enrichment technology to non-nuclear states like 

Canada. You know what’s amazing, Mr. Speaker? That was one 

of the topics our Premier raised. 

 

Are we entering a new era in Canadian history, Mr. Speaker, 

reminiscent of the days of Lester B. Pearson and the Auto Pact, 

Brian Mulroney and NAFTA [North American Free Trade 

Agreement], an era where Canadian politicians are persons of 

influence, not irritants in international political circles? It seems 

so, Mr. Speaker. And it would seem Saskatchewan’s new 

Premier is a lead-off hitter. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Regina Police Service Half-Marathon 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

Sunday I had the pleasure of volunteering for the fifth annual 

Regina Police Service Half-Marathon. It was quite the day for a 

run, Mr. Speaker, with grey skies and wind gusts upwards of 60 

kilometres, but the 700 race participants and the 100-plus 

volunteers were not deterred. The RPS [Regina Police Service] 

Half-Marathon always draws quite the crowd, and this was the 

first where a cap of 700 on registration was in effect. The race 

was sold out well in advance, and it’s abundantly clear that this 

event is indeed a must-do event for the Regina running 

community. 

 

This event always draws a wide-range of participants, and this 

year was no exception with a number of light-footed luminaries 

completing the course. There was Regina Mayor Pat Fiacco and 

city councillors, Michael Fougere and Louis Browne. There 

was His Hon. Lieutenant Governor Gordon Barnhart. Chief of 

the Lac La Ronge Cree Nation, Tammy Cook-Searson was in 

the running. And the media was well represented by Jason 

Matity, Michelle Hugli and a fellow who is no stranger to the 

legislature, Gareth Dash Dillistone. And of course Regina’s 

finest was well represented by a number of their own including 

newly appointed Chief Troy Hagen. So congratulations to him 

on a number of fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to close by thanking all the people and organizations 

who make the RPS Half-Marathon such a great event and for 

helping us all to run harder, be stronger, and think bigger. A 

special word of congratulations to race director Patti 

Sandison-Cattell. Patti always does a top-notch job. She works 

very hard and even makes it all a lot of fun. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Raymore Honours Achievements in Volunteer Service 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Friday I had 

the pleasure of attending a special event in the community of 

Raymore. The event was held to honour the achievements of 

Ms. Joyce Lorenz. The day marked 10 years of volunteer 

service by Ms. Lorenz as a board member of the Raymore 

Housing Authority. The dedication and commitment to the 

community that Ms. Lorenz has displayed is to be commended. 

She currently right now serves as board chairperson. 

 

I was honoured to be asked to present Ms. Lorenz with 

certificate of appreciation from the province of Saskatchewan, 

as well as a 10-year pin from the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation to commemorate her years of service as a dedicated 

volunteer. 

 

Saskatchewan’s strong volunteer base is one of the best in 

Canada. Volunteers like Joyce Lorenz and the entire Raymore 

Housing Authority Board of Director are typical of the 

committed individuals who serve their community with a great 

deal of time and energy. Indeed the province’s network of 

housing authorities stands at 276; that’s run by over 1,500 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

volunteers. 

 

With this in mind, I would like to make a special mention of the 

other board members in Raymore including Elizabeth Denman, 

Arlene Deeg, Siegfried Lang, Brian Dionne and manager, 

Margaret Hodgins. The tireless efforts of these individuals 

make it possible for people to remain in their home 

communities, close to family and friends. This is one of the 

important ways that we can honour the efforts of our senior 

citizens who worked so hard to build Saskatchewan that we’re 

so proud of. Again, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate Ms. 

Lorenz of 10 years of service in the Raymore area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Informative and Unique History Lesson 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, recently the grade 12 drama class at Moose Jaw’s 

Vanier Collegiate presented the play Who is Mrs. Wilson? The 

play is about the namesake of the Mae Wilson Theatre, located 

in Moose Jaw’s historic cultural centre located in my 

constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

The drama class invited grade 3 students from St. Michael’s 

School to attend. The young students were provided a guided 

tour of the facility complete with historical re-enactments that 

outlined the theatre’s vaudeville beginnings through to the 

Capitol movie theatre. The tour was complete from boiler room 

to dressing rooms. Originally the building was known as the 

Monarch Theatre when it was built in 1913. It actually opened 

and operated as the Allen Theatre until 1922 where it showed 

films, hosted road shows, and vaudeville theatre. 

 

The theatre received renovation in 1949 and was renamed at 

that time the Capitol Theatre. When the Mae Wilson restoration 

project started, it received from Mae’s son, Larry Wilson who 

was a lifetime performer, a donation of $350,000 towards the 

construction of the current building with the request that the 

building be named after his mother. Mae Wilson was a 

long-time music teacher and arts promoter in Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in thanking 

the grade 12 drama students of Vanier Collegiate and their 

director, Wayne Dirkson, for their most informative and unique 

history lesson. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Targets 

 

Mr. Harrison: — After overseeing a staggering 62 per cent 

increase in greenhouse gas emissions, the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] had a deathbed conversion last year on the 

eve of an election. They figured they should be seen to finally 

be doing something to address the issue. So they set targets, the 

most significant being a 32 per cent reduction over 2004 levels 

by 2020. 

So imagine our surprise, Mr. Speaker, when just hours before 

Earth Day, the NDP Environment critic did a stunning reversal 

on her party’s position. During a media scrum she completely 

abdicated the call from Saskatchewan to reach these targets. She 

said, and I quote, “I would say the federal targets are something 

they should clearly be adopting.” 

 

The federal targets are intensity based. The NDP Environment 

critic has said repeatedly that intensity-based targets would do 

nothing to reach our goals. And, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

targets call for a 20 per cent reduction by 2020. We know that 

the NDP like the phrase stunningly incompetent. Perhaps it’s 

because they’re so intimately familiar with the concept. I ask 

the NDP to stand up and come clean with their real position. Is 

it intensity-based targets or not? Is it a 20 per cent reduction or 

not? Is it defaulting to federal targets or not? Or is it simply a 

case of stunning incompetence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Prince Albert Mintos Win Team Award 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

year the Saskatchewan Sport Awards banquet was held at the 

Conexus Art Centre, and recipients in each category were 

announced. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the Prince Albert 

Mintos AAA hockey team was the recipient of the team award. 

 

The Mintos had a strong ’06-07 season finishing 35, 7, and 1. 

They placed first of 12 teams in the midget AAA hockey league 

playoffs, winning each of the four games they played. They 

won the provincial title for the second consecutive season. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the ’07 western regionals, the Mintos once 

again placed first by winning each of the four games they 

played there. At the Telus Cup, held in Red Deer, the Mintos 

won each of the seven games they played there. Mr. Speaker, 

the Prince Albert Mintos is the only AAA team in Canadian 

hockey history to win national championship in two 

consecutive years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well as being proud of my hometown team, the 

Mintos hold a special place in my heart as I once played for that 

team. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I still have my Mintos jersey and 

keep it as a reminder of my glory days. And if I could still get 

into it, I’d have worn it today. I ask that all members join with 

me in congratulating the Mintos on receiving the Team Award 

at the Saskatchewan Sports Awards banquet. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Carol Teichrob 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

last year as the NDP ship was sinking like a rock, campaign 

Co-Chair Dale Schmeichel abandoned ship and quit the 

campaign team. The NDP said, that’s okay. We still have Carol 

Teichrob as our campaign Co-Chair. Well, Mr. Speaker, not any 

more. 

 

Carol Teichrob has been a member of the CCF-NDP 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 

Party] since 1952. She’s been an NDP MLA and cabinet 

minister, but she recently quit the party because she believes it 

is headed in the wrong direction. According to today’s 

StarPhoenix, Teichrob thought the party was on the wrong track 

when it tried to paint the Saskatchewan Party leader as a wolf in 

sheep’s clothing. And she completely disagreed with the NDP’s 

unsustainable and unaffordable drug plan. She said, and I quote, 

 

“This was the crowning glory of the platform and I 

thought well, God Almighty, what have I been wasting 

my time for, for the last 18 months going to these 

meetings that were supposed to be planning the election, 

and hear the major plank . . . I’ve never heard of it.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the wolf in sheep’s clothing and the NDP drug 

plan were the two biggest decisions of the NDP’s campaign. 

Their campaign Co-Chair had nothing to do with those 

decisions, and they both backfired horribly. And now Carol 

Teichrob says the NDP leader won’t even look at her. She said, 

and I quote, “Isn’t that stupid?” Exactly, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that 

stupid? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Climate Change 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I hear 

Australia is absolutely beautiful at this time of year. In 

mid-February the Minister of Environment and her chief of staff 

left for a 10-day trip to Australia. While she was gone, the Sask 

Party caucus issued a news release stating that the minister 

would, quote, “. . . hold a news conference upon her return from 

Australia to discuss the details of her trip.” 

 

The minister must never have seen the news release because she 

never held any news conference, and we still don’t know how 

much her trip cost or what it accomplished. Will the minister 

explain today what she learned on her trip? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for her question and I thank her for 

allowing me the platform to explain what happened on my trip. 

I was very pleased while I was in Australia to accompany a 

Saskatchewan-based company who is one of the lead 

companies with carbon capture and storage, HTC Purenergy, on 

new product launches in both Sydney and in Adelaide, which 

was incredibly well received by industry stakeholders in 

Australia. 

 

I also had meetings with the premiers from the Australian 

states. As the members opposite would know, the Council of 

the Federation is the model that the Australian premiers have 

adopted and we had joint meetings. The now opposition leader 

while he was premier received that invitation. I would imagine 

he would have attended had he been in a position to do so. 

 

I also met with the Zero Waste organization which is a south 

Australian recycling organization to discuss some best practices 

on that front. And as the member opposite is concerned about 

the water supply in this province, I was also very impressed to 

see that every toilet in Australia . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that Manitoba 

Premier Gary Doer attended some of the same meetings as our 

minister. The difference is that he seemed to have learned 

something while he was there. His recent provincial budget 

included a $145 million investment into climate change 

initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the west, Alberta announced this week that they 

are dedicating $328 million to a climate change fund. In 

contrast the Sask Party cut the $320 million Green Future Fund 

and replaced it with an extra $10 million this year. And now the 

government is looking at intensity-based targets, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re setting the bar so low that it’s actually underground. 

 

To the minister: can she promise this House that she won’t 

come back in two months with a climate change plan that 

actually lets greenhouse gas emissions grow? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for her question. I would point out that 

one of the major differences between Alberta and Saskatchewan 

is that Alberta last year introduced legislation on the climate 

change file, something that the NDP absolutely failed to do in 

this province. There was no legislation, no regulations. There 

were no industry specific targets for oil and gas or for 

SaskPower in this province. 

 

And if the member opposite is concerned about intensity-based 

targets, I would point out again that on Tuesday she said, and I 

quote, “I would say that the federal targets are something that 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

they should clearly be adopting.” 

 

I would point out to the member opposite that the federal targets 

are intensity-based, and if she doesn’t actually agree with her 

own statement from Tuesday, I will quote from their climate 

change booklet that they released last year, which would have 

industry, and I quote, “. . . reach mandatory emissions reduction 

obligations under the federal climate change plan,” which again 

is intensity-based. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is interested in 

legislation, I suggest you stay tuned. I guess Saskatchewan’s 

greenhouse gases are ready for growth. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — I guess Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gases are 

ready for growth. The members opposite were once fond of 

quoting the Manitoba NDP. Well let’s compare. Mr. Speaker, 

Manitoba is so confident in its emissions targets that Premier 

Doer is putting them into legislation. Unfortunately the Sask 

Party is ignoring Manitoba and is instead following the path of 

Stephen Harper. They’ve kept the NDP targets, but they’ve 

gutted the very funding set out to help achieve those targets. 

 

To the minister: does she actually have any intention of 

reaching those targets, and if so will she set out those targets in 

legislation as Manitoba has done? Or will she keep blaming the 

NDP for her shortcomings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, if the NDP Environment 

critic wants to discuss shortcomings, I would point out that they 

were unable to actually introduce legislation or regulations 

because they had no targets last year for industry or SaskPower. 

There was nothing to legislate. They had every opportunity. 

Instead of actually doing something on this issue, instead they 

sat back and watched for 16 years as emissions in this province 

grew by 62 per cent. 

 

So I would again ask the NDP Environment critic to clarify her 

party’s position. Is she now abdicating the NDP targets as she 

clearly on Tuesday has endorsed the federal climate change 

plan? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It would certainly help if members 

even close to the minister would give the minister an 

opportunity to respond. I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, taking something out of 

context seems to be the only answer the minister has. 

Mr. Speaker, Gary Doer went to Australia and came back, Gary 

Doer went to Australia and came back with a plan. Our 

Environment minister went to Australia and came back with 

nothing but a tan. 

 

The NDP has put forward a motion calling on the government 

to set . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I know members have their own 

personal views and opinions, but in the Chamber members also 

have the right to ask a question and to respond. I recognize the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP has put 

forward a motion calling on the government to set its 

greenhouse gas emission targets into law, as well as creating 

and reporting mechanisms. The target set by this motion 

matched the targets from the Sask Party platform, and they 

match the targets from the mandate letter sent from the Premier 

to his minister. There’s no reason why the government should 

have to think twice. To the minister: will she support the NDP 

motion, or will the government do the cowardly thing and 

refuse to allow any debate on this topic today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, apparently I had a better 

time on my trip than even I was aware of because I kind of 

missed the tanning part. But to go back to the member’s 

statement that I was taking things out of context, I would point 

out again that it is the NDP’s own climate change plan that I’m 

quoting from where they clearly indicate that they will be 

adopting the federal climate change plan. 

 

And I would point out again that the federal climate change 

plan is intensity-based targets, and it is a 20 per cent reduction 

by 2020 whereas the provincial targets are a 32 per cent 

reduction by 2020. So she’s asking us to sign on to whatever the 

NDP is proposing today. Perhaps she can first clarify exactly 

what she’s proposing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Nurses’ Contract Negotiations 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Health minister has been 

very clear that he is responsible for the great progress being 

made on the nursing file. Mr. Speaker, he has been prouder than 

a puffed-up peacock as he has boasted about his ability to sign 

an MOU [memorandum of understanding] with SUN 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses]. 

 

He has pointed to the MOU as an asset to the bargaining 

process, but, Mr. Speaker, the wheels have come off the wagon. 

Ninety-four per cent of SUN members have rejected the 

government’s contract offer, and the decision of a strike vote is 

likely to come as early as today. To the Minister of Health: 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

what does the minister have to say on this most recent turn of 

events? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, am I proud of the MOU, the partnership that our 

government signed with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses? 

Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. It is unprecedented in Canada. There 

are no other provinces that have achieved this accomplishment. 

 

Work has started on that memorandum of understanding. We’ve 

had a meeting already once, and there’ll be another meeting 

coming up next week. It’s dealing with recruitment and 

retention issues, and, Mr. Speaker, I’m very aware at the same 

time there’s a collective bargaining process going on. And that 

bargaining process, like every other bargaining process, has its 

ups and its downs. 

 

There is certainly a lot more pressure being turned on right now 

by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. That’s fully in their 

mandate to do that. They’re looking at perhaps a strike vote. 

They’re not happy with the proposal put forward by SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations]. I think 

SAHO’s heard that. The public’s heard that. I heard that last 

night at their annual meeting, Mr. Speaker, but the process will 

work. The end result is what is most important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as they say, you ain’t seen 

nothing yet. Mr. Speaker, the minister has been trying hard to 

suggest that there was no trouble in paradise between him and 

the nurses, but now we know the real story. SUN president, 

Rosalee Longmoore, said in a news release issued yesterday, 

and I quote: 

 

“Nurses are outraged that the government has signed a 

partnership agreement to work collaboratively, and then 

betrayed that commitment by instructing their bargaining 

committee to refuse to negotiate exactly the same 

retention and recruitment provisions that Minister 

McMorris has already agreed to - this is a good cop-bad 

cop routine that’s destructive and juvenile.” 

 

To the minister: why did he instruct his bargaining committee 

to refuse to negotiate the retention and recruitment provisions 

included in his MOU? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as I said in my first question, we’re very proud of 

a partnership agreement that we’ve signed with SUN that’s 

going to deal with a lot of the recruitment and retention issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the members on that side should talk 

maybe a little bit more about retention of their own members, 

former members, Mr. Speaker. They’d certainly do a much 

better job of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But certainly the process is a process that will take some time. 

There are emotions at the table, absolutely. I saw some of those 

last night at the annual meeting, as the member opposite did. He 

was at the same meeting, Mr. Speaker. I think that the process 

will work. It’s a process really, quite frankly, that was put in 

place by that former government. 

 

Now it’s interesting if he’s asking me as a minister to interfere 

and dictate to SAHO what that agreement should look like. Is 

that what happened under a former NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker? I’d ask him that. Is that how they conducted 

negotiations — with SAHO as a puppet, but they were running 

things behind the scenes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, obviously that member, and 

perhaps that minister was at a different event than I was. But, 

Mr. Speaker . . . Because I heard different. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister says that he won’t inject himself into the bargaining 

process. 

 

But at the SUN convention this week, when not sharing his 

feelings or blaming others, the minister said very clearly that he 

feels mandatory overtime is necessary. So much for being a 

silent partner. The minister wants to tell nurses what needs to be 

on the table but when things get tough he throws up his hands 

and he says it’s between SUN and SAHO. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister can’t have it both ways. He 

made himself part of the bargaining process when he introduced 

the MOU [memorandum of understanding] during negotiations. 

Now the people of Saskatchewan expect solutions — not 

blame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: is he going to just sit there now and claim it 

isn’t his problem? Or will he stand today, show some 

leadership, and promise to clean up the mess he’s made? Mr. 

Speaker, what’s it going to be? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear 

what I said last night because that member is absolutely wrong, 

absolutely wrong with what I said, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I said, Mr. Speaker, regarding the question on overtime 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

and mandatory overtime, what I said is, after 16 years of failing 

to recruit and retain the proper number of nurses in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, health regions are feeling that they have 

to have mandatory overtime to ensure there’s care in this 

province. It’s absolutely disgraceful the mess that that former 

government left this province in when it comes to human 

resources in health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have done a lot in only five months. We’re 

increasing the number of training seats so that more of our 

Saskatchewan people will be trained to work in our health care 

facilities. But even more than that, in the short term we’ve been 

across to the Philippines, attracted 300 nurses that will help in 

the short term, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done more in five months 

than that government did in 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Release of Confidential Documents 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina Police 

Service’s suspect in the case of the unauthorized disclosure of 

confidential police files is a retired Regina police officer. We 

now know that the Minister of Justice admits he wrote a letter 

on behalf of the suspect, quote, “two or three years ago.” On 

Monday of this week the minister told reporters in regards to 

this suspect, quote: 

 

What I’ve indicated is it’s not someone I’ve met. It is not 

somebody that I have an ongoing relationship with. It is 

someone I wrote a letter on behalf of two or three years 

ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is going to want to pay very close 

attention to this question. Does the minister today, does the 

minister today stand by his claims on Monday that the retired 

police officer in question is someone that he never met with 

personally and is not someone he was in regular contact with? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the 

members opposite take the opportunity to read what the 

members on this side of the House have said. And I’m pleased 

that they’re following what’s going on. 

 

It’s clear that the members opposite have a fixation with how 

the Saskatchewan Party has handled this matter instead of how 

the NDP covered it up. Unlike the NDP, the Saskatchewan 

Party has been forthright and upfront. It has corrected 

misstatements and has been entirely co-operative with the 

authorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP fraud scandal began in 1992. In 1994 Pat 

Lorjé attempted to get the NDP to come clean with the police. 

Not until the embarrassment of 2007 when Chief Cal Johnston 

made his unprecedented late-night news conference did it all 

come out. 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party does things ethically and properly, 

unlike the New Democratic Party. Mr. Speaker, I can 

understand why they have a fixation, but let’s get on with 

things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Very clearly, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 

does he stand behind the comments that he made on Monday? 

Is it still his assertion that he has not met with the Regina police 

officer? And is it still his assertion that it is not someone that he 

was in regular contact with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in 1992 the NDP caucus 

was involved in a fraud involving their caucus funds. To avoid 

political embarrassment, they tried to cover it up. Many of their 

members are still in the House today — the member from 

Nutana, the member from Riversdale. In 1994 they were 

pressed to try and come clean with everything that took place. 

 

Again in 2007 Glenn Hagel stood in this House and tried to tell 

the media and the members of this House that he had provided 

full and complete candid information. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

was not correct. 

 

Sixteen years, Mr. Speaker, it took for the NDP to come 

forward and admit that they had not been forthright with the 

police. Mr. Speaker, that’s a problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Accountability 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in this 

House we raised the issue of what is now being called the 

unaccountability Act, Bill 31, by which this government intends 

to hide expenditures up to $350,000 from public scrutiny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the reaction of the Premier in the House 

yesterday and his further comments in the scrum, I have a very 

simple and direct question: did the Premier even read this piece 

of legislation before it was introduced in the House? Did the 

Premier know the provisions that were included in this piece of 

legislation before it was introduced in the House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, governments must always 

be working to strike a balance between efficiency and 

accountability. The $50,000 threshold for cabinet approval of 

expenditures has been in place for many years. As a result our 

cabinet decided that it was not appropriate to have to have 

cabinet approve basic things like replacement of routine 

facilities, etc., in parks. We feel that ministry officials are 

perfectly capable and qualified to make those kinds of spending 

decisions. That’s why we want to raise the $50,000 threshold. 

 

That said, the official opposition raised some legitimate 

concerns about accountability. Our government is committed to 

accountability and that’s why the Premier has asked me to take 

two steps to ensure that accountability is not compromised. 

First I will be writing to the Provincial Auditor to seek his 

recommendation on the appropriate level of spending requiring 

cabinet approval. And second I will be introducing a House 

amendment to amend the legislation to leave the threshold as is 

at $50,000 until we receive a response from the auditor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I guess that question does spring 

to mind. I hear from a colleague in the House, did anybody in 

that cabinet or caucus review this legislation before it was 

placed on the Table here? 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know once you’ve been caught, once you’ve 

been caught you can do some quick retreating, and that’s what 

we’re seeing today. That’s what we’re seeing today because, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s either incompetence, which means they hadn’t 

even read the Bill, didn’t understand what the Bill said, or it 

was an effort, it was an effort to escape accountability. So 

which was it? Which was it, Mr. Speaker? That’s my question 

— incompetence or an effort to escape accountability? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate input from 

members of the public. We appreciate input from members 

opposite. We appreciate input from members of our own 

caucus. We appreciate input from the Provincial Auditor. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in government there is always a balance 

between accountability and efficiency. Our government is 

working to improve efficiency. And we feel that part of that 

improvement is giving our professional civil service more 

authority to make spending decisions within the budgets that 

have been approved by cabinet. 

 

However this government should not compromise government 

accountability, and that’s why we’re going to be seeking the 

Provincial Auditor’s counsel on how to achieve the proper 

balance on what would be an appropriate spending threshold for 

cabinet approval. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the threshold is going to remain 

at its current level of $50,000. We appreciate the point that’s 

been made. We’ve listened to that point, and we’re going to 

make the appropriate amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that 

this opposition has been able in one day to help this government 

see the light. But the question is: why wouldn’t you talk — if 

you want to — to the Provincial Auditor before you draft the 

legislation, before you introduce it, before you try and sneak 

through this provision which would have allowed this 

government to spend up to $350,000 without public 

notification, Mr. Speaker, for at least a year? 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I listened yesterday with interest to the 

Premier as he tried to justify this by saying well, you know, 

we’re just too busy. We’re just too busy to spend time at 

cabinet. We’re just too busy to spend time at cabinet reviewing 

expenditures up to $350,000. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, then let me ask this question: does this 

government think it’s too much, too much for the public to ask 

that members of that cabinet would spend an hour a week 

reviewing decisions that represent $350,000 expenditures of the 

taxpayers’ money? Are they too important, too busy to do that 

much on behalf of the taxpayers who elected them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have a complex 

process that we’ve adopted in our province, and it’s a relatively 

good process. Things go through estimates. Things go through 

cabinet. Things go through the budgetary process. Things go 

through Public Accounts. Some things require cabinet approval; 

some things do not. These things, the expenditures that we’re 

talking about, still will require ministerial approval. They will 

be approved within budget. They will be subject to ministerial 

approval. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while we still believe that it makes sense to 

raise the $50,000 threshold, we appreciate the public’s concern 

and we feel that this can be done, we can make this increase 

without compromising the public’s need for accountability. Mr. 

Speaker, we recognize that we want the auditor’s advice on this 

and we want to look to the auditor for that advice and 

suggestion. 

 

The members opposite talk about, are we listening? Are we 

paying attention? I would encourage them to listen to people 

like Carol Teichrob. They are out of touch with their own 

membership. They are out of touch with the public, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the result of work of 

opposition, we’ve seen this government change course on a 

number of events. The Minister of Social Services was forced to 

change course on what she wanted to do with the department. 

We’ve seen the Minister of Advanced Education, the part-time 

Minister of Labour change course on now . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members can come to order or we will 

just wait to finish question period. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’ve changed 

their mind on social services. Now we’ve got the part-time 

Minister of Labour admitting that he better go out and do a 

public competition, at least for the Vice-Chair of the Labour 

Relations Board. I think in a matter of moments we’re going to 

see the Minister of Municipal Government, having succumbed 

to the pressure of the public and the opposition, change his 

mind on his budget, which will by the way mean the whole, 

changing the budget. And now we’ve got this government 

changing their mind on a Bill they’ve just introduced last week. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if they’re so willing to change their mind, 

my question is this: will they change their mind on their 

decision around the dental sealant for children? Will they 

change their mind around axing the vulnerable workers’ 

program? Will they change their mind about the ill-advised cut 

to the Station 20 funding in Saskatoon? Will they show the kind 

of leadership that would make those kind of changes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will have a competent, 

professional government. Bills are introduced. They receive 

first, second, and third reading. They proceed through 

committee. And we receive input from the public at each and 

every stage as Bills progress through the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we welcome input from the members there. 

We welcome input from the auditor and from members of the 

public. And we’re not afraid to make a change when it’s 

appropriate, Mr. Speaker. That’s what good, competent 

government is all about. And we will do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Funding for Saskatchewan Municipalities 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I am pleased to rise today to announce new funding for 

Saskatchewan municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Our government is funnelling an 

extra $10.41 million in revenue sharing to municipalities in 

order to provide property tax relief for taxpayers. Mr. Speaker, 

this funding was not announced in our budget, but our province 

has experienced a record-breaking oil land sales rights in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognized one individual who’s 

been given the floor. I’d ask members to respect the opportunity 

for the minister to make his statement. Minister for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much . . . 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are in 

a position to help taxpayers who are facing tax increases. This 

new funding comes on top of a $7.9 million increase in revenue 

sharing announced on budget day and brings the total 

revenue-sharing increase this year to $18.3 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — This enhancement provides 

approximately $140.55 million for Saskatchewan’s 

municipalities for a total increase of 15 per cent over last year. 

 

Our campaign promise was to provide 14 per cent over two 

years, along with the negotiation of a new long-term 

revenue-sharing agreement. This new revenue-sharing funding 

allows us to keep tomorrow’s promise today and exceed our 

two-year commitment in one year. 

 

The revenue-sharing enhancement of $10.41 million will be 

added to the 2008-09 revenue-sharing amount of $130.14 

million and will become part of the base funding for 

municipalities going forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after consulting with the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, the Saskatchewan Rural 

Municipalities Association, and New North, we decided to add 

this new funding to the revenue-sharing base. Although this 

funding is unconditional, our goal is to help municipalities 

provide property tax relief to Saskatchewan people, particularly 

those that are planning property tax hikes this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the representatives of the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and SARM 

here today for this announcement. Earlier this week I met with 

representatives from SUMA and SARM and New North to hear 

their expectations on what to do with the extra revenue being 

provided today. That meeting was important because it builds 

on the government-to-government relationship we feel is vital 

to building our province and addressing citizens’ needs. Our 

province and municipalities need to be ready for unprecedented 

economic growth. 

 

This money will not solve all the concerns municipalities have, 

Mr. Speaker, but we have moved quickly on increases to the 

revenue-sharing pool until we can negotiate a permanent, 

long-term solution to revenue sharing. 

 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce to this House we are 

keeping tomorrow’s promises today, and with this funding 

we’re helping our municipalities reduce municipal tax increases 

that might otherwise restrict future growth. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Oh sorry, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear you. First 

off, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the minister for sending across 

a copy of his statement this morning. And I’m very pleased that 

after numerous days of questioning, this minister has finally 

decided to take our advice and redress the revenue sharing that 

they have made available to the municipalities and the cities out 

of this huge mountain of surplus cash that they’re sitting on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member . . . they can laugh and they can 

jeer a little bit here, but, Mr. Speaker, how many days did we 

hear the Minister of Municipal Affairs go out to the rotunda and 

say, we promised 7 per cent; we’re delivering 7 per cent. That’s 

it. It’s not enough and we may see tax increases. And he stuck 

by that line until the Premier popped up one day in the House 

and talked about the glowing economy, the mountains of money 

that was rolling into the provincial government. And when he 

went out to the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, he said, well I haven’t 

heard any complaints about this, but we’ll have a look at it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you had to be out of province not to have 

heard the media accounts and reports from municipalities and 

cities that right across this province every municipality was 

looking at tax increases anywhere from 3.6 per cent up to 

almost 10 per cent. That’s historical tax increases right across 

this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, after hearing questions from us, I’m very 

pleased that the minister and the Premier decided to re-address 

this issue. And I know that it will be — this extra funding or 

this additional funding — will be well received by 

municipalities and cities, but, Mr. Speaker, let’s not 

second-guess ourselves here because many across this province 

will still see property tax increases. Not maybe as high as first 

proposed, but we are still talking in the range anywhere from 2 

to 5 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that I will 

congratulate the minister on. First and foremost there was a 

number of comments when the Premier first said he was going 

to look at this. He hadn’t heard about it, but he . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

can complete her statement. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when the Premier first went out in the rotunda and 

spoke that there may be an opportunity to provide more money 

to municipalities, he talked about dedicated funding. He talked 

about conditional funding. He talked about it being specific and 

it may claw back from next year any proposed increases that 

come from next year. 

 

So there are a couple of things that I’m very pleased to hear, 

and I’m sure the municipalities will be also. Number one, that 

this is unconditional funding, and number two, that this money 

will be in the base. And that’s what’s important to the 

municipalities, that they know that they have this funding built 

into the base and that it’s unconditional. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while this money is still less than what was 

provided to municipalities in revenue sharing last year — the 

increase was 30 million last year — I do want to say we’re very 

pleased that the government listened to this opposition and to 

the cry of citizens about the concern with property tax and have 

contributed more money. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, as per 

mutual agreement to move to a motion to proceed to 

government orders. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Proceed to Government Orders 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That this Assembly do now proceed to government orders. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved: 

 

That this Assembly do proceed to government orders. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 37, an Act 

respecting provincial parks, is being put forward to enable more 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

effective park enforcement. It will also make minor but 

important legal refinements to park boundaries to allow for 

proper digital mapping done by Information Services and my 

ministry. 

 

Instead of park enforcement staff hand delivering tickets to 

vehicle owners who are in breach of park regulations, the new 

parks amendment Act will allow staff to place tickets directly 

on vehicles without the vehicle operator being present. If the 

receiving party does not respond to the ticket, enforcement staff 

can legally pursue the matter by mailing a follow-up ticket to 

the registered owner of the vehicle. 

 

The other aspect of the amendment of The Parks Act involves 

digital mapping. Digital mapping is an ongoing provincial 

project that will result in minor legal amendments to many of 

the provincial park boundaries. Revisions will include 

incorporating updated language used by Information Services 

Corporation in describing their parcelization of titled land, and 

more precisely defining the boundaries between a few private 

lands and the adjacent parks. These changes will ensure the 

correct mapping of the various park areas by Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport and Information Services Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 37, The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2008. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has moved second reading of Bill No. 37, The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased this afternoon to enter into debate on amendments to 

Bill No. 37, The Parks Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that 

although on the surface looks like it’s relatively simple and 

mostly housekeeping in nature dealing with making changes to 

park boundaries, but, Mr. Speaker, the result of the changes to 

park boundaries includes new parcels of land or excludes 

parcels of land from within the parks, Mr. Speaker. And those 

changes are complex in themselves. And we do thank the 

minister for sending over the map she did, of each park, that 

would indicate the parcels of land that are being amended or 

changed, added or deleted from the park in each particular case, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s very detailed work to check out each of these changes 

to ensure that in making these changes that pieces of land are 

. . . the implications of some of those changes on the financial 

well-being of the province, changes perhaps to the industrial 

capacity of the park, Mr. Speaker. And we are going to need to 

take some time to work with the minister and the officials to 

understand the implications of each change. 

 

In fact it would be very helpful if the minister would be 

prepared to send over the notes that she would have on the 

particular changes in each of the parks along with the maps so it 

would help us and speed up our ability to research the particular 

changes more thoroughly. And if the minister were able to help 

us in that way, we would be able to move through this Bill 

much quicker than the individual checks we would have to do 

park by park, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, due to the complexity of the changes in front 

of us, even though they may seem to be housekeeping, it’s 

incumbent upon us as an opposition to ensure that the changes 

are nothing more than housekeeping and are in fact in the 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan. So until we have the 

ability to make those checks, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would 

move we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of the debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 34 — The 

Graduate Retention Program Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise to participate in the debate of Bill 34, An Act 

respecting a Graduate Retention Program and repealing The 

Graduate Tax Exemption Act. This is a measure that I’ve taken 

a great deal of interest in over the years, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly there’s been a fair amount of dialogue, a fair amount 

of discussion that’s taken place in the province over the past 

years in terms of both how to make post-secondary education 

more accessible, more affordable for people and at the same 

time what we can do in Saskatchewan to retain and to attract 

young graduates to Saskatchewan so that they can bring their 

increased knowledge, their increased skills that they gained 

through post-secondary education to bear in our economy and 

our society. 

 

And in terms of what it takes for a society to thrive, to succeed, 

certainly the studies come in again and again indicating the 

critical importance of post-secondary education and what that 

does in terms of not just the kind of jobs that are available . . . 

And indeed be it the OECD [Organisation for Economic 

Co-operation and Development] or the Conference Board of 

Canada, any number of think tanks again come out with stats 

indicating anywhere from two-thirds to three-quarters to 80 per 

cent of all new jobs being created requiring some form of 

post-secondary education. 

 

So again this Bill is tied up in that critical discussion as to what 

it takes for a society to succeed and to ensure that the human 

capital is there, the brainpower is there, the skill and knowledge 

is there to ensure that we succeed in this province. 

 

I had the privilege and the pleasure of heading up a review of 

accessibility and affordability for post-secondary education. 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

And I met with hundreds of people across the province, went 

from Weyburn in the South to La Ronge and points north. In the 

course of the discussion and the dialogue around that report, 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to talk to people that were 

students. I had the opportunity to talk to people that had family 

members in the post-secondary education system, to educators, 

to administrative staff supporting the system, to people that 

wanted to get involved in the system. 

 

And in the course of those discussions, there were different 

people that brought up the question of graduate retention and 

how do you use that as a means by which to round out the 

package in terms of, you know, both accessibility on the front 

end of post-secondary education and making sure that you 

eliminate the barriers to participation in post-secondary 

education to provide the supports and what it takes to ensure not 

just participation but success in the post-secondary education 

system. 

 

And then of course what we can do as a province to ensure that 

once we collectively have made this investment, what we can 

do to ensure that the province of Saskatchewan realizes a return 

on that investment? And certainly members have talked about 

this particular measure in those kind of terms, using that 

language of return on investment. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And I think that’s a fair point, Mr. Speaker, and it’s, you know I 

think a sad commentary in terms of where we’re at in a federal 

sense in Canada, in terms of, I think, the people in 

Saskatchewan do want to see a greater return on the, the larger 

investment that the people of Saskatchewan are forced to make 

in terms of post-secondary education, in terms of and in 

response to the retreat from federal standards and a better 

measure of federal funding for these critical programs, you 

know post-secondary education being chief among them. 

 

But throughout the ’90s we saw the elimination of things like 

the Canada assistance plan, the replacement of that with the 

Canada Health and Social Transfer, the greatly diminished 

budgets that came with that. And as the feds retreated from 

what had been an area of responsibility, this, this question of a 

provincial investment and the acute nature of a provincial return 

on that investment became all the more salient in the 

discussions around post-secondary education. 

 

And certainly, you know, I attended school throughout the ’90s, 

Mr. Speaker. I was part of that generation that saw tuition 

double and in some cases triple and the attendant concern that 

that raised around the very access that the broad many have to 

post-secondary education. And in that discussion, there’s a lot 

of attention that comes too. If the province is making this 

investment, what kind of guarantees should the province be 

seeking in terms of a return on that investment? 

 

So, you know certainly we’ve had different measures 

throughout the years in terms of return for service bursaries and, 

you know, different kind of incentives too. You know once that 

investment has been made to ensure that that investment is 

being realized by the province that made it, which is the case 

when of course it’s a provincial investment, much more so than 

a federal investment. 

And I guess that leads me to two points I want to make in this 

debate for sure, Mr. Speaker. One is that as the federal 

government has retreated from its responsibility to fund these 

things, that you know perhaps under the constitution are, are 

clearly delineated as a provincial responsibility. And I might 

point out, Mr. Speaker, that in Canada, post-secondary 

education as a provincial jurisdiction is different from, you 

know, virtually any other western industrialized federation that 

provides post-secondary education. And that is because these 

other industrialized countries have realized the importance of 

post-secondary education and a knowledgeable, skilled, 

populous workforce, and the importance of that to, not just 

society, but to economy and productivity. Pick your measure, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know there are different sort of historical reasons why 

Canada is different in that regard. But the fact remains that in 

the ’60s and the post-war expansion of the welfare state, there 

were steps taken to ensure that provinces had greater 

wherewithal to provide a basic level of access to post-secondary 

education and basic quality in terms of that post-secondary 

education. 

 

The ’90s saw a retreat from that and as such you saw a 

fragmenting of the system. You saw a fragmenting of what used 

to bring Canadians together and, you know, wildly different 

experience in terms of the levels of tuition across the country, in 

terms of quality across the country, and a lot of that being 

directly related to not so much whether people are Canadians, 

but whether or not they have the fortune to be in Nova Scotia or 

New Brunswick or BC [British Columbia] or Yukon or where 

they were. 

 

So I think that was a regrettable trend, Mr. Speaker, and that led 

us directly into discussions, a more urgent discussion of what 

are the means to secure the return for provinces making an 

increasing investment into post-secondary education. 

 

Now over the past years, the Romanow administration, the 

administration that I was part of with the member of Riversdale 

as our head, there were different measures seized upon by 

which to try and to secure that investment. You know 

return-for-service bursaries were particularly important in the 

health care professions. We saw some good success with those 

measures in terms of nursing, in terms of bursaries provided for 

doctors, in terms of hard-to-recruit, hard-to-retain professional 

items such as technologists. 

 

And I guess it was building on that experience and again 

responding to things that we had heard as we got around the 

province and discussions that we’d had with stakeholders and 

students and interested parties, that we brought forward the 

graduate tax exemption. 

 

And again in ’99, there were different parties that ran on 

different platforms. I’m sure you remember that well, Mr. 

Speaker. And arising out of that, there was a compromise on a 

tax credit that was criticized as being inadequate. We listened to 

those criticisms, and we responded with one which was much 

more robust in terms of the value to individuals. And I think 

that the government of the day has brought forward a measure 

that goes beyond that certainly, that builds on the experience of 

Manitoba in terms of what they’ve done with the graduate tax 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

situation there, in terms of a refundable rebate. 

 

And I guess the thing that remains to be seen, Mr. Speaker, is 

there’s been a lot of hype about how this is a very aggressive 

measure and possibility the best in the free world and all of that. 

But I guess it remains to be seen (a) how much it’s actually 

going to cost. It’s booked for $12 million this year, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s going to be with great interest that the 

opposition monitors as to how much this is going to cost the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again in terms of how we see that basic measure of 

accessibility and affordability for post-secondary education, 

which is tuition, we’re going to be watching that very closely, 

Mr. Speaker. Because when the members opposite were seizing 

upon the experience of Manitoba and dismissing the measures 

that we’d taken on the graduate tax exemption side — you 

know, fair enough that’s their point of view — but in using the 

Manitoba model as an example, they’ve I think forgotten the 

basic fact that in Manitoba they’ve had a freeze on tuition that 

was only removed this past year, Mr. Speaker, in the budget 

that was introduced in that province mere weeks ago. But 

they’ve essentially had a freeze on tuition. When the Manitoba 

NDP came to power in 1999, they reduced tuition 10 per cent 

and then froze it, and that’s provided the province of Manitoba 

with tuition at a level that is the third lowest in the country. 

 

And I guess I point that out, Mr. Speaker, because what we also 

heard from students and families and stakeholders — time and 

time again— is that to get into the system in the first place it’s 

important to have a tuition that is reasonable enough and 

affordable enough so that students can get through that door in 

the first place. And it’s fine to have these wealthy, sort of, 

rebates post-graduation, but you have got to get into 

post-secondary education in the first place, and you got to be 

able to succeed and persist through the post-secondary 

education. 

 

And I guess the concern that we have with this measure is that 

in terms of the narrow, sort of, question of recruitment and 

retention of graduates, it does a not bad job of that. But there is 

some concerns that I’ll get into in a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But 

in terms of the, you know, people getting into the system in the 

first place and then succeeding in the system, it doesn’t do 

anything in that regard. And of course the government of the 

day has said that, well we’ll continue the freeze for one more 

year. 

 

And I find that interesting, Mr. Speaker because in, you know, 

the last spring, along about this time, we had the member for 

Silver Springs talking about how we needed to have tuition that 

was at least below the national average and, you know, why 

hadn’t we taken any action in this regard. 

 

And I guess what I’d say to that is a number of things. Under 

the member from Riversdale’s leadership, Saskatchewan spent 

the most per capita on post-secondary education. We spent the 

greatest percentage of budgetary expenditure on post-secondary 

education. As a percentage of our GDP [gross domestic 

product], we spent the most in Canada on post-secondary 

education. 

 

And in terms of the investment that we as a province were 

making in this critical area, we made a very large investment in 

that regard, Mr. Speaker. And again because of the things I said 

at the outset in terms of the importance of post-secondary 

education to society and to the economy and in terms of people 

being able to realize their full potential in a socio-economic 

way, we thought this was an important investment that needed 

to be made. So we were proud of that investment. 

 

But where we wanted a greater return and where we wanted a 

greater measure of accessibility and affordability was around 

where we ranked federally in terms of the level of tuition being 

required from students. And we also wanted to make sure that 

students had some basic relief on the affordability side of 

things, and some predictability in terms of how they went 

forward with tuition. And again the only times that we’d been 

able to specifically secure progress on this front, Mr. Speaker, 

was with, you know, 2004-05 when we introduced that first 

year of a freeze and then froze it the next two subsequent years. 

 

Now the government is saying that they’re going to engage in a 

study. They’re going to engage in some kind of a consultation 

in terms of what comes next. I would suggest that they take a 

close look at, you know, not just what we had proposed in terms 

of the platform, in terms of a $1,000 reduction to tuition and 

then pegging the amount going forward to ensure that students 

had predictability and affordability, but also making sure that 

you’ve got that gain around quality to ensure that that amount is 

backfilled with the post-secondary institutions. 

 

You know there have been criticisms raised of that approach, 

Mr. Speaker. But I find it interesting that, you know, 

fundamental elements of that approach are in practice in British 

Columbia. They’re in practice in Alberta. And you know, I 

think that the students and the families of students in 

Saskatchewan deserve to have the same approach. 

 

So we’ve had another year of a freeze brought in. Again we’re 

glad to see that. But we want to see that basic affordability and 

sustainability for students that are trying to plan their lives and 

how they’re going to afford this critical investment on their 

part, we want to see that secured, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again there are discussions that have been identified to be 

undertaken by the government of the day. And I would urge 

them not to look just at the work that had been done in terms of 

the accessibility and affordability review, but I’d also urge them 

to look at what’s going on in Alberta and British Columbia in 

terms of their go-forward mechanism which is pegging tuition 

to some basic measure such as CPI [consumer price index] or 

some kind of educational price index. 

 

One of the things that we were glad to introduce the graduate 

tax exemption around was that it wasn’t just focused on just 

university. It was focused on post-secondary education students 

as a whole because, of course, we think it’s important that 

we’ve got people going to university and getting undergrad 

degrees and graduate degrees. But we also thought it was 

important that we had a measure that extended to graduates 

from SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], graduates from our regional colleges. And so 

we’re glad to see that in that sort of design aspect, that there is 

some similarity there with what’s being brought forward here in 

terms of the SIAST grads being able to take advantage of this 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

program. 

 

Something that we’re still . . . you know, we’ve got a few more 

questions on and perhaps we can get these nailed down in 

committee. Different from the graduate tax exemption program 

that we’d previously had in place, the party opposite 

campaigned on an approach that only had the exemption 

available to students that had gone to school here. 

 

And again in the campaign we said, you know, this sends a 

terrible message to the students of Saskatchewan that for 

whatever reason need to go to other provinces, perhaps to other 

countries, to get their education. And you know, it being the 

global economy and the global village, I mean, why wouldn’t 

we want to send young or Saskatchewan people out into the 

world to get that education and then bring that back to the 

province of Saskatchewan? Why would we not want to incent 

that behaviour as a society, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So the Saskatchewan Party, I think, has shifted on that in terms 

of the approach that they’d taken in the campaign. There’s some 

room now in terms of certain programs being designated where 

students can go out to other provinces, get that education, and 

then bring that back home to the province. So I guess we’re 

glad to see that, Mr. Speaker, but again we’ll see how that 

works out over the long haul. 

 

The $12 million that has been booked for the program as a 

whole, we realize — and we’d had some discussion of this in 

estimates, Mr. Speaker — we realize that’s a start-up cost. We 

expect to see this cost go up fairly aggressively over the years. 

We’ll be watching that closely and I guess we’ll see. The 

amounts that Manitoba has booked for what has been described 

by members opposite as a less aggressive program, the amounts 

that the province of Manitoba has booked certainly seem to be 

much greater. So again we’ll we watching that very closely. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I guess it’s interesting that this is the investment that’s being 

made. It shows in a sort of a marquee investment on the part of 

the members opposite at this time, Mr. Speaker, that again we’ll 

see where Saskatchewan stacks up as the data comes in, in 

terms of whether or not that tradition of leadership, in terms of 

the per capita expenditure, in terms of the percentage of 

budgetary expenditure, or in terms of percentage of GDP that 

our province spends on post-secondary education, we’ll be 

interested to see how whether or not that leadership is continued 

or if it goes sideways somehow. 

 

But I guess the broader sort of things that I’m not sure that a 

back-end measure does, Mr. Speaker, is ensure that we make 

our system broadly accessible in the first place. And I’ve talked 

about tuition, but there are other things in terms of barriers to 

post-secondary education that certainly we heard a lot about 

from students and their families or people that wanted to be 

students, throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Geography is a huge barrier in terms of access to 

post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. And again it’s fine 

to incents graduation and again we think that’s important. But 

we think if you put all of your attention there and don’t pay 

attention to who’s getting into the system in the first place, that 

that’s really only catching half of the equation. 

 

And again geography being such a big concern, it remains to be 

seen where this government stands on things like credit transfer, 

and better coordination throughout the different component 

parts of the system. I know the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy has talked about how he was able to go to get his first 

year of university without leaving home and his home 

community, and certainly we’ve got a tremendous advantage in 

Saskatchewan in the regional college system that enables, 

enables the post-secondary system to break down that barrier of 

geography and to make that education more accessible and 

affordable in home communities. 

 

And again one of the worries I have there, Mr. Speaker, is that 

in this budget, you know, that was hailed by members opposite 

as, you know, the $1 billion historic budget, and ready for 

growth and all these things, the problem with that, Mr. Speaker, 

is that in the capital envelope for post-secondary education 

there’s $45 million. And in that subsection of the expenditure 

there’s $800,000 for capital out there in regional college 

country. 

 

And again if this is one of our critical means by which we make 

post-secondary education more accessible, more affordable, and 

you know, provide better on-ramps for people right across the 

province in terms of the system, and again the way that that 

makes our economy more productive, more knowledge-based, 

and makes our society better running and better suited; then 

you’d think that the regional college system would have been a 

natural in terms of where investments would have been made. 

But again, $45 million, that’s a good amount devoted to capital 

— but 800,000 of that devoted to regional college capital. 

 

And again you talk to the regional college people across the 

province, their enrolments are up. They’ve got a great number 

of capital needs and $800,000 doesn’t cut it. So I guess, you 

know, this is the historic capital budget and it’s odd that at this 

time when there’s all this self-congratulation and back patting 

going on, on the other side, that a mere $800,000 is devoted to 

capital for the regional college system. 

 

In terms of measures that ensure better access and engagement 

in the post-secondary education system by First Nations and 

Métis people, you know there were some measures that we had 

taken in terms of investment around SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies], around Gabriel Dumont in terms of 

taking training on-reserve. You know, it seems that it’s not 

quite status quo but they used it . . . These good foundations 

that we’ve got built, they haven’t really been seized upon by the 

members opposite. So that’s a place where again, if you’re 

going to have these back-end measures around retention and 

incenting completion that’s fine and good. But it’s just as 

important to make sure that you’re getting a broad cross-section 

of Saskatchewan people into post-secondary education in the 

first place and that’s particularly true around First Nations and 

Métis people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are other supports that need to be brought to bear, be it 

day care, transportation. Housing is of particular importance, 

you know, increasingly right across the province. So there are a 

great number of measures to ensure that that basic accessibility 

in the first place, that we see is not being well served by this 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

budget at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, again we think it’s fine and good to have 

aggressive rebates on the back end of post-secondary education, 

but something we know that the members opposite have missed 

is the basic accessibility in the first place. And again, if you’re 

not doing anything to expand the club, to expand the 

opportunity to that critical experience which is post-secondary 

education, we think that fails the province and fails the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my place and cede the 

floor to my colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise on behalf of 

the official opposition to make a few comments on Bill No. 34, 

The Graduate Retention Program Act. As I have visited various 

campuses and engaged in discussions with students from a 

range of programs and universities, colleges and technical 

institutes, I’ve heard some concerns, Mr. Speaker. Students are 

concerned about the loss of the graduate tax exemption program 

that the previous NDP government initiated. 

 

Under the NDP’s program, new graduates were able to earn 

$100,000 in tax-free income during their first five years of 

employment. This graduate tax exemption program was broadly 

available to all graduates of post-secondary certificate, diploma, 

degree, and journey person programs. And it was a program 

that was not only designed to retain our young people, Mr. 

Speaker, but it was also designed to recruit them from 

elsewhere. The graduate tax exemption program was available 

to graduates from outside of Saskatchewan who want to start 

their careers and build their lives here. 

 

But that program has been axed, Mr. Speaker, and replaced with 

something different, something less comprehensive. Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party government’s new program is not 

without merit, but it is also not without fault. Young people 

have told me that this new program is far more confusing than 

the straightforward graduate tax exemption. On the one hand, 

the minister says the graduates of select programs will receive a 

$20,000 tuition rebate, but when young people read the fine 

print, Mr. Speaker, they see that it isn’t all it’s cracked up to be. 

 

When they read the fine print, they see that if they complete a 

journey person’s certificate program or a one-year certificate or 

degree program, no matter what year they finish, they only 

receive $3,000 of their tuition money back, no matter how 

much they may have paid in tuition. Completion of a two-year 

certificate or diploma program in 2007 merits just $3,200 of 

their tuition money back, but if they complete such a program 

this year instead, they’ll get $6,400 of their tuition rebated to 

them — again with no consideration for how much tuition they 

have actually paid. A three-year undergraduate degree warrants 

$5,000 if you graduated in 2007, $10,000 if you graduated this 

year, and $15,000 if you graduate next year. 

 

And wait, Mr. Speaker, because it’s about to get even more 

complicated and confusing. An individual who completed a 

four-year undergraduate degree in 2007 will get just $5,000 of 

their tuition money rebated to them over seven years after 

graduation. A 2008 graduate, on the other hand, will get 

$10,000 of their tuition money back. A 2009 graduate, however, 

will get $15,000 in rebated tuition. And only those who 

graduate from a four-year undergraduate program in 2010 will 

actually receive $20,000 of the money they paid in tuition 

rebated back to them over the following seven years. 

 

It’s no wonder that young people are confused because there are 

a lot of details in the fine print of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. The 

Sask Party program is being rolled out at a snail’s pace over the 

next several years, and young people will receive vastly 

different benefits depending on which program they complete 

and when they complete it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, further into the fine print, we see that the 

Sask Party government’s plan does very little to actually recruit 

young people to build their futures here in Saskatchewan. The 

graduate retention program leaves out the vast majority of 

out-of-province graduates. I’m pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Sask Party has slightly altered their original plan which 

completely shut out all out-of-province graduates. It is 

commendable that after significant pressure from the opposition 

and the public the minister made some alterations to his plan, 

but it is not enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The ministry’s website indicates just eight eligible 

out-of-province programs — just eight. That falls far short of 

what it should be, Mr. Speaker. Young people from 

Saskatchewan who must study in their chosen field outside of 

Saskatchewan, such as speech-language pathologists, are 

completely shut out of the benefits of this program. Young 

people from Saskatchewan who choose to study elsewhere but 

who want to return home to Saskatchewan to build their lives 

here after their studies are also completely shut out of this 

program. 

 

And for young people who are not from here who are 

completing their post-secondary training and contemplating 

their futures, the Sask Party program does absolutely nothing to 

recruit them to come and build their futures here in this great 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the Sask 

Party plan fails miserably in the area of youth recruitment. 

 

This tuition rebate program also fails miserably when it comes 

to making post-secondary training and education more 

accessible at the front end. Mr. Speaker, as I have had 

opportunities to speak with young people from across 

Saskatchewan, one of the most commonly raised issues is 

accessibility to post-secondary training and education. A future, 

partial rebate of tuition spread out over seven years after young 

people complete their programs does absolutely nothing to help 

them with the high tuition fees that they face today. When I 

asked the minister in committee some days ago what was his 

opinion about current tuition levels in Saskatchewan, he refused 

to provide his views. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the young people that I have spoken to about this 

program are confused because they view it as convoluted. They 

wonder why it doesn’t benefit their friends who have left the 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

province to study but want to come home to Saskatchewan. 

They wonder why it does so little to recruit young people from 

other places to build their futures here. And they wonder why 

this government has done nothing to make post-secondary 

education more accessible at the front end. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s well known that the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour is extremely averse to any 

form of public or stakeholder consultation. So I want to ensure 

Saskatchewan young people and students in our universities, 

colleges, and technical institutes have an opportunity to be 

heard. I look forward to further discussion on this Bill in 

committee. At this time I would move that Bill 34 be sent to 

committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture, and Sport 

that . . . pardon me, the motion responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour that Bill No. 34, The 

Graduate Retention Program Act be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To Human Services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 31 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 31 — The 

Executive Government Administration Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

I am very pleased to stand today and make a few remarks on 

this Bill. Since speaking on this Bill just yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve had some tremendous changes, Mr. Speaker. 

Yesterday as I spoke at some length about accountability and 

the lack of transparency and accountability with this particular 

piece of legislation, with the move from 50,000 to $350,000 in 

the limits in which would have to be recorded and moved 

forward through OC [order in council], Mr. Speaker, and in a 

mere 24 hours we’ve seen a complete turnaround, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen what I would call a miracle — a miracle, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve seen the government finally see the light, Mr. 

Speaker. They decided that they knew they would follow our 

direction. They would move forward and amend their own 

legislation just one day after putting it in the House, Mr. 

Speaker. And for that, Mr. Speaker, we thank them. We thank 

the fact that they listened to us. We thank them for the fact that, 

Mr. Speaker, they know when they’re doing something wrong, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the role of the opposition to point 

things out, maybe things that were oversights, things that hadn’t 

been looked at very carefully, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

will conclude my remarks on this Bill at this time and just thank 

the members opposite for listening to us. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to speak to this Act, an Act that has 

been referred to as the unaccountability Act, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the direction that the government was taking us up 

till this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as the member from Regina Dewdney indicated in his 

short remarks here just a few moments ago, after a very short 

intervention by members of the opposition who had actually 

studied the Bill, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has 

offered significant changes in this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I reviewed the government cabinet Minister of 

Justice’s remarks in introducing this Bill yesterday, and, Mr. 

Speaker, in general the comments made by the Minister of 

Justice were as follows: 

 

. . . these are major [excuse me, Mr. Speaker] these are 

major modifications to the administration of government, 

[but] I want to assure the members that the internal 

mechanisms of oversight and monitoring undertaken by 

Treasury Board and other offices, including this House, 

remain intact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the Minister of Justice, in 

presenting the Bill indicated that indeed these are major 

modifications, and then he says basically, trust us because other 

provisions are there to ensure that accountability remains in 

place. 

 

Well in just 24 hours the member opposite on one matter related 

to the clauses of this Bill has indicated that in fact that’s not the 

case, Mr. Speaker. There are considerable number of other 

modifications to the delivery of government, Mr. Speaker, that 

are accounted for in this legislation. 

 

The members of the opposition now have realized that we have 

to do some intense scrutiny, Mr. Speaker, of all the clauses of 

this Bill. And as a result we are recognizing that with changes 

coming, perhaps next week, Mr. Speaker, amendments that the 

government is proposing, that in fact this Bill is changing, and 

the Bill that’s in front of us right now, Mr. Speaker, will not be 

the Bill that the government wants to have passed at the end of 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

this session. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, given that there are changes coming, given 

that there is more scrutiny that’s required on this Bill on these 

major modifications to legislation, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

debate on this Bill be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 32 — The 

Executive Government Administration Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 apportant des 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive 

Government Administration Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again 

I’m pleased to rise today and add a few additional comments to 

my remarks yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday, these are consequential 

amendments to Bill No. 31. The fact that Bill No. 31, as I stated 

yesterday, was fundamentally flawed, required significant 

change, Mr. Speaker, and in fact decreased significantly the 

accountability and the transparency of government and left 

considerable concerns in the minds of both the public and 

members of the opposition. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the minister’s announcement 

today that he’s going back to the levels that were there prior to 

the introduction of this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to have to examine in more detail what the implications 

are then on the consequential amendments, Mr. Speaker. So at 

this time, I’ll conclude my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too am 

pleased to rise to begin discussion on this particular piece of 

legislation. And I thank my colleague from Regina Dewdney 

for so perfectly raising the issues yesterday and of course our 

leader from Saskatoon Riversdale who directed questions at 

government on Bill 31 and the consequential amendment Bill 

32. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, given that this Bill flows from discussions on 

31, until we’ve got 31 resolved and we know exactly what’s 

happening, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that we adjourn 

debate on this Bill. And I would therefore move that we now 

adjourn debate on Bill 32. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 32. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 25 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. It’s a pleasure to rise 

and speak again on this Bill. I know there are other people to 

speak to this. I just want to say again a couple of points. We 

have some questions about this, about the consultations on the 

process of identifying these parcels of land, who was involved, 

and that type of thing. And as well, specifics about each parcel 

of land because it’s important that each parcel of land that’s 

taken out is replaced by some land of equal ecological value. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say as well — and I said this yesterday 

and I’ll say it again today — it seems that we’re operating on a 

bit of hype here, Mr. Speaker. The week that we celebrated 

Earth Day, this is the kind of legislation that’s introduced by the 

Saskatchewan Party government — one that is from the looks 

of it a step backwards in terms of protecting lands in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve made great gains in terms of biodiversity in this 

province. And what’s the first piece of legislation they do? 

They remove lands from The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

This is serious stuff. This is kind of the tone that they’re setting 

and I have great concerns and I know many people throughout 

Saskatchewan and in fact Canada watch this kind of thing and 

have some deep concerns and worries about the kind of 

directions that we’re going in. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, I know some other people will want 

to speak to this Bill and so I’ll conclude my remarks right now. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 

raise some questions about this particular Bill. I know that The 

Parks Act, which was discussed earlier today, involved a 

number of parcels of land and a number of changes to the 

boundaries of parks. 

 

As it relates to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, there are 

also many pieces of land and we’d very much appreciate 

receiving the maps from the minister. I think it would be quite 

helpful and would speed the House’s dealing with this 

particular legislation if in addition to the maps we could receive 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2008 

all of the detailed explanations of why certain pieces of land are 

going into wildlife habitat land and why there’s more land 

going out. 

 

And with that comment, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 25, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 24 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to rise again to enter in debate on this Bill. Mr. 

Speaker, as I was saying yesterday, the notion of replacing the 

two Vice-Chairs on the Labour Relations Board with only one 

Vice-Chair is counterintuitive, given that there is an amount of 

activity that goes through Labour Relations Board. The 

government members have already complained that they feel 

that the decisions aren’t being rendered quickly enough, and by 

reducing the staffing of Labour Relations Board, it seems 

counterintuitive as to how those decisions would then be 

rendered in a more timely fashion. 

 

In the Premier’s mandate letter to the Minister of Labour, his 

letter states, quote, “In your capacity of Minister of Labour, 

establish a fair and balanced labour environment in 

Saskatchewan that respects the rights of workers and employers 

. . .” And it goes on to list a number of things. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this speaks exactly to what I was saying 

yesterday about the fact that the changes that the government is 

making to not only this Bill but some other pieces of legislation, 

Bills 5 and 6, actually create a toxic labour environment in the 

province which is again potentially counterproductive to 

attracting workers to the province or attracting workers to stay 

in the province. 

 

And it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, that I came across a 

number of quotes that were said in the past, one of which was 

from the Premier. At this time was May 4, 2005, quote, Mr. 

Speaker, “. . . what the opposition . . .” at that time was 

obviously the Sask Party: 

 

. . . what the opposition disagrees with is labour 

legislation that hurts both employers and employees 

because it casts a chill over the provincial economy and 

turns away investment into the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s exactly, Mr. Speaker, what I fear the changes that the 

government has brought forward will end up doing to this 

province. 

 

So it’s interesting that the opposition at that time saw that, felt 

that in terms of an unbalanced labour environment, which is 

exactly what the government is now creating and unfortunately 

didn’t take their own advice. 

 

The other quote that I came across, for instance, was from the 

member of Silver Springs in November 24, 2005, quote, “. . . 

Saskatchewan’s unbalanced labour environment is a deterrent to 

private sector investment, job creation, and economic growth 

. . .” Again speaks to the fact that if you don’t have a balanced 

labour environment, a fair and balanced labour environment, it 

does cast a chill over the economic potential, potential 

capability of the province moving forward. 

 

And clearly since there has been such a large hue and outcry 

from the workers in this province that are either represented by 

unions or not, who are represented by other groups and 

organizations in the province — there are some serious 

concerns to be had with the labour legislation, these pieces of 

legislation that the government has brought forward. And this is 

yet another one of those Bills. 

 

There are many other speakers that want to speak to this Bill as 

well, Mr. Speaker, so at this time I will take my seat, and 

encourage the government members to look closely at what 

they’ve decided to do so far, reconsider their decisions, and 

potentially make the right decision of moving these Bills — all 

of them, all of the labour Bills — into further public 

consultation so there can be some true, meaningful dialogue had 

on these Bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 

pleased to enter into discussion on this particular piece of 

legislation this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of 

legislation in itself is not that complicated or that large or 

complex of change, Mr. Speaker, but the implications of this 

particular piece of legislation could be far-reaching. And, Mr. 

Speaker, because we don’t have, have not had the opportunity 

yet to consult and talk to all the stakeholders that may have 

concerns about this particular change, at this time I would move 

that we adjourn debate on this particular piece of legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 24, The Trade Union 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

accommodate the good work of the committees, I move that this 



April 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Deputy House Leader has 

moved that in order to accommodate the working of committees 

that this House, Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:43.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1087 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1087 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1088 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 A New Era in Canadian History 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1088 

 Regina Police Service Half-Marathon 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1088 

 Raymore Honours Achievements in Volunteer Service 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1088 

 Informative and Unique History Lesson 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 

 Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Targets 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 

 Prince Albert Mintos Win Team Award 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 

 Carol Teichrob 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1089 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Climate Change 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1090 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1090 

 Nurses’ Contract Negotiations 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1091 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1092 

 Release of Confidential Documents 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1093 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1093 

 Accountability 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1093 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Funding for Saskatchewan Municipalities 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1095 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1096 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

MOTIONS 

 Proceed to Government Orders 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1096 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1096 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1097 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1097 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1101 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 1102 

 Bill No. 31 — The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1102 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1102 

 Bill No. 32 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 apportant des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1103 



 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1103 

 Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1103 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1103 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1104 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1104 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


