




















































Hansard: March 18, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 14A  TUESDAY, MARCH 18, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 339 

 March 18, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am honoured to be able to introduce to you and 

through you to the members of the Legislative Assembly a 

group of approximately 15 students who are seated in your 

gallery. These are students who are enrolled at the University of 

Regina Graduate School of Public Policy, and they’re pursuing 

their master’s degrees in either public management or public 

policy. 

 

They’re accompanied today by Lynn Minja who is no stranger 

to public service in Saskatchewan. In fact I would go so far as 

to say there is no person better qualified to let people know 

about the ins and outs of public administration in Saskatchewan 

than Lynn Minja. 

 

I look forward to meeting with this group after question period. 

I would ask the members to join me in extending a very warm 

welcome to this group of students who are not just from Canada 

but also come to us from countries such as China and 

Kazakhstan. So please join me in extending them a warm 

welcome, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, through 

you and to you I would like to introduce in your gallery three 

gentlemen from Carrier Lumber stationed in Prince George, BC 

[British Columbia], and I’d ask them to stand please. It’s Mr. 

Terry Kuzma and Mr. Bill Kordyban. And then there’s 

Saskatchewan manager, Mr. Ed Kwiatkowski. It is indeed a 

pleasure to have them here. They’ve been in Saskatchewan 

since 1995 and are looking at one of our valuable resources — 

forestry. So good to have them here. Welcome to the House and 

thank you for being here, gentlemen. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

legislature I’d like to introduce some people in your east 

gallery. I’d like to introduce you to Sinda Cathcart, president of 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] Local 3967 and 

Scott MacDonald, vice-president. They are joined with other 

members from Moosomin, Broadview, Whitewood, Grenfell, 

Indian Head, Wolseley, Montmartre, Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Lumsden, Raymore, Balcarres, Cupar, Imperial, and the Regina 

health care centres. These are the people that work in our health 

care centres in the Regina district and also joining them, Larry 

Hubich, president of the federation of labour. I ask all members 

to welcome these hard-working health care workers to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and Mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

too, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d like to 

welcome the gentlemen representing Carrier Lumber here this 

afternoon. We are looking forward to a meeting later this 

afternoon to talk about forest-related issues here in 

Saskatchewan and the opportunities that exist in that industry 

here in Saskatchewan. Look forward to meeting with you here 

later this afternoon and engaging in a very productive dialogue 

about forestry. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 

honour today to introduce to you and through you to all the 

members in the Assembly two gentlemen who are no strangers 

to the Legislative Assembly. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we 

have Mr. Bob Pringle who is the past MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] for Saskatoon Eastview, and beside him 

we have Mr. Ted Merriman who is the past MLA for Saskatoon 

Northwest. And I am looking forward to working with these 

gentlemen on a project that we just announced today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you, seated 

in your gallery, I’d like to introduce my CA [constituency 

assistant], Ryan Long, a remarkable young man, a graduate of 

Teen Challenge, and a young man that makes me look good in 

my constituency as we attempt to follow in the footsteps of Mr. 

Ted Merriman. And I’d like to introduce his father, a good 

friend of mine, Bruce Long, a retired director of Crown 

attorneys for the province of Ontario. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 

you’ll know, this morning a number of us were visited by 

members of the realtor association in our province, and I want 

to in particular welcome Maria Ziegler to the Legislative 

Assembly. Maria is a realtor in the city of Saskatoon, working 

for Inovex, and I know that she’s had an enjoyable morning. 

And I trust that she looks forward to question period, and this 

really is an opportunity to hear the thrust and parry of debate in 

our Assembly. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to 

welcome Maria Ziegler to the Legislative Assembly. 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you in the west gallery a good 

friend of mine, David Marit, who’s the president of SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities]. With him 

is Doug Steele, a director of SARM. And the third gentleman, 

who isn’t wearing the funny coloured jacket, is Larry Grant, a 

councillor with the RM [rural municipality] of Val Marie. I’d 

ask everyone to give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join in and 

welcome the members from SARM. Larry Grant is one of my 

constituents, as is Dave Marit, and so I’d like to welcome them 

to the Assembly here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I present a 

petition to the Assembly on behalf of residents of Moose Jaw 

and the surrounding district. Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the members to 

respect the right of the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

to present her petition. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, and the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And I present this on behalf of all residents of Moose Jaw and 

the surrounding area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 

today and present a stack of petitions concerning student 

housing. The petitions read: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to aggressively working with 

partners to expand on-campus and off-campus housing 

options for Saskatchewan students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from 

throughout Saskatchewan, but they are collected with the 

assistance of the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union 

and the Graduate Students’ Association of the University of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present several pages 

of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on behalf of 

citizens of province of Saskatchewan concerning the 

withdrawal of the proposed essential services legislation and 

withdrawal of the proposed amendments trade union Act. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Regina, Saskatoon, and 

Dundurn. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Regional Economic Development Association Week 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation has proclaimed the week of March 16 to 22 as 

Regional Economic Development Association — REDA — 

Week in Saskatchewan. 

 

This gives us the opportunity to celebrate the numerous 

achievements of the REDAs with the many people involved 

throughout our province. Mr. Speaker, economic development 

is about leadership. The REDAs have been instrumental in 

building partnerships and creating opportunities to strengthen 

local economies, and we celebrate their achievements. 

 

The REDAs will play a significant role with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. Their high performance will be very important 

in the future economic development of our province. Mr. 

Speaker, the REDAs are currently involved in 60 projects and 

145 initiatives in our communities. Over the past five years, 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

REDA projects and initiates have yielded investments totalling 

nearly 180 million, created 471 jobs, and maintained 397 jobs. 

 

The REDA youth employment program has allowed 169 young 

people to pursue a career in economic development. Mr. 

Speaker, we thank and congratulate the many men and women 

throughout Saskatchewan who work hard every day to make the 

REDAs a success. Their continued commitment and dedication 

will be needed to help build the tremendous potential and future 

growth of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

2008 Global Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to recognize an 

outstanding teacher at Saskatoon’s Bedford Road Collegiate — 

Sheelah McLean. She has been awarded Global Citizen of the 

Year by the Saskatchewan Council for International 

Cooperation this year. She was nominated by her students in the 

applied global citizenship 30 class. 

 

Students and staff see Sheelah as a role model, mentor, and 

friend. Her powerful and innovative teaching techniques has 

inspired her students to be free, thoughtful, dedicated, critical 

thinkers and, most importantly, vehicles of positive action and 

social change in our world. 

 

It is said that she is a pioneer in her field by co-developing and 

piloting a global citizenship class going where no educator has 

gone before, and her students definitely think it is a good thing. 

They are excited and challenged to be learning what it means to 

be a global citizen in this new century. 

 

Ms. McLean has an outstanding resumé, receiving her Master 

of Education with a focus on anti-racist and anti-oppressive 

education. She has published numerous works on educational 

theory and policy. She has been an adviser to student groups, 

including the Gay-Straight Alliances and coordinated activities 

on the very important International Day to Eliminate Racism for 

the past 10 years. Mr. Speaker, she has also won several 

awards, including the 2006 Centennial Scholarship Award for 

Academic Excellence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me and the students of 

the applied global citizenship 30 class in congratulating Sheelah 

on her well-deserved recognition. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Lakeland Citizens of the Year 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 15 I had 

the honour of attending the ceremony honouring the Lakeland 

Citizens of the Year for 2008, Don and Florence Dugan. I 

brought greetings on behalf of the province, a plaque, and a 

bouquet of flowers. 

Don and Florence Dugan moved to Anglin Lake in 1997 after 

having a cabin there since 1989. Don had worked for Canadian 

National Railway as a conductor, as they raised their three sons 

who have now given them six lovely grandchildren. 

 

Don and Florence are very humble people who don’t like to 

brag about their work in the community, but it deserves to be 

said. They have both been known to be active at St. 

Christopher’s Church at Christopher Lake where Don would 

even head down in his truck and clean up the yard after a tree 

fell down. Not to be undone, Florence would be inside making 

sure the inside was as clean as the outside. They never turned 

up their noses at a job that was necessary. Both even helped out 

during the construction of the addition to the church, later 

helping to form the odd job squad of church volunteers that 

would go out and help the elderly residents with their home 

maintenance. 

 

I would like my fellow members to join myself and Lakeland 

area residents in congratulating Don and Florence Dugan on 

being named the Lakeland Citizens of the Year for 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Spring Free From Racism 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Sunday I, along with the member representing Regina 

Dewdney, had the privilege of attending the ninth annual Spring 

Free From Racism event. This event is held in recognition of 

the international day for the elimination of racism which is 

observed annually on the first day of spring. Mr. Speaker, this 

event brings various cultures together under one roof and 

celebrates the diversity of these cultures, thereby breaking down 

the barriers raised by a lack of trans-cultural understanding or 

knowledge unknown which is one of the root causes of racism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a celebration of food, culture, entertainment, 

and co-operation. Thanks to the efforts of event organizer, Barb 

Dedi, and her hardworking team of volunteers, sponsors have 

once again provided enough assistance to ensure that the event 

is, and has been since its inception, free of an admission charge. 

The event is open and inviting to everyone regardless of 

socio-economic situation. All profits from the display and food 

booths go directly to the participating organizations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to join me in 

thanking and congratulating the organizers and participants of 

this year’s Spring Free From Racism event for once again 

hosting and providing such a wonderful forum. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Campfire Tax 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

Speaker, it’s my extreme pleasure today to rise in the House to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan the dreaded wiener roast tax is 

toast. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — That’s the comic relief of the 2004 

provincial budget. This unfair levy for people trying to enjoy 

the splendour of our provincial parks has now gone the way of 

the dodo bird. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government actually 

listens to people. When the NDP [New Democratic Party] first 

floated the idea of a tax on campfires, it wasn’t just the 

members on this side of the House who were outraged. People 

across the province raised their collective voices in protest. 

Choruses of don’t tax our wiener roast or don’t tax our 

marshmallow roast, we heard that from throughout the 

province. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, if you remember, the NDP also tried to 

shortened summer that year by not opening the parks early. Mr. 

Speaker, getting rid of this onerous tax was something this 

government campaigned on. And as we have 17 times before, 

we kept that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — As this government works to sustain our 

current economic prosperity, we are more than willing to use 

the benefits to cover that bill and let people enjoy their 

campfires tax free. What that means, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re 

making this change without increasing other fees. 

 

In the spring of 2004, the people of Saskatchewan told the 

province, stay out of my campfires. Once again on November 7, 

2004, the people of Saskatchewan spoke. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would call the member from 

The Battlefords to order. I’ve asked, I’ve asked, I’ve asked 

members . . . Order. I’ve called the government members to 

order. I’ve asked members to allow the member to be heard. 

And it is inappropriate to be hollering from your seat when a 

member’s trying to speak. 

 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

New Home for the Moose Jaw Pottery Club 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Moose Jaw Pottery Club . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call the member from Cannington to 

order. The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the Moose Jaw Pottery Club 

search for a new location ended recently with the pottery club’s 

relocation to a newly renovated space. 

 

The new facility is an older home that sits on the edge of the 

Wakamow Valley. The property had been willed to the 

Wakamow Valley Authority by its original owner and had sat 

empty for the last couple of years. The pottery club president, 

Janice Schiman, felt it would be a perfect location and a perfect 

fit for the club’s needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wakamow Valley Authority agreed. Thanks to 

support from local Moose Jaw businesses, club members were 

able to completely renovate the home’s interior. The main floor 

is a great space where the club will offer adult and children’s 

classes and workshops as well as a space for club members to 

work. Located on the top floor are private studios that are 

rented out to artists. 

 

I know that the pottery club is thrilled with the move. And this 

new location will continue to inspire the creation of beautiful 

artwork. Interestingly, the original owner of the home was an 

artist herself, and I’m sure she’s pleased with the conversion. 

 

I’d ask that all members join me in congratulating the Moose 

Jaw Pottery Club on their recent move to their new home. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Federal By-election Results 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, just seven weeks after the 

recent provincial election, former NDP MLA Joan Beatty 

turned her back on her leader. She turned her back on her party. 

And worst of all, she turned her back on the people who elected 

her — the voters of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the voters of northern 

Saskatchewan returned the favour by turning their back on Joan 

Beatty. Voters in Desnethé-Missinippi-Churchill River handed 

her a resounding defeat. And for the NDP, it was an even more 

dismal showing, as the NDP candidate finished a distant third, 

and just three days after NDP leader, Jack Layton, stopped in 

Saskatchewan to fire up the troops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Saskatchewan’s 

newest Member of Parliament, my friend, RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] officer Rob Clarke, and wish the 

new Conservative MP [Member of Parliament] well as he 

begins the important and challenging work of representing 

northern Saskatchewan in Ottawa. Congratulations, Rob. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, given 

that today is the Saskatchewan Forestry Association AGM 

[annual general meeting] in Prince Albert, and given that it’s 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

been some three weeks since Domtar accepted this 

government’s belated, begrudging proposal regarding the 

reopening of the Prince Albert pulp mill, I think it’s only fitting 

to find out just where the government is on this important file. 

 

To the Minister of Energy and Resources: what is their 

timeline; what is their plan? When, if ever, can the people of 

Prince Albert expect that pulp mill to be reopened? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

happy to report that there’s ongoing and continuing negotiations 

going on with Domtar. We presented a proposal to them some 

few weeks ago now. They got back to us on Friday with a 

counter-offer. We’re looking at that very seriously, and we’ll be 

making decisions with respect to that very soon. And those 

decisions, I think, will be very important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. They’ll be a step forward in terms of relations 

with the forestry industry in Saskatchewan, and we’re very 

much looking forward to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s their embarrassing 

record. The member from Batoche chaired a task force that has 

no findings. The Premier three times was in Prince Albert to 

promise they had a plan to open the mill. There’s no plan. The 

member from Prince Albert Carlton took out ads in the 

newspaper in Prince Albert during the election and said he had 

a plan to reopen the mill. There’s no plan there either, Mr. 

Speaker. The Minister of Energy and Resources claimed to 

have had discussions with Domtar when clearly no discussions 

had taken place. 

 

There’s no transparency from the Saskatchewan Party on this 

issue, Mr. Speaker. My question is simple, fittingly: in light of 

these facts, why would anyone trust anything they have to say 

on this issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it’s a well-known fact that after the first meeting that we 

had with the Domtar representative, Patrick Loulou, and after 

the second meeting that we had with Patrick Loulou, we were 

interviewed by members of the media on both occasions. And 

we most certainly did have a good discussion with him. We 

presented a proposal on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Loulou indicated that he wanted some time 

to look at all of the details within it and that he’d be getting 

back to us in a timely fashion. 

 

So it passes strange from that minister to suggest that none of 

this ever happened when indeed it did happen, Mr. Minister. 

We were interviewed by all of the people in Saskatchewan. We 

were interviewed by members of the media here in 

Saskatchewan. And the good news in this is, is talks are going 

on. There’s productive discussions about it. They got back to us 

Friday of last week, Mr. Member, and we will be moving things 

along in a timely fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker. It does not 

pass as strange to the people of Prince Albert that I defend their 

interests in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, they unilaterally ripped up an 

MOU [memorandum of understanding] that provided the pulp 

mill to reopen. They ripped it up with no plan to replace it. The 

only thing we’ve seen from them on this issue is a kneejerk 

reaction driven by ideology, and a litany of half-truths. 

 

The P.A. [Prince Albert] pulp mill is not only important to the 

people . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

needs to be very careful on how he words his questions and 

refers to individuals and whether they’re presenting the truth or 

not. The member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — It’s important not only to the people of Prince 

Albert and the North, but to all of Saskatchewan. My question 

to the Minister of Energy and Resources: with their 

government’s embarrassment of riches, what has he done, and 

more importantly, what has the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton done to ensure that there’s any money in tomorrow’s 

budget to make sure that pulp mill reopens? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 

the outset of this very failed agreement, the MOU that the NDP 

signed with Domtar, we indicated, the Premier indicated at the 

time that this was something that we could not support. We 

indicated that through the election campaign. 

 

Immediately after the election campaign I contacted the 

representatives for Domtar, indicating to them that in spite of 

the fact that the NDP wanted to put $100 million of taxpayers’ 

money at risk — in spite of that fact — we would not be 

prepared to go ahead with that. 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

And do you know what their response to that was? Is that they 

were still prepared to look at Saskatchewan because it’s a great 

place to do business here in this province. They’re prepared to 

look at it because they have a pro-business government in 

Saskatchewan now, and they look at it because of the resource 

that there is in Saskatchewan. And they most certainly are going 

to be looking at a very strong proposal from us that we have put 

forward, that they have countered most recently. And I dare say, 

Mr. Member, that in a few short weeks we think we will have 

conclusion to this, and I don’t think you’re going to like it 

much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Federal Funds for Child Care 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier has been busy trying to sell the federal 

budget, speaking in very glowing terms about his relationship 

with the Prime Minister and the great sign that his 

more-flies-with-honey approach is paying off for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday the Premier referred to $31 million in the federal 

budget for Saskatchewan child care. He claims the money is 

new and unique to Saskatchewan. The question is to the 

Premier: does he stand by his claim that Saskatchewan received 

new and unique funding for Saskatchewan child care to the tune 

of $31 million and could he stand today and clarify his 

statements? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the money allocated to the 

province of Saskatchewan in the budget with respect to child 

care is very much part of a redress of a concern Saskatchewan 

raised with the government related to the social transfer that 

comes from the national government. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

welcome development because the redress occurred . . . the 

problem initiated under that party when they were in power, it 

needed to be fixed and like so many things, like so many things 

including the Domtar deal, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to work 

very, very hard to fix the very long list of things left undone or 

poorly done by members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier had said to the 

media the other day, and I quote, “This child care money which 

is new, $31 million, and uniquely for Saskatchewan . . .” The 

Premier went on to say that he was personally responsible for 

the child care funds because he raised the issue at 24 Sussex. 

Too bad he didn’t raise the equalization while he was there. 

But information from the federal Department of Finance shows 

that Saskatchewan will receive less money this year for child 

care than what it did last year. Now does that sound like new or 

unique to the Premier? To the Minister of Education: can the 

minister table documents today that shows this money is in fact 

new and unique to Saskatchewan or will he admit that the 

Premier got it wrong? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter here is 

that the federal government about two years ago signalled that 

they would be increasing the social transfer to the provinces. 

Our province, however, did not receive any intended increase, 

certainly not proportional in our view to what other provinces 

received. The issue apparently went unraised by members of 

that government or if it was raised it was not raised very 

effectively. 

 

So in addition to issues around infrastructure, around our desire 

to pursue the uranium value-added chain and work with the 

federal government on that issue, in addition to our pressing the 

case for clean coal money — $240 million which we received 

— we did raise this issue with the Prime Minister and the 

national government. 

 

They have responded in kind in terms of what was in the 

budget. We would like to continue to pursue a greater amount 

of investment in this area — greater certainly than what the 

previous government was able to make. And one wonders if 

they even raised the point with the national government at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier seems to have 

no proof to back up his claims. There’s absolutely nothing on 

the federal website that shows any increase on the child care, 

and the piece that he’s talking about in the social transfer was 

announced over two years ago. In fact, the province of 

Saskatchewan should be receiving its second payment of seven 

and a half million dollars of a five-year program. That’s not 

new. Just because he’s never heard of it before doesn’t make it 

new. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in this province and working families 

depend on child care to enter the workforce and build our 

economy. The Premier making light of it is not helpful. Will the 

Premier please clarify: is there $31 million of new money for 

child care in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that member, that member sat 

in a cabinet that presumably knew that the province was not 

receiving its share of the increase in the Canadian Social 

Transfer. And if they didn’t know, then they ought to be 

answering questions in terms of those who provide early child 

care, early childhood intervention in this province. They ought 

to be answering questions to the taxpayers of the province. 

 

Exactly what were they doing that they fell asleep at the switch, 

that they were unable to make the case? The fact of the matter 

is, Mr. Speaker, that we discovered this. We were briefed by 

officials on it. We raised it with the national government. The 

national government has addressed it in this way, including a 

payment earlier this year in the amount that the member refers 

to. 

 

I think that’s what governments ought to do. There are many 

other things on the list that we have inherited from that 

government, things that were either poorly done, poorly done or 

not done at all, and we’re working our way down the list, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier can stand and 

talk about other issues, but the question was: will this 

government have 31 extra dollars, new dollars as he calls them, 

for . . . $31 million for Saskatchewan families to help with child 

care? That’s a huge expansion, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, but 

all the details we’ve seen is Saskatchewan will be receiving 

less. 

 

Transparency and accountability is not one of the commitments 

this government has worked hard to keep. Mr. Speaker, they’ve 

removed their code of ethics from the website, and we now 

know why. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, back to the topic. Would the Minister of 

Education please tell us how the 31 million new dollars will be 

committed to child care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, I can tell that member opposite that she has to 

stay tuned for tomorrow afternoon when we will define, the 

Minister of Finance will define exactly where the 7.525 million 

for this year will be spent. It will be allocated, Mr. Speaker, in a 

number of areas. It will meet the needs of many children and 

many groups who have been lobbying that former government 

for years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very happy that the federal government has 

announced an escalator clause, in fact, on each of the transfers 

that will occur over the course of the next five years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Labour Relations Board 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Labour. Neither the Minister of Labour nor the 

Deputy Premier was able to tell reporters yesterday exactly 

what the new Chair of the Labour Relations Board, Mr. Love’s 

involvement was in the Sask Party transition team. The minister 

has now had since yesterday to look into the matter. Can he 

now answer a simple yes or no? Did Ken Love, as a member of 

the Sask Party transition team, have any dealings with the 

Ministry of Advanced Education and Employment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in response to questions from media members yesterday I think 

I made it very clear as to the involvement of Mr. Love with 

transition and the consultation that he provided to the various 

files that he was responsible for. I made it very clear that he was 

not involved in any of the discussions involving terminations of 

deputy ministers. I also made it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that at 

the time that Mr. Love was involved with the transition team, 

that that involvement should not and did not preclude him from 

being considered for the position of Chair of the LRB [Labour 

Relations Board]. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, when the Labour Relations 

Board Chair was first fired, someone from the Premier’s 

communications office promised that the new Chair would have 

and I quote, “. . . a great reputation who has been around on 

both sides of the labour equation.” 

 

My question to the Minister of Labour: is he aware of the 1990 

Saskatchewan Court of Queen’s Bench case by the name of 

Roche Percee Coal Mines Union, Local 1623 v. Manalta Coal 

Ltd.? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Love graduated from 

the College of Law in 1971. He was a partner since 1981 in his 

law firm. He was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 1989. We 

would spend a long time going through each and every case that 

Mr. Love participated in. Mr. Love has a strong career in the 

community and also in the legal profession. Mr. Speaker, we 

have lawyers that have been former prosecutors and have gone 

to the bench, former legal aid lawyers have gone to the bench 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

and have done a superb and impartial job. 

 

It is the expectation of this government that Mr. Love will be 

hard-working, competent, professional, and will do his job 

without showing any kind of partiality whatsoever. I think it’s 

incredibly unfair for the members opposite to try and raise that 

kind of inference for somebody that’s going to go out and do a 

first-rate job for the citizens of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to table a copy of that 

judgment and also to summarize it for the members opposite. In 

March 1988 Mr. Ken Love was appointed by the minister of 

Labour to act as the Chair of an arbitration board established to 

consider a particular case. This case involved an allegation of 

wrongful termination. The applicant argued that he was not told 

of Mr. Love’s appointment as the board Chair, nor of any 

hearings until after the board had dismissed the grievance. Mr. 

Speaker, the court ruled that Mr. Love’s board had denied the 

applicant natural justice which resulted in an unfair hearing. A 

denial of natural justice — all about what The Trade Union Act 

is about. 

 

The Chair of the Labour Relations Board needs to be above 

reproach and needs to be seen to be above reproach, not just to 

business but to labour as well. With such a record, how can the 

Minister of Labour possibly justify this appointment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I suspect that there was 

some NDP staffers spent a goodly number of hours going 

through transcripts and case reports over the last number of 

years. Virtually every person that has sat on any kind of a court 

or tribunal has had cases overturned on occasion. Mr. Speaker, 

in fact Mr. Ball has an excellent and a superb reputation in this 

province and I would like to refer the members opposite to 

Dennis Ball, now with the Court of Queen’s Bench. He was 

appointed during the previous Conservative administration and 

served for several years under that administration, and went on 

to serve under the Romanow administration, and had an 

excellent, superb reputation for being fair, impartial, and 

somebody that went on to Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suspect that that’s exactly what’s going to 

happen with Ken Love, that he too will represent the citizens of 

this province in a fair and impartial manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. While we’re pleased to see 

guests here in the Assembly today, I just want to remind guests 

that guests are not to participate in any way or form in the 

debate. Thank you. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

Ms. Atkinson: — So let’s review the facts, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Love is the Chair of an arbitration board. One Dick Rendek is 

appointed by the employer. No one ever told the union or the 

dismissed employee that this hearing was taking place. The 

union was phoned and said, we didn’t know about it. And what 

did Mr. Love do? He issued a decision, Mr. Speaker, without 

ever giving the union an opportunity, or the dismissed 

employee, to attend the hearing because they were never told, 

Mr. Speaker. And the court overturned his decision. That’s 

called a denial of natural justice. How can the members 

opposite possibly, possibly argue that this man has the 

reputation to serve as the Labour Relations Board Chair, who is 

to be seen to be above reproach and be above reproach, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the outgoing Chair of the 

Labour Relations Board had had decisions attacked in the Court 

of Queen’s Bench, had had a decision overturned recently 

because they had sat on it for too long. If ever was a denial of 

justice, is one where justice delayed is justice denied. 

 

It is the intention of this government and this Labour Relations 

Board to deliver fair and impartial decisions in a timely manner. 

We expect, we expect nothing less. 

 

If the members opposite want to go back and review 

everybody’s legal records over the past, they’re entitled to do 

that. I would caution them — what they say inside this 

Chamber may not give them the same protection when they try 

and repeat allegations outside the Chamber. The judgment and 

the record that the people have written speak for themselves. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have every confidence in Mr. Love’s 

ability to deliver fair, impartial, competent judgments in a 

timely member on behalf of both union and management and 

behalf of everybody that goes before the Labour Relations 

Board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — New question. Mr. Love and the Deputy 

Premier weren’t the only ones involved in the decision to axe 

the Labour Relations Board members. It seems that a key 

member of the Sask Party’s transition team, one Doug Emsley, 

was the only person to have had discussions with the outgoing 

LRB members prior to the termination. Can the minister please 

explain what role Doug Emsley played in his decision to fire the 

LRB members and hire Ken Love, and can he tell us what 

advice he received from Mr. Emsley? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education, the 

Deputy Premier. 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Emsley has been working with the transition team for 

months. He has provided advice to the transition team in a 

go-forward position prior to November 7. But most importantly, 

since November 7, he has given advice on moving forward, 

moving files forward and to determine what transition teams 

should be doing. That work is ongoing. It is nearly complete. 

 

And in fact, I would dare say, Mr. Speaker, that by the end of 

March the entire transition process will now be falling on to the 

various ministers who are responsible for their files — whether 

that be within the ministry or whether that be within the Crown 

— and the services of Mr. Emsley will no longer be required. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — It’s interesting that Doug Emsley was 

involved in the LRB firings, given that his company has 

actually appeared before the board on several occasions. I want 

to table two copies of two LRB decisions involving Mr. 

Emsley’s company, Vision Security. In the first instance the 

board ruled that Mr. Emsley’s company was in violation of the 

duty to bargain in good faith. In the second, his company’s 

statement of employment was found without evidentiary value. 

Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a bit of a smell here. 

 

We know that the new LRB Chair was involved in the transition 

team that recommended he be hired. We know that the 

transition team is being led by an individual who has an axe to 

grind against the LRB. What we still don’t know is why the 

firings took place to begin with. Will the members opposite just 

admit that its transition team pressured him into firing the board 

and hiring with Sask Party’s connections? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that is 

absolutely not true. Mr. Emsley has been involved in facilitating 

discussions and has been involved in advising the transition 

team on a go-forward basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been making changes to the various 

agencies, to boards, to commissions, all of the ABCs [agency, 

board, commission]. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members to allow the 

minister to respond to the question that was placed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, that advice and those 

recommendations were made to transition and to government 

and it is cabinet’s decision on moving forward on the various 

recommendations. And that is what happened, Mr. Speaker. It is 

the government’s decision on moving forward and building this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Doug Emsley has an 

appearance of a conflict of interest, given that he has been 

found in violation of The Trade Union Act of the province of 

Saskatchewan. Doug Emsley, as head of the transition team, 

was the person who talked to the Labour Relations Board 

members, who by the way were interviewed and went through a 

selection process, and ordered to be appointed. He has Ken 

Love involved in his transition team, acting as a lawyer on 

various files, Mr. Speaker, and Ken Love shows up as the new 

Chair without ever having gone through a selection panel 

process. How can the members opposite possibly justify letting 

Doug Emsley anywhere near the Labour Relations Board 

decisions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to clarify for the member opposite. She used the term that 

Doug Emsley was the head of transition. I can honestly say to 

her that I believe that that was my role. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there were different 

individuals who were part of the transition team. There were 

people who volunteered and provided services. There were 

people who were contracted. There were individuals who 

assisted from law firms throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are individuals, those are individuals who have assisted 

the transition team. 

 

I think I’ve even paid the former premier a compliment because 

the member opposite assisted the transition team in the very 

first step that we undertook, which was the change of the staff 

within this building. And that got off to a great start. And I’ve 

indicated that before, Mr. Speaker, that with the co-operation of 

the former government, and with the co-operation of so many 

different individuals, the transition has been a success, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Corrections and 

Public Safety. 

 

Flood Protection Funding for Fishing and Waldsea Lakes 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 6 my 

colleague — the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations, 

in a role as MLA for Kelvington-Wadena — and I met with 

local authorities and residents of Fishing Lake and Waldsea 

Lake to announce this government’s provision of 4.2 million in 

flood protection funding for those areas. 

 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

Since the spring of 2007, for nearly a year, residents and local 

authorities of Fishing Lake and at Waldsea Lake have endured 

terrible conditions and suffered significant loss. We cannot 

replace all of their losses, Mr. Speaker, although the provincial 

disaster assistance program will provide funding, so a good 

portion of infrastructure and property can be restored. What we 

can do and what we have done, Mr. Speaker, as a government is 

to help make sure we reduce the chances of similar 

circumstances creating similar losses in the future. 

 

We provided 4.2 million to the local authorities of the five 

communities around Fishing Lake and Waldsea Lake, not as 

compensation for damage already done, but to help them 

protect their property and the region against future flood-related 

disasters. We have told these communities government will 

provide them with support for developing their own flood 

protection plans and in recognition that at least half of the costs 

of implementing the plans need to be covered by the property 

owners and local authorities themselves. That way, flood 

protection planning becomes a community solution driven by 

the residents and administrators who know their own needs the 

best, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The flood protection funding from Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing helps Fishing Lake and Waldsea Lake ensure the 

future of their communities for tourism, for business, and for 

the potential of local growth. By helping these communities 

develop and implement their flood protection plans today, we 

are securing what is possible for tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. We 

are looking to the future, Mr. Speaker, a future where residents 

can return and prosper in these beautiful and vibrant 

communities, a future where businesses can grow, and all of the 

surrounding areas and residents can benefit. 

 

We have also held several meetings with the Fishing Lake First 

Nations, Mr. Speaker. The purpose of those meetings, which 

will continue to take place, is to ensure the measures 

undertaking Fishing Lake have minimal impact on the fish 

habitat in the lake and to discuss remedial measures that can be 

undertaken to address any impact that does occur to the fish 

habitat. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of Fishing Lake and 

Waldsea Lake, and I want to thank the Fishing Lake First 

Nations who are an important user of the lake and whose 

concerns over retaining natural habitat there are vital. Their 

knowledge of the lake has been invaluable in this process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to thank all of these people and organizations for their 

patience. We have learned many lessons from the lake, and the 

most important one may be that solutions haven’t come easy 

because the circumstances are so complex. 

 

When we took over administration of this province in 

November, Mr. Speaker, one of the commitments this 

government made was to the safety and security of 

Saskatchewan citizens. I am proud this government is keeping 

promises and is demonstrating our commitment with the 

announcement of funding for flood protection to the residents 

and communities of Fishing Lake and Waldsea Lake. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

start by thanking the minister for providing a copy of his 

statement in advance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very significant improvement and move 

forward for the people of both Fishing Lake and Waldsea Lake. 

Those people in those communities — those cabin owners, 

homeowners — that experienced significant flooding just over a 

year ago have waited a long time to move forward to make their 

homes flood proof and the area in which they live less 

susceptible to future flooding. This money will help do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we move forward on this file, the actual 

damage to cabins and homes is of serious concern to those 

residents. It’s a concern shared by members on all sides of the 

House, and this is a file that’s been worked on by both sides, 

and we do appreciate the minister continuing moving this file 

forward. 

 

We also continue to share with the minister, as he indicated last 

night in estimates as well, a desire to move the provincial 

disaster assistance program to cover preventative measures, that 

the federal government share in helping provinces deal with 

preventative measures in areas where disasters have occurred. 

And we know that, through preventative measures, we can 

prevent future disasters. 

 

So members on this side share with the minister and the people 

of Waldsea Lake and Fishing Lake their support for this money, 

and we wish you continue helping those people in Waldsea 

Lake and Fishing Lake, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Task Force on Housing Affordability and Availability 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people are enjoying the benefits of a strong 

economic momentum and population growth. There are more 

people working in Saskatchewan today than ever before. 

Residential construction is up 40 per cent. Average wages have 

grown by 5 per cent in the last year, the highest growth in the 

country, and the province is expected to lead the country in new 

capital investment this year. 

 

Our government is committed to sustaining Saskatchewan’s 

economic momentum and to ensuring that all Saskatchewan 

people benefit from our growing economy. We are also 

committed to making sure our province is ready for future 

growth while preserving the quality and unique life of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

One of the fastest growing sectors, Mr. Speaker, is residential 

construction. Despite a 62 per cent increase in housing starts in 

Saskatchewan last year, according to RBC [Royal Bank of 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

Canada] Economics, ours is the only province expected to see 

an increase in housing starts in 2008. Mr. Speaker, for 

homeowners and housing developers, this is great news. 

Purchasing a home very often represents the largest single 

investment most people will ever make, and the increased value 

of housing, both exciting and new, has created increased wealth 

for homeowners. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it also presents a tremendous incentive for 

developers to build new housing or make capital improvements 

to existing housing stock. However it has placed immense 

pressure on the rental market. Growing demand has reduced the 

available supply and contributed to low vacancy rates and 

higher rental costs in urban centres throughout the province. 

Overall, Saskatchewan cities have experienced a decline in the 

vacancy rate to 1.2 per cent, the lowest average vacancy rate 

ever recorded in Saskatchewan. The situation for renters in 

Lloydminster, Saskatoon, North Battleford, and Swift Current is 

even more challenging as the vacancy rates have fallen below 1 

per cent. 

 

The question facing our government today, Mr. Speaker, is how 

can we best ensure greater housing affordability and availability 

for individuals and families who are least able to afford the 

increased cost of housing. At the same time, we are seeking to 

ensure there is sufficient incentives in place to encourage 

private sector construction of rental and affordable housing. 

 

The previous government made some progress in this direction, 

and I would like to acknowledge the work done in the area of 

affordable housing. Sask Housing has indicated that at the 

present time there are about 900 affordable housing units under 

development or at various stages of construction. We believe 

the increase to the housing rental supplement has been of 

considerable benefit to low-income families. 

 

However much of the work done in the past didn’t anticipate 

the impact of the economic and population growth in our cities 

such as Saskatoon. Our government believes Saskatchewan is 

entering a period of unprecedented economic momentum. We 

expect the economic and population growth to continue, and we 

want to look actively at new ideas and new ways to manage that 

growth. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce today the 

formation of a two-person task force on housing affordability 

and availability. Bob Pringle and Ted Merriman will meet with 

stakeholders in several Saskatchewan cities over the next two 

months to gather input and develop recommendations as to how 

we can best encourage greater housing affordability and 

availability. I have asked the task force to focus their effort on 

three areas and to report their findings and recommendations to 

me by May 30, 2008. 

 

The task force will examine options and bring forward 

recommendations for encouraging more private development of 

new private rental housing. They will look at options that 

municipalities may be able to undertake in partnership with the 

provincial government to encourage new development. They 

will also look at provincial government actions and policies in 

the area of affordable housing to determine if there are ways 

that they can be more efficient and effective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to addressing the 

housing challenges facing many of Saskatchewan’s low-income 

individuals and families. The task force announced today is an 

important first step towards addressing that issue. I look 

forward to receiving their recommendations. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in response to 

the ministerial statement regarding the establishment on 

housing affordability task force. Thank you to the minister for 

sharing the statement, so I may read it and prepare. 

 

I must say that my first reaction is that of shock and 

disappointment. I know that many people across this province 

on the eve of the provincial budget being released tomorrow 

expected that we would see much more than more study. This 

announcement is truly inexcusable. We have known and in fact 

raised questions in December regarding Saskatchewan’s 

housing crisis, and now the minister has taken three months to 

organize a study process that coincidently will report most 

likely after the legislature has risen for the summer. This is truly 

disappointing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what one member of the task force said last 

summer about the housing crisis. Ted Merriman is quoted in 

The StarPhoenix on July 26 saying, “In an emergency situation 

you have to take proactive action. You can’t sit back and do 

nothing.” He goes on to say “You’re not the one living on the 

streets.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you the time for action is now. 

Home ownership is becoming more and more out of reach, and 

we all know the vacancy rate for rental housing is at a crisis 

level. People are shocked at huge rental increases . . . and 

they’re laughing across the way. And just last week, we all 

heard word about the potential Barry Hotel being closed and 

forcing as many as 40 people out on the streets. And what about 

the work about Saskatoon’s SOS [Saskatoon Overnight Shelter] 

emergency shelter project. How’s that coming along? And this 

is the list. And it goes on and on, and this is the best we get. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I am equally shocked not to hear anything in 

the minister’s statement about the First Nations and Métis 

housing issues both on and off reserves. And what about the 

North? These people are clear partners in our province’s future, 

and again the minister has forgotten them. When do they get to 

share . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I believe the member 

from Saskatoon Centre deserves the opportunity to be spoken 

and heard. The member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, another group was left out of this announcement 

today. Just last week a group of University of Saskatchewan 

students did a project called 5 Days for the Homeless 

highlighting the need for action around youth homelessness. 

Student housing is a real problem with real solutions. We could 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

and we should be acting. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the 

resources. Let’s get to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year at this time the NDP premier announced 

an increase of over $100 million for renewing our communities, 

including $60 million for housing initiatives. We need the same 

bold, strong leadership — not a smokescreen — for tomorrow’s 

apparent do-nothing budget. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Saskatchewan Association of School 

Business Officials Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 14, The Saskatchewan 

Association of School Business Officials Repeal Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 14, The Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials Repeal Act. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 15 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 15 entitled The Northern Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 15, The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, Next sitting of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from — let’s see; I 

didn’t have it here — Last Mountain-Touchwood. Pardon me. 

Pardon me. I apologize to the member. The Chair of Human 

Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

second report. Mr. Speaker I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Human 

Services committee: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of intergovernmental 

relations. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

that it has concurred certain estimates and to present its second 

report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of 

Intergovernmental Affairs: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

respond on behalf of the government to table answers to 

questions 219 to 293. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member has tabled questions 219 to 293. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Potash Development Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of An Act to repeal The 

Potash Development Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation that we are presenting 

here this afternoon is in an effort to repeal the legislation that 

the NDP brought in the ’70s through Allan Blakeney — a piece 

of legislation that started us down a very dark path in 

Saskatchewan’s history, a period of time that said to the people 

all over North America and indeed the world that Saskatchewan 

was a closed economy, that Saskatchewan was an economy that 

didn’t want to seek investment in this province, a province that 

didn’t have any confidence, a government that said we don’t 

need help from anywhere else. We don’t want any investment 

in Saskatchewan, and in fact we’re going to do the exact 

opposite. We’re going to move forward and we’re going to 

expropriate things from people that don’t belong to us. 

 

It was a dark age in Saskatchewan’s history. It was an age that 

Saskatchewan lost tremendous amount of capital investment 

over the years, an age that we still are suffering from today, an 

age that the people all across North America have looked at and 

said frankly this is a province where you wouldn’t want to 

invest in. Thirty-five years later, we’re still suffering from the 

stigma associated with that type of legislation. 

 

And in addition to the industry that was driven out here — and 

it’s legion in number, the potash industry, the oil and gas 

industry that retreated dramatically at that time from 

Saskatchewan — there was a number of other industries that 

looked at Saskatchewan and said we don’t want to be a part of 

an economy that says those kinds of things, that sends those 

kinds of signals. But more importantly, more importantly than 

the industry that was driven out of this province, there was one 

other even more precious resource that was driven out of our 

province, and that was the sons and the daughters of people all 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

Because what it said to those people at that time was, we don’t 

want to be a part of a government that does that kind of thing in 

Saskatchewan. It doesn’t want to create opportunity. It wants a 

closed economy. And so what we see today is young people 

that moved out of our province throughout the ’70s and 

throughout the ’80s, in senior management positions all over 

the world. That’s what we see. We drove out some of the very 

best, the very best young brains out of Saskatchewan. And 

that’s where provinces like Alberta benefited from, provinces 

like Alberta benefited from. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would call 

members to order. There will be ample opportunity for all 

members to enter into the debate following second reading. I 

recognize the Minister of Energy . . . Order. I call the member, I 

call the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow to order. The 

minister responsible for Energy and Mines. Order. I call the 

government members to order as well. Member from Energy 

and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — A very dark time in Saskatchewan’s 

history, a shameful past in the history of this province, a time 

that sent a signal of a government that just simply didn’t have 

confidence in investment opportunities in Saskatchewan, a 

government that didn’t want to see our province move forward 

in many ways. And at that time, as I said, young people moved 

out of this province in droves. And the interesting thing that 

we’re going to see with this legislation is we’re going to see 

what the NDP’s reaction . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to see in 2008 what the NDP’s reaction to this Bill 

is, whether they still are in favour of things like the Regina 

Manifesto that this thing was generated from, that this piece of 

legislation was generated from, or are they in favour of an open 

economy. Are they in favour of a province that’s moving 

forward? Are they in favour of a province that’s confident 

enough in itself to say to the people all across this province that 

we are open for business, that we are going to stand in the face 

of adversity, that we are prepared to move forward in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

This is a government, this is a government opposite from those 

members that says yes to all of those things, that we are going 

to move forward. We have a Premier that’s clearly set an 

agenda for this province, that has clearly set an agenda for this 

province that’s based on three things: on hope, on opportunity, 

and on success. 

 

And those are the kinds of measures that we should have been 

looking forward to over the past number of decades in 

Saskatchewan, but we simply haven’t, but we simply haven’t. It 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

is a dark time in our history. It’s a time that we should all be 

ashamed of in this province, and it’s a time that we should look 

back on and hope should never happen again, should hope that 

it will never happen again. 

 

And you know what’s happened ever since we sent that signal 

back in the fall, when the Bill was introduced back in the fall? 

Since that time, what have we seen? We’ve seen literally 

hundreds of millions of dollars of investment, looking at the 

potash industry alone — billions, in fact, of dollars of 

investment that have been announced recently for the potash 

industry in itself, billions of dollars of investment. We see 

companies from all over the world now in Saskatchewan. 

They’re looking at mining opportunities in Saskatchewan right 

today. We will see, I dare say, in a few years perhaps, additional 

mines being created in Saskatchewan. 

 

If you look at the map in terms of where the potash reserves are 

in Saskatchewan, literally every available opportunity has been 

staked in Saskatchewan because people in the last few months, 

in the last few months, have looked at Saskatchewan and said, 

now’s the time, now’s the opportunity to grow in 

Saskatchewan. Now is the opportunity to have a great . . . to 

build a facility in this province. 

 

Well and the members opposite carp from their seat, Mr. 

Speaker, but the fact of the matter is really clear. In terms of 

potash reserves in Saskatchewan, I understand there are two 

townships approximately left where you might be able to stake 

a claim. Outside of that . . . Two townships in Saskatchewan. 

And for the members opposite that don’t know what a township 

is — and I dare say there’d be quite a few of them — 6 miles by 

6 miles represents a township. 

 

So in terms of the overall province of Saskatchewan, there is a 

miniscule amount of area left that you could stake a claim in 

terms of potash in Saskatchewan. The entire rest of the province 

has been staked, and we will be seeing new mining 

opportunities come forward in Saskatchewan here in the 

not-too-distant future. 

 

But in addition to that, what it has done for our province, Mr. 

Speaker, is one other very positive thing. It sent a very positive 

business signal to everybody, whether you’re looking at potash, 

whether you’re looking at forestry, whether you’re looking at 

oil and gas, whether you’re looking at anything you can name 

in Saskatchewan. Now they look at Saskatchewan and say, it 

will be a great place to do business. And that’s why we’re 

seeing literally hundreds of millions of dollars of investment 

pouring into Saskatchewan. And that’s also the reason I would 

say to some of the members opposite, that’s also the reason why 

we’re starting to see young people coming back to our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The very same people that the NDP drove 

out are now starting to come back to Saskatchewan, and it’s a 

very, very healthy thing. And we saw that no matter where 

we’ve travelled in the last little while, there’ll be people coming 

up to us and saying the same thing over and over and over again 

— I left Saskatchewan in the ’70s and the ’80s and the ’90s and 

into the 2000 years because there wasn’t opportunity in our 

province, because we had a government that was not prepared 

to look at opportunity. 

 

We had a government that was prepared to look at 

expropriating things, taking away from others something that 

doesn’t belong to you. And so we’ve made a very clear business 

signal to people across this province and indeed North America 

and we’re very, very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to be able to put this 

legislation forward. 

 

And as I said, we’ll be very anxious to see and we’ll be 

watching with great interest, and the business community in this 

province and outside of this province will be looking at this 

with great interest to see, when we call the vote on this 

ultimately and ask every member in this legislature to stand, 

where the member opposite will be standing. 

 

Will they be with the opportunities that this government has 

presented? Will they be looking forward to the future? Will 

they be looking towards providing opportunity for the young 

people of this province? Or will they be looking backwards at a 

time that was dark and very, very a poor time in our history? A 

time that Allan Blakeney brought forward a piece of legislation 

— the same firebrand speaker that you had at your convention, 

talking about renewal, talking about renewal. Talking about 

renewal for the NDP party, a party that brought in this kind of 

heinous legislation in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure on behalf of the government to 

move second reading of An Act to repeal The Potash 

Development Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 

moved that Bill No. 3, The Potash Development Repeal Act be 

now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Potash is a very rich 

resource that Saskatchewan enjoys in huge quantity. The hon. 

member for Kindersley has just pointed out that potash is 

throughout much of Saskatchewan and indeed much of the land 

has been staked. 

 

There’s a few things I want to say around potash and this Act to 

repeal The Potash Development Act. One of the things I want to 

say is that the potash industry is enjoying absolute record 

success. Last year, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan alone 

enjoyed net income of $1.1 billion — $1.1 billion. That was 

their net income for 2007. Not quite double, but nearly double 

what their net income had been in 2006. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that even prior to the election, 

the potash industry was scheduled, was planning to expand by 

investing nearly $1.7 billion in potash, in the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan. And they were going to expand by 4.8 million 

tonnes annually their production, bringing the total production 

to 22.1 billion tonne . . . pardon me, not billion, million — 

that’s with an “m” — to 22.1 million tonnes by 2012. 

 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

So what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is clearly there is not, was 

not, any crisis of confidence in the potash industry. There is no 

crisis of dollars in the potash industry. It’s an industry that is 

doing very, very well. And we’re pleased as always to have 

corporations making profits. 

 

Members opposite would have the world believe that somehow 

we’re opposed to profit or that profit is a bad word. I will come 

back to profits and the profits that the PCS, Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan, was making at a time while it was a Crown 

corporation. That’s part of the message that I have here today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But clearly no crisis; in fact exactly the opposite. There is a 

surplus of confidence in the potash industry. World demand is 

growing for potash. Potash producers and corporations are 

expanding their mining capacity to meet that. And what is the 

response of the members opposite? Well let us just roll over; let 

us roll over and they can tickle our belly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that what we have is a 

fundamental difference in philosophy and it doesn’t necessarily 

make the government wrong — doesn’t necessarily make the 

government wrong. There’s a difference, a fundamental 

difference in philosophy when it comes to our natural resources. 

 

I think, I believe, I know I can speak for members of the New 

Democratic Party opposition. We believe that Saskatchewan’s 

natural resources are the property of Saskatchewan’s people and 

that the Government of Saskatchewan has an obligation to 

develop those very natural resources and to extract the 

maximum return for the people of Saskatchewan who we argue 

own those very resources. 

 

I have heard from time to time members opposite say that 

natural resources are the property of the people of 

Saskatchewan. But they act like those very natural resources are 

inexhaustible. We argue that development should take place for 

the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. They can benefit in 

jobs; they can benefit in money and other ways. 

 

Right wing governments believe that the natural resources are 

unlimited and should just be developed as quickly as possible 

— full stop, period — always, Mr. Speaker, always to the 

benefit of the corporations. And they believe that that serves the 

public good. They believe in the trickle-down theory, Mr. 

Speaker, the trickle-down theory which says when a corporation 

is building a potash mine, in this case, that some of the profits 

will trickle down to the workers in the potash mine. That’s in 

essence the belief. So there’s a little bit of a fundamental 

difference. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker, point out that I’m mounting . . . One of 

the arguments I have is around who benefits. And I’m going to, 

at some risk, dash ahead in my speech. 

 

In 2007 Murray Dobbin, who is a freelance journalist and a 

member of both the Council of Canadians and the Canadian 

Centre for Policy Alternatives, in a letter-writing . . . He led a 

letter-writing campaign, a protest for what he called obscene — 

it’s a quote — “obscene salaries.” He published reports on how 

long it takes for an average CEO [chief executive officer] from 

the list of 100 of Canada’s best paid CEOs, how long it takes 

those 100 to earn the average annual salary of a Canadian. 

 

The average salary of a Canadian, Mr. Speaker, is just shy, in 

2007, just shy of $39,000 — 38,900 and change. Okay. And it 

took any one of the top 100 CEOs — of which the Chair, Mr. 

Doyle, of PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan] is in that 

list — it took any one of them, the longest it took was until 

about 10:30 a.m., January 2, at the rate that they’re . . . 

[inaudible] . . . to earn the average income that the average 

Canadian makes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that we’re debating a Bill that’s 

numbered 3 — Bill No. 3. One of the very earliest things that 

the incoming government did was introduce a Bill that they 

acknowledge is largely meaningless, largely ceremonial, and 

it’s little more than gestures, little more than gestures. Clearly 

when the potash industry is enjoying record growth, record 

profit, is expanding, is planning to expand in any event, 

working relationships were very, very good — and I assume 

still are — with the Government of Saskatchewan, at that very 

point they introduce an Act to repeal an Act, interestingly an 

Act that was never utilized. 

 

Members opposite, including the hon. member for Kindersley, 

would have us believe that somehow, somehow Saskatchewan 

was using The Potash Development Act as a tool to take over, 

to nationalize the potash industry. And nothing, nothing could 

be further from reality. Every single potash mine that became 

part of the then Crown corporations, Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, was purchased — fair market value; willing 

buyer, willing seller. Willing buyer, willing seller. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we are with Bill 3, the third Bill 

introduced by the incoming government dealing with the repeal 

of The Potash Development Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — A meaningless gesture, there is no question. 

Even in members opposite, I can’t believe that they would 

doubt, this is not the biggest issue of the day. This should not be 

the biggest issue of the day, Mr. Speaker — an industry that’s 

doing very, very well, an industry that will continue to do very, 

very well with or without this Act to repeal The Potash 

Development Act. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It seems there are just a few too many 

debates going on from the one that we’re actually supposed to 

be listening to, and so I would ask members to allow the 

member from Regina Coronation Park to complete his remarks. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, regardless of our ideology, I 

believe that it is the responsibility of government, whether it be 

a right wing government or a left wing government, to 

maximize the return of our natural resources for the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s the job in a nutshell. 

 

How do we best govern for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan — not for Bay Street, not for the Ontario 

firemen’s pension? I don’t wish the Ontario firemen’s pension 

fund any ill, but that’s not who elected any government in 

Saskatchewan. It’s the very people of Saskatchewan. 

 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

As I pointed out, we have a little ideological difference. It’s 

interesting that right wingers go around saying that . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — They score a lot of goals. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I have to chuckle at a heckle. I used to be in 

hockey a right winger, Mr. Speaker, and the heckle was that 

right wingers scored a lot of goals. Well I maybe never scored a 

lot of goals. I tried hard but I scored a few. 

 

Anyway right wing governments and left wing governments 

have an obligation to maximize the return for the people of 

Saskatchewan. That’s the point. The former right wing 

government, Grant Devine’s right wing government, at least, at 

least had the courage to do something meaningful. It did what 

they philosophically believed in. They privatized a Crown 

corporation. They privatized the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, took it away from being a Crown corporation 

and into the realms of a publicly traded company. 

 

That’s what they believed in. At least that was a meaningful act, 

a very meaningful act. I argue it cost the people of 

Saskatchewan hundreds of millions of dollars — hundreds of 

millions of dollars — and continues to cost us that every year. 

As I’ve pointed out, a philosophical difference in how this 

universe works. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

that was put together, put together . . . I should go through a 

little bit of history. Potash, potash was . . . It was in about 1932 

we first realized there was potash in Saskatchewan before 

virtually any of us, I think, before any of us in this Chamber 

were born . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well close, a few 

might have been. Anyway, the point is, Mr. Speaker, the history 

of knowing we have potash is relatively new. 

 

In 1942 the socialist Government of Saskatchewan had drilling 

going on all across Saskatchewan. Ostensibly they were drilling 

to find out to prove where the oil was, but the reality was they 

were also looking at, where’s the potash resource? What is 

available for development? 

 

And so in the early ’40s the potash resource was I want to say 

largely proved up but I don’t know — that might be overstating 

it a bit. But certainly the extent of potash resource under 

Saskatchewan’s ground was much, much, much better known 

than it had been before that. So clearly we’d identified where 

potash was, clearly we’d identified where it was likely in 

commercial quantity. 

 

Clearly that had taken place under a socialist government and 

that CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 

government invited private corporations to come and develop 

potash mines. Three — three — corporations answered the call. 

Three publicly traded, private corporations answered the call. 

And what was the exchange, Mr. Speaker? It was just this. We 

knew there was water formation to get through, most notably 

the Blairmore Formation. That was the most difficult, but 

there’s water at various levels, all kinds of challenges to get 

down to the 3,000-and-a-little-bit feet that we have to get to to 

mine potash. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the CCF government of the day said to those 

three corporations that look, we’ll give you a royalty holiday all 

the way to 1981, which in the ’50s they were essentially giving 

a 30-year or close to a 30-year royalty holiday, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s the history of left wing governments, knowing that 

there’s times when we can’t just do it ourselves. So just get rid 

of that rhetoric that we somehow think we can do everything 

ourselves, because it’s not, it’s not there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am keenly aware that there is a need to get to 

Premier’s estimates and I have much to say on this Bill 3, so I at 

this point, I move that we adjourn the debate. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Supplementary Estimates — March 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvotes (EX01), (EX07), (EX03), (EX04), and (EX08) 

 

The Chair: — Today the Committee of Finance is dealing with 

the supplementary estimates for Executive Council. Before we 

carry on, I would ask the Premier to — if you’d like to — 

introduce his officials, and if you would like to make a few 

opening remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I think 

the supplementary estimates are self-explanatory; however I 

know there will be questions. I’ll do my best to answer them 

with the help of the officials who I’d like to introduce you, to 

introduce all of the members of the committee that have joined 

me here today. The deputy minister to the Premier, Garnet 

Garven; special adviser in the Premier’s office, Joe Donlevy; 

and Bonita Cairns, the director of corporate services in 

Executive Council. We look forward to the questions from the 

Leader of the Opposition. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — Central management and services. I recognize 

the Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And I want 

to, with the Premier, welcome the officials who are here to 

assist the House this afternoon as we work through these 

supplementary estimates for Executive Council. 

 

We recognize that these estimates in many ways are involved 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

with the transition period between governments. Some of those 

expenditures would have happened under our government. 

Some of the expenditures in this package of supplementary 

estimates are happening under the new government, and so they 

essentially deal with the transition period. And so many of my 

questions today and observations that I’ll make relate to the 

transition period. 

 

I would ask the Premier if he would provide for the legislature 

this afternoon therefore a total list of the public servants who 

have been terminated, fired, let go during the transition period 

— a list of all of the public servants who have been let go as a 

result of the transition. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’d be happy to 

supply that list to the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I wonder, Mr. Chair, if the Premier would 

provide it to the legislature this afternoon, now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s over, Mr. Chair — thank you to the 

Leader of the Opposition —it’s a number of people, obviously, 

including those that were severed by the outgoing 

administration from their work here in this Legislative Building 

primarily. We will endeavour to get the list today. Those 

elements, those parts of the list that we cannot provide to 

members today we will get to all hon. members of the 

committee as soon as possible. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I thank the Premier for that 

commitment. We do know, and the broad public of 

Saskatchewan know, some of the names that were on that list. 

And obviously there were names will be on that list who 

worked in the political staff of ministers in the former 

government. 

 

But there is another list of individuals whose employment was 

terminated by this government following the election, who have 

been widely recognized, Mr. Chair, as very valuable public 

servants who brought to their work no sense of partisanship and 

so on. And we know that some very significant public servants 

have been let go, fired in the transition. So perhaps I could ask a 

few questions about one or two of those public servants. 

 

Perhaps the Premier could explain to the legislature today and 

the people of Saskatchewan why it is that he chose to terminate 

the employment, to fire Mr. John Wright. Mr. John Wright has 

been a career public servant, most of that career spent in 

Saskatchewan. He served a variety of governments and is 

recognized, if I may say, Mr. Chair, as a valued public servant, 

not just in Saskatchewan but right across Canada. Perhaps the 

Premier could explain to the legislature why he chose to 

terminate Mr. John Wright from the public service in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s certainly my view, 

and I think it’s shared by others who observe transition 

processes in a parliamentary government, that there will be 

changes for one of two reasons. Certainly that would 

characterize the changes that the new Government of 

Saskatchewan has made, Mr. Chair. The two reasons being: one 

is renewal; one is the interest on the part of a new government 

to renew. 

 

It certainly does not take away in those instances from the 

service that has been rendered to the province and to the people 

of Saskatchewan by long-standing public servants like Mr. 

Wright, who has done an admirable job spanning different 

administrations, who did an admirable job as a deputy of 

Finance and then into Crown Investments Corporation and then 

SaskPower, where he was, I believe, then seconded to the 

Ministry of Health. And as we said at the time, we want to 

acknowledge his service to the province, thank him for that, and 

just note that there are going to be changes as a result of our 

desire to renew both the public service and the new 

government, especially in a key area such as Health. 

 

The other reason for changes are in those instances where there 

is a clear political affiliation on the part of those working in 

government with the outgoing, the former government. 

 

Those are the two reasons that we pursued changes and have 

pursued changes, and with respect to Mr. Wright, I would 

certainly classify him in the former, certainly a professional 

civil servant who rendered good service to the province. 

 

But we seek renewal, and the transition that we saw, Mr. Chair, 

was balanced between status quo and some continuity — some 

deputies moving positions but remaining at the deputy level; 

others moving on to other things; and still others promoted, 

either from without or within the province. And I think that’s 

reasonable in any transition process. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Is it therefore, Mr. Chair, the assessment of the 

Premier that, using Mr. Wright as an example, that he could not 

serve this government in its capacity to renew? Mr. Wright, 

among others whose employment was terminated by this 

Premier and this government, have served a variety of 

administrations. Mr. Wright worked in the administration of the 

Conservative Party in the 1980s. 

 

Is it therefore the Premier’s assessment, when he speaks of the 

need to renew, that Mr. Wright could not serve in that capacity, 

and the others who had no political attachments during their 

public sector career, that have been summarily fired by this 

government? Is it his conclusions they were incapable of 

providing the kind of renewal that he seeks, where others 

apparently were? And if that is the case, let me ask the Premier, 

were these discussions held with Mr. Wright or with Ms. 

Durnford or with Mr. Brooks, Mr. Gladue? Were there 

discussions held to determine whether or not they could serve 

this government and bring about the kind of renewal that the 

Premier seems to desire? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I would point out, Mr. Chair, that 

none of this relates directly to supplementary estimates, which 

is the matter before the Assembly. We’re prepared to answer 

these detailed questions on supplementary estimates today, Mr. 

Chair. Additionally the Leader of the Opposition is going to 

have the chance to ask much more general questions, as he is 

now doing, about transition or any other issue when we have 

the normal course of Premier’s estimates towards the end of the 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

session. 

 

Having said that, I think I’ve answered the question in a general 

way in terms of the changes that have taken place — that they 

are a combination of our desire to renew and also our desire to 

change those existing civil servants employed by his 

administration who were clearly partisan. 

 

The Chair: — We are dealing with supplementary estimates 

but it does also mention severance obligation. So if it did fall in 

severance with that particular person, it would count. But I’d 

also remind the leader of the loyal opposition that we are 

dealing just with that, and we’ll just stay with a severance that it 

dealt with in supplementary estimates. And I will leave that up 

to the Premier to lead me in that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well we can have the Premier try and dodge 

these — I know are difficult questions for him — by using 

some technicality around the supplementary estimates. But I, 

with you, Mr. Chair, read right here on the page that monies are 

included here under special warrant for severance. Now some of 

that obviously will be available to those who we severed as we 

left government — obviously. 

 

Then let us put this question to the Premier: can he today give 

us an estimate of what the severance costs will be to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan for having fired these long-standing 

public servants? Can he give us at least an estimate today of 

what the severance costs will be? Because each of these, to my 

understanding, were fired without cause. And therefore the 

Premier perhaps could provide for this House today an estimate 

at least on what the severance costs will be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Just for clarification, Mr. Chair, certainly 

we acknowledge that the supplementary estimates we’re dealing 

with in Executive Council here are about severance — 

severance within Executive Council, the bulk of which are the 

severances executed by the Leader of the Opposition when he 

was the Premier prior to the immediate transition of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. Severances within the Ministry 

of Health or any other ministry with respect to deputies or 

others are certainly not what is contemplated here in the 

reference to severances. These are Executive Council 

severances, and I’d be happy to answer any questions the 

Leader of the Opposition may have about that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well it is very clear, Mr. Chair — and I’m 

sure the public will see this today, anyone who may be 

observing this discussion — that the Premier simply does not 

want to talk about having fired valuable public servants who 

have served this province and its people. 

 

The Chair: — We are dealing just with the supplementary 

estimates. Under budget estimates we will be able to vary into 

the different departments, but right now we’re dealing with just 

supplementary estimates that deal with Executive Council. So I 

will remind members, Leader of the Opposition of that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I am fully apprised, fully apprised 

of the activities and the functions of Executive Council. And 

part of the function of this Premier and his Executive Council is 

to provide oversight for the entirety of government. That’s what 

they get paid to do. 

And we are fully aware that the Executive Council today is 

taking a very direct role in the transition, the transition period 

which is covered by these supplementary estimates. Therefore, 

Mr. Chair, this Premier should be prepared to answer to this 

legislature and the people of Saskatchewan questions about the 

transition that is being overseen by Executive Council, 

Executive Council which is being funded by the very estimate 

that is in front of us, supplementary estimate it describes. 

 

In the estimate page you will see yourself, Mr. Chair — the 

Premier can see it — that this is related to the transition of 

government. It’s right there on the page. So in this transition 

this Premier, this Executive Council has determined that a host 

of very valuable public servants who had no political 

engagement were to be terminated, were to be terminated. 

 

His Deputy Premier has gone out and said that the criteria for 

now employment in the senior public service is a criteria which 

includes if or not the individual shares the philosophy of the 

Premier. Not just the philosophy of government, but the Deputy 

Premier has been before the press saying that these public 

servants must share the philosophy of the Premier. 

 

So let me put this question to the Premier: under what criteria of 

your philosophy, how is your philosophy shared or described to 

these public servants who were then terminated? Because all 

that the public can conclude is that this has nothing to do with 

renewal, that it has to do in fact with their inability to share 

your philosophy. So, Mr. Chair, I put this question to the 

Premier: what process was used to describe for these public 

servants the so-called philosophy of the Premier and according 

to the Deputy Premier, this is now the test. Can he explain that 

to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

[15:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, let me just be very clear. We 

are prepared to answer all of these questions in Premier’s 

estimates. All of the questions that the Premier wants to answer, 

we are prepared to give the . . . or the Leader of the Opposition. 

We are prepared to give the former premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition, the same exact amount of time that he afforded to 

me when I was the Leader of the Opposition, at the end of 

session, to get into a wide-ranging discussion about the 

transition or about any particular ministry. 

 

What we are talking about here today, what we are talking 

about today is the supplementary estimates related to Executive 

Council. The supplementary estimates of Executive Council do 

not relate to the severance of the deputy minister of Health. 

They don’t relate to the severance in terms of any other deputy 

minister or official of the government. 

 

Now we’re prepared to answer all of those questions. But I 

wonder if the Leader of the Opposition, who’s been in this 

Assembly for a lot longer than I am —think first elected when I 

was in third year university — should know what we’re here, 

what we’re met here to do which is to execute the 

supplementary estimates of Executive Council. If he’s got any 

questions at all, I’d be prepared to answer those questions. 

 

The Chair: — We are dealing with the supplementary 

estimates and I will read: 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

Additional funding [which] was provided by Special 

Warrant for common law severance obligations and leave 

entitlement payments to former employees of Executive 

Council and for costs related to the transition of 

governments. 

 

Now the Premier has stated that some of the questions fell out 

of that, and I will take the Premier, for now, at his word at that. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, if this 

Premier is unable to answer questions or unwilling to answer 

questions . . . Now he says he’s fully prepared to answer all the 

questions in a month or two when we do Executive Council 

estimates. Why not answer them today? We’ve got an hour. 

We’ve got an hour and a half. Why not answer them today? 

 

You know, Mr. Chair, this is not going to work. If the Premier 

sends notes and letters to all of his ministers telling them they 

need to be open and accountable, he’d better adhere to the same 

policy in terms of his own performance in this House. Now 

we’ve already had the experience of one minister of his 

government who won’t answer questions in this House or won’t 

answer questions out in the rotunda. Now it looks like we’re 

working on the President of Executive Council in the same 

fashion. 

 

I’m asking some very simple questions, very simple questions, 

Mr. Chair, about the transition, the period of time that these 

supplementary estimates cover, some very simple questions 

about the transition. So let’s try this one out. Let’s try this one 

out. 

 

I’ll ask the Premier, in these numbers that we have before us in 

the supplementary estimates which are on your table, Mr. Chair, 

are the expenses of the transition team included? Are the 

expenses of the transition team included in the supplementary 

estimates that we have before us today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, the supplementary 

estimates certainly contained a number of elements including 

some of the transition costs. They contain, and we haven’t got 

any questions on this yet, but I think it’s fair to put it before the 

Assembly. They contain principally nearly $3.1 million in 

severance for employees, severance that was undertaken by that 

member when he was still the premier. 

 

They contain vacation and SDO [scheduled day off] payouts to 

employees of $350,000. Mr. Chairman, they contain — and I 

hope we get to talk a little bit about this today because it 

actually is a part of supplementary estimates — a seven-month 

contract with Bernie Cherko totalling $217,000. For what, we 

don’t know, because there’s this report, there’s this report about 

Fishing Lake but there may be other reasons. There may be 

other reasons that you wanted to provide this contract to Mr. 

Cherko within your office when you were the premier. We’d be 

looking forward to that, Mr. Chair, if he wants to get into it. 

 

There’s also an over-expenditure resulting — an 

over-expenditure on his watch — of about $60,000 applied in 

July 2007 for performance pay increases. And so there’s a total 

here, the transition costs of government which include 

Information Technology Office costs, $82,000; 

transition-related expenditures including costs associated with 

setting up offices, employee relocation, and other administrative 

expenditures, $185,000. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Premier has indicated that in 

fact that there are, within this supplementary estimate, dollars 

that will be provided to the transition team or for transition 

costs. So let me ask this question. He has committed today to 

provide a list of all of the public servants that have been fired, 

terminated in the transition period. Will he this afternoon now 

provide to the House therefore a list of all of those, all of those 

individuals who have been part of the quote, “transition team”? 

Will the Premier give us the list today in the House of the 

transition team? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, any official that is involved in 

the transition team who is reflected in the estimates that we are 

discussing and debating today certainly can be furnished to all 

members of the committee and that will occur. And there may 

be subsequent questions too about severance. We could deal 

with that in general terms. 

 

But again the information in terms of these estimates is pretty 

clear: $3.633 million in supplementary estimates and special 

warrant expenditures of the former administration, of the former 

administration; the remaining expenditures of $267,000 of the 

current administration, including $82,000 for Information 

Technology Office costs’ and 185,000 — as I have just said in 

my previous answer — for transition-related costs. It includes 

costs to set up an office, to set up offices, employee relocation 

and other administrative expenditures. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Chair, for the public of Saskatchewan, 

never mind just for this legislature, for the people of 

Saskatchewan, will the Premier this afternoon tell us who is on 

the transition team? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the transition team, before and 

after the election, consisted principally of the member for 

Canora-Pelly, the now Deputy Premier of the province. Who 

led the transition process? Myself. 

 

Also assisting on transition throughout the process was the then 

chief of staff to the Opposition Leader, now chief of staff to the 

Premier, Reg Downs. And also of course, we had been advised 

by others as well, including Mr. Emsley who has been the 

subject of some debate and discussion here in this Assembly. 

 

And then post the transition to the new government, of course 

the deputy minister to the Premier would also assist in matters 

of transition, in terms of ordering the new government and 

preparing our new government to enter its first legislative 

session and now of course on the eve of our very first budget. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, would the Premier provide to the 

legislature information on anyone who may have been 

contracted to assist his transition team? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There was a number 

of individuals who were contracted to help with transition, 

including Doug Emsley, including Mr. Ron Larson, including 

Tracy Pugh, including Ruth Klassen-Burwell. Additionally 

services were contracted from TMC database development and 

support and KPMG audit services. 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, were others involved in the 

transition process who may have been contracted or paid by 

other departments of government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my understanding that 

no, that’s not the case, and were it to be the case, it would also 

be outside the discussion of Executive Council supplementary 

estimates. But the direct answer to the question is certainly 

that’s not, that’s not the information. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Premier has mentioned a group 

described as TMC data management. Would the Premier 

describe what services they provided for the transition in 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I believe TMC is a 

very well-known, Regina-based company specializing in 

database and network solutions, in offering servers certainly to 

large organizations. In this case, there was the need to organize 

as a result of a brand new government moving in. There was the 

need for the databasing to occur, to inventory all of the various 

elements of government that we had come into having won the 

election. And so TMC was retained to do that function, as they 

are retained to do that function on behalf of many organizations 

— private and public — in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, would the Premier indicate whether 

this contract was tendered? Was it a competitive process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, no, the amount was $9,817 

total. And so there was the need to move quickly, and that 

number appears to be very favourable in terms of just 

proceeding to develop a relationship for the company that has a 

track record here in the city of Regina and across the province. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today I am sure the 

Premier is pleased to read The StarPhoenix commentary by Mr. 

Randy Burton that talks about some very favourable polling 

results for himself and his government. Mr. Burton in his article 

today says, and I quote, “An internal poll conducted for the 

government recently shows the government is . . . enjoying a 

honeymoon with voters.” Later in the article it’s described as an 

Angus Reid poll. 

 

Mr. Chair, I want to ask the Premier: was this poll 

commissioned by Executive Council? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chair. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’d ask the Premier: does he know 

where this poll was commissioned in government? 

 

The Chair: — He had said it didn’t deal with Executive 

Council. We will just always stay within supplementary 

estimates of Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, perhaps you could have someone 

who works in Executive Council, whose salary is being paid by 

this province, to please to tell him who in government 

conducted this Angus Reid poll. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I think the answer is no. 

Executive Council did not conduct this poll. That’s the answer, 

and maybe the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t like it but 

that’s the answer. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Premier ought to know 

this. If his government is out polling, then the Premier ought to 

know who or where within his government this polling is being 

done. Now either Mr. Burton has got it wrong, that this is not a 

government poll, or he’s got it right, and it is a government poll. 

 

If it is a government poll, the Premier should be able to come to 

the legislature this afternoon and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan where in his government this polling is coming 

from. I ask again: is this a government poll? Is this a 

government poll, and who paid for it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, first of all the poll 

references Angus Reid, and to be sure the Saskatchewan Party 

utilizes the services of Angus Reid. And frankly we appreciated 

the services of Angus Reid over the last little while. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, those majority of the people of the province who 

wanted change and wanted to make sure that the then 

opposition party, Saskatchewan Party, availed itself of the very 

best, are also pleased that that occurred. 

 

The answer to the former premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question, it was not conducted by executive 

government. It’s not part of these estimates. The answer is no. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I accept the Premier’s comments that 

Executive Council didn’t pay for this poll. That’s not my 

question. Did any agency or department in his government pay 

for this poll? Was this poll that’s referred to by Randy Burton in 

The StarPhoenix today paid for by the provincial Government 

of Saskatchewan in any of its agencies or departments? 

 

The Chair: — We are just dealing with Executive Council. I’ll 

rule that question out of order. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m pleased to be ruled out of order 

by yourself, but I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan want 

to know the answer to this, and you won’t rule them out of 

order. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is we have a report today in The 

StarPhoenix that says this government is conducting polling of 

a political nature. The Premier should ought to know if they are 

or not. If they’re not, it’s a very simple thing for him to stand up 

today in the legislature and say, no we’re not; this was a poll 

paid for by the Saskatchewan Party. Fair enough. But he won’t. 

He won’t stand up and say, this is not being paid for by the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and therefore I can only conclude it 

is. 

 

And if he refuses to answer who’s paying for it, then I guess we 

will find out through a variety of processes, whether its freedom 

of information or whether it’s through . . . Well now, who’s the 

member over there from Cannington trying to shout me down? 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

It won’t work. It won’t work. It won’t work, Mr. Chair. 

 

A very simple question. Perhaps the journalists will want to ask 

this question. Who is paying for the polling that results in these 

kinds of political results being in the paper today? 

 

Now I again want to return, Mr. Chair, to the Premier on the 

question of severance. It’s clearly a part of this package. As 

they have fired public servants throughout the public service — 

we’ll get the list later from the Premier; he’s assured us of that 

— surely this Premier, surely this transition team and surely his 

chief public service and Executive Council have built some 

estimates on the severance costs. Would he today share with 

this legislature and the people of Saskatchewan at least an 

estimate on what the severances will be to these public servants 

who have been fired without cause? 

 

And secondly, during the period under which is covered by 

these supplementary estimates, can he report to the House if 

agreements have been reached with these public servants? Have 

they reached agreements on severance with these public 

servants who they fired without cause and, in my view, without 

justification? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well in terms of what we’re dealing . . . Let 

me just say this, Mr. Chair, because there was a bit of rant, a 

rodomontade from the Leader of the Opposition about the 

polling. And I’m not sure why he’s so obsessed with it. This 

may be the same kind of Angus Reid polling that our party has 

done in the past. It might be a different one. I don’t know. But I 

can see why he’s upset by it, because what it says, what it says 

Mr. Chairman, is that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan; they have no nostalgia for the past. The people 

of the province of Saskatchewan are looking forward to a bold 

future in the province. They like what they see from this new 

government, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The people of this province, if this poll is an accurate refection 

of the views and the feelings of Saskatchewan people, is that 

they have still had enough of the NDP, that they are glad that 

they made their decision on the November 7, that they see this 

province moving forward with a government that is looking out 

the front window — the windshield — not in the rear-view 

mirror; a government that’s ready for growth and about to bring 

down a historic budget tomorrow to build on that, Mr. Chair. I 

can understand why he’d be upset and worried about the poll. 

 

Now with respect to the question of severance. We’re dealing 

with Executive Council severances, so let me answer the 

question of the Leader of the Opposition. The first special 

warrant was passed on January 10, 2008 and it includes $2.71 

million for severance and vacation, SDO payouts for employees 

of the former administration. That’s not an estimate. That’s the 

value. 

 

The second warrant passed included $646,000 for severance 

and vacation, SDO payouts for employees of the former 

administration. That is not an estimate. That’s the actual cost. 

That’s what we’re talking about here in the estimates this 

afternoon, and I look forward to more questions from the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 

response to a question earlier from the member from 

Riversdale, the Premier indicated that Ron Larson is part of 

these spending estimates. And I would ask the Premier to please 

advise us what Mr. Larson is doing on behalf of Executive 

Council. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Larson is no longer 

contracted as a part of any of the transition effort. His role 

chiefly, I am informed, was to prepare the new government in 

terms of inventory and preparing to deal with what is a huge list 

of agencies, boards, and commissions that the new incoming 

government inherited. We found — we discovered — Mr. 

Chairman, that there wasn’t much organization inherited from 

the previous administration. There wasn’t much of a database in 

terms of knowing even the nature and the extent of these 

agencies, boards, and commissions. 

 

And that’s serious enough, Mr. Chairman. But as you know, we 

found that also to be the case when it comes to children in the 

province, as the Minister of Social Services has highlighted. 

The same, the same kind of lack of care and attention to 

Executive Council, unfortunately, occurred . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask that just the 

members that are in the debate be heard rather than all the 

members, I know, that want to enter into the debate, but we will 

just do it one at a time. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well we know that Mr. Larson was on 

contract. Can the Premier advise us what he was receiving per 

month for that contract, and how many months was Mr. Larson 

paid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Twenty-five thousand in total over two and 

a half months or so — 10,000 a month, Mr. Chair. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Can the Premier advise us whether or not 

there are other people on contract particularly looking at 

procurement policy for the Government of Saskatchewan? If 

they’re on contract, I’d be interested in the name of that 

individual and how much is being paid per month to that 

individual. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes indeed, we are 

undertaking a review of the procurement policy of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, what we found when we inherited the role of the new 

Government of Saskatchewan was a system put in place by the 

previous administration to procure advertising that seemed to be 

more about turn taking and perhaps some political influence on 

the part of the member of the . . . now the Leader of the 

Opposition and, I would imagine, particularly on part of the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

What we want to do is find a better way to do that. It is part of 

the, certainly part of the estimates that we’re discussing today, 

and we’ll get the number, the amount of money that is involved 

in this contract to this individual who is undertaking this review 

of the procurement of advertising communications for the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 



360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

Ms. Atkinson: — Can the Premier provide us with the name of 

the individual who’s undertaking this review? When did this 

individual start his work, and when does the Premier expect that 

the work will be completed, and precisely how much is this 

individual being paid per month for this work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We’re going to get the exact information on 

the date the contract began. It was late January. As to the term 

of the contract, the same applies. We’ll get that information. 

The amount is $10,000 per month. It’s to Bob Anderson of 

Saskatoon. Bob, Mr. Anderson ran Shaw Communications in 

the province for some period of time. And he has been engaged 

and been working on this procurement issue on behalf of the 

new government. We look forward to his report. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now I want to move on to another person 

that has been hired in the Premier’s office, and that’s Ron 

Dedman. Can the Premier describe to us precisely Mr. 

Dedman’s duties and how much Mr. Dedman is being 

remunerated for each month. And what are the results of his 

work thus far? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Dedman, who 

began with the Government of Saskatchewan through 

SaskPower in 1967 and worked through until 1974 with the 

Blakeney government at the Crown corporation, has also had a 

number of different roles within the private and the public 

sector, including work with the government in the 1980s. 

 

He is — and this is not a secret; it was a matter of an order in 

council — he has been named the associate deputy minister to 

Executive Council for executive resourcing. And his title’s 

pretty self-explanatory. He’s helping the new government with 

respect to the human resource needs as we seek to ensure that 

we are attracting to vacancies very qualified people within the 

civil service, and also working with ministries to ensure that our 

government is providing the kind of, the kind of opportunity for 

training, for development, for furtherance in the careers of the 

civil service. 

 

And so far I can tell members of this committee, Mr. Chair, the 

work has . . . he has done excellent work for the new 

government. And we look forward to that continuing in the 

future. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Can the Premier indicate to the 

legislature what work he has been so successful with, who has 

he recruited, and to what positions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, there’s been a number of 

new deputy ministers appointed by this government and, I 

mean, they’re a matter of the public record. They’re in orders in 

council, which that member will have access to as will all 

members of the public. 

 

It’s pretty safe to assume that, in some way, Mr. Dedman’s 

counsel and advice has been helpful in retaining these new 

members of the civil service and will also be helpful as we 

continue to attract and recruit women and men from across the 

country to help build the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I understand that there have been some 

assistant deputy ministers that have been relieved of their duties 

in the public service, and I’m interested in knowing whether or 

not Mr. Dedman has recruited any new assistant deputy 

ministers to these vacant positions as a result of the change in 

government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, it would be Mr. Dedman’s 

duty and role to help the deputy ministers, to help my deputy 

minister, in the recruiting and sourcing of senior civil servants 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — We have in the province of Saskatchewan an 

independent commission called the Public Service Commission, 

which is in charge of recruiting public servants to various 

positions in the public service, not only including members who 

are in scope, members of unions, SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees’ Union], but also out of 

scope. 

 

And I’m wondering if it is the Premier’s position, given that 

historically we have gone through a selection process for 

assistant deputy ministers, associate deputy ministers, whether 

or not it’s his intention to have Mr. Dedman, along with his 

office, determining who the assistant and associate deputy 

ministers will be in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the Public Service Commission 

certainly is continuing, as we speak, its role in terms of 

recruiting people for the classified elements of the civil service. 

There is also the opportunity for advice from Executive Council 

with respect to levels of associate deputy minister and deputy 

minister. That has always certainly been the case. It continues 

to be the case with the new government. And the Public Service 

Commission’s work is in no way affected by this. There 

certainly is a consultation process back and forth but the Public 

Service Commission continues to staff the government with 

respect to classified positions. 

 

[15:45] 

 

As for the competitive nature of the appointment of new 

associate deputy ministers or other senior level members of the 

civil service, there’s a combination of things at work here 

including competitions and advertising, some promotions 

within government — exactly the kind of thing you’d expect 

when a large organization is recruiting to its senior management 

levels. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I just want to understand what the Premier 

just said. Is it his intention to have ADMs — assistant deputy 

ministers, associate deputy ministers — go through the public 

service process when those appointments are being made? I 

think I heard him say that’s his intention. I just want to make 

sure I heard him correctly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, backing up to a question asked 

by the hon. member from Nutana regarding our procurement 

review. Mr. Anderson began on January 23. He will complete 

his work on May 22 for a four-month term, and he’ll report to 

the government at that time. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what we’re saying is the process undertaken by 

this new government is not different than what previous 

governments have done. There are those senior levels, senior 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

positions in the civil service that are appointed by orders in 

council — your deputy ministers, your associate deputy 

ministers. 

 

It’s the intent of our government to use all the resources that we 

can in terms of executive sourcing. We’re going to use all the 

tools at our disposal. We will advertise in some cases. There 

will be some promotions from within in other cases. And then, 

by order in council, deputies and associate deputies will be 

appointed. That was the path followed by the new government 

after the election of November 7 when changes were made. It’s 

what should be expected. 

 

There’s an accountability measure built into that through 

Executive Council, through the cabinet, through myself, 

through the Premier’s office, and that accountability will 

continue with the new government. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Just so I understand the Premier: is this a 

new process to appoint assistant and associate deputy ministers 

by order in council? Is this the new policy of the new 

government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the hon. member sat in the cabinet and 

so she’ll know in the case of Mr. Osborne, for example, that he 

was . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well we only did it once, 

they say; we only ever did it once. Also associate deputy 

ministers appointed by order in council. And so there is a 

practice of this in this government, by your government. It’s 

true, it’s true of other governments. 

 

And you know, you know, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting that 

this is a point of contention with the opposition because I think 

it’s reasonable to say you’d want the Executive Council that 

would be responsible to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan for appointments, that would include the Public 

Service Commission input, that it would include competition 

and promotion from within, that it would include good advice 

within Executive Council. That’s what the new government’s 

getting, Mr. Chairman. It’s a matter of practicality and common 

sense. These are foreign concepts to the members opposite, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Just for the record, all assistant and associate 

deputy ministers were not appointed by order in council. And in 

fact Mr. Osborne, that was a very old order in council and 

unfortunately it’s something our government missed, Mr. 

Speaker, and Mr. Osborne has now paid the consequence of that 

by being terminated. 

 

But I just wanted to ask the Premier another important question 

in my view. There has been a recent appointment in the 

department of Advanced Education and Labour, a recent order 

in council. Is Mr. Carr an associate deputy minister or an 

assistant deputy minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I think the member may 

want to check her facts because I believe if she checks, she’ll 

find that associate deputy ministers were appointed by orders in 

council by her government at the cabinet table. Yes, I think you 

should check your facts. In the case of Mr. Carr, he’s an 

associate deputy minister now in the department of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

Ms. Atkinson: — My question for the Premier: was there a 

competition for the new associate deputy minister’s position at 

Advanced Education and Labour? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, there are a number of 

appointments that have occurred. Some are the product of 

competitions. Some are the product of informal competitions. 

Some are promotions from within and some are not. In the case 

of Mr. Carr, given his considerable experience with respect to 

the area that he’s now going to be working in government, 

clearly the government was satisfied that they had the right 

individual to be carrying out these duties and made its decision 

and followed a practice by order in council that the previous 

government also followed. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: —Through the Chair to the Premier, can the 

Premier advise us of other assistant deputy minister or associate 

deputy ministry positions that have been appointed through 

order in council by his government and whether any of these 

appointments went through competition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, notwithstanding the fact that 

this is not part of estimates today, I will say this as an answer. 

All the orders in council are public and available to the hon. 

member. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I appreciate the Premier saying that, but I’d 

like to have it on the public record in Hansard whether or not 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh I think what we . . . You 

don’t ask the question unless you know the answer. 

 

So I would like to ask the minister, I would like to ask the 

Premier to advise us . . . Oh yes, oh yes. I’d like to ask the 

Premier to advise us: are there any assistant or associate deputy 

minister positions that have been appointed by the new 

government that did not go through a selection or the public 

service process? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chairman, you’d think an 

election defeat on November 7 would take the hon. member 

down a notch, but it hasn’t — not at all. There’s still some 

hectoring and some lecturing and some, well finger pointing, I 

guess. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this information is a matter of the public record. 

It’s not frankly a part of the estimates today that we’re 

discussing. These are ministerial estimates. If the member for 

Nutana, if the former premier of the province, the Leader of the 

Opposition wants to get into a wide-ranging discussion about 

who’s in orders in council and who’s not, we can do that at the 

end at the session. These questions are asked and answered as a 

matter of the public record in the orders in council published 

and hidden, Mr. Chairman, on the Internet and in the media that 

widely reports them. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Chair, my understanding is that the 

Sask Party came to office indicating to the public that they were 

going to be open and accountable to the public. And so I 

expected that, given that this is certainly what the Sask Party 

said to our citizens — and certainly the citizens agreed with the 

open and accountability policy of the Sask Party — that we 

would have the benefit of that open and accountable position of 

the Sask Party in this Legislative Assembly. 



362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

Now I’ve asked the Premier a very specific question. There 

have been appointments. Associate deputy ministers have been 

appointed. There have been assistant deputy ministers that have 

been appointed. I asked the Premier a very simple question: 

have any of these folks gone through a process where the jobs 

were advertised in the paper, all people across the country and 

in Saskatchewan have the opportunity to apply for those jobs? 

What kind of selection process occurred, or were these people 

appointed by the new government simply because, as we’ve 

heard from the Premier, he wants people in senior positions that 

adhere to the philosophy of the Sask Party? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, that last 

remark, that last little . . . The hon. member tried to slip in a 

little remark that’s just frankly not true and misrepresents what 

has been said by the Deputy Premier and by myself with respect 

to transition. 

 

Now what the hon. member might be getting confused about 

though is comments from her former leader, the government 

she was a part of in 1991 when Roy Romanow had this to say. 

He said about people that they were firing at the time, he said, if 

they are politically incompatible with an NDP administration, 

quote, “it makes the person not competent to carry out the job.” 

That’s her party’s approach. That’s not been the approach of 

this new government. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with respect to these appointments, even though 

they’re not included in the estimates that we’re supposed to be 

debating today, I’ll say this: the orders in council that she’s 

referring to are sent or couriered to her office as soon as they 

are available, Mr. Chairman. To her office. And yet she wants 

to waste the time of the committee and go over the content of 

the orders in council that she already has. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Chair, soon, soon — we don’t have a date yet 

but soon — we will post these orders in council on the 

government’s website, or as we’ve heard hon. members say, on 

the Interweb. They’ll be able to dial up the Internet, assuming 

they all can do that, because the other issue when we inherited 

Executive Council, Mr. Chairman — and the costs are a part of 

this discussion here — is the fact that Executive Council office, 

the Premier’s office, weren’t wired, weren’t ready for any kind 

of technology or the Interweb because apparently this kind of 

technology escaped the former members opposite. 

 

The OCs [order in council] have been sent to the member. Soon 

they will be on the Internet and available for discussion. I will 

say with respect to appointments that they are a combination of 

promotions from within, they’re a combination of competitions 

that we’ve held, and some . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

the member for Riversdale is not listening because I’m 

answering his question. 

 

And finally, and finally some of them are direct appointments 

made by a new government seeking renewal, seeking to change 

from what was a tired, old NDP government; seeking new ideas 

to carry this province forward, new ideas to continue the 

momentum we see in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Chairman; new 

ideas to sustain growth. 

 

The poll that the former premier refers to I think says it pretty 

clearly. The people have weighed in again, not just on 

November 7 but here in March, four months later. They like the 

new approach. They reject the old approach, Mr. Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Chairperson, I have served 

with four premiers in this Legislative Assembly in my time in 

this Assembly. And I have to tell you, it’s the first time that I 

have ever heard a premier say to another member that their 

questions are a waste of time, Mr. Speaker. So I would just like 

to say that to the member opposite. I have never heard a premier 

say to another member of this House that their questions are a 

waste of time. 

 

The member did not answer the question. Of all of his 

appointments, all of his appointments to the various senior 

positions of the public service, has there been one competition? 

And the Premier has failed to answer that question. So I will ask 

it one more time. In terms of his appointment to senior positions 

in the public service, did any of these positions go through — 

and these appointments — go through a competition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Of the new appointments to date, none have 

gone to a competition process. That may well be the case in the 

future, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And with respect to the member’s preamble where she said 

she’s never heard a member of this Assembly say, never heard a 

. . . Well I want to remind the hon. member then of the words of 

the former premier when questioned by the current member for 

Martensville about the Murdoch Carriere scandal, about the 

Murdoch Carriere scandal when he said precisely the same 

thing. You want to talk to your colleague beside you before you 

say something in the House that’s not true. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With the change in 

government, Mr. Chair, as you’re aware, there are a number of 

policies and programs that will certainly be affected. And I 

know on the opposition side we’ve had the opportunity to ask a 

good number of questions, Mr. Chair, over the last few weeks. 

And sometimes we get a glimmer of hope. Sometimes we don’t 

get all the information that we’re wanting, all the information 

that’s required. 

 

And with this transition, Mr. Chair, a lot of the answering that 

we’ve been seeking, a lot of the information that we’ve been 

seeking has not been falling on the actual line ministries, on the 

ministers. But the slack has been picked up by Executive 

Council because we’ve seen the situation where ministers aren’t 

prepared to answer or they’re afraid to answer or they just 

simply don’t know because they’re not involved with the details 

of their ministry. 

 

[16:00] 

 

One example of this, Mr. Chair, would be the changes to the 

grad tax exemption program. Before Christmas, Mr. Chair, I 

had the opportunity to ask a question to the Minister of 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. It’s a very long 

name . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . This is my preamble. If the 

members would listen, they’ll see the connection to Executive 

Council. 

 

And when these questions were asked to the minister, Mr. 

Chair, there was no answer. No information was provided. The 

members on this side, the members in the press gallery, the 

public that was there, the people at home watching on TV, they 

gained no information. They gained no insight. They don’t 

know what the outcome of the question was. 

 

The question that I asked the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour was why the changes that took place 

to . . . the proposed changes of cancelling the grad tax 

exemption and replacing it with a tuition rebate scheme, why 

would that exclude individuals that receive their training 

outside of the province? Or perhaps individuals — that through 

no fault of their own, good Saskatchewan people — have to 

study outside of the province because a program is not offered 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

One example, one example of that might be speech-language 

pathologists. Many speech-language pathologists have to go to 

the University of Alberta. So when I asked this question to the 

minister, I received no answer. Instead what’s happened 

through scrums outside of this Chamber, through other 

communication efforts of the government, the minister’s 

shortfallings, how the slack has been picked up by Executive 

Council. 

 

Because I could not get any information from the minister, I 

will ask the Premier because Executive Council has been 

fielding the questions. Everything’s being run through 

Executive Council. Was the omission of changes to the grad tax 

exemption program, the omission of people that have to study 

outside of province or people from outside the province wanting 

to come in, was that an intentional omission, Mr. Chair? To the 

Premier: was that an intentional omission or simply an 

oversight? Thank you. 

 

The Chair: — I will caution, though those are valid questions, I 

will read again that this is dealing with supplementary 

estimates, dealing with “additional funding . . . provided by 

Special Warrant for common law severance obligations and 

leave entitlement payments for former employees . . .” 

 

I will leave it if the Premier wants to answer it, but I believe 

that the question is outside of this, of the supplementary 

estimates. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, the impetus for that question, 

the reason for my concern is that, as the critic for a portfolio, I 

have received letters; I have received phone calls from people 

who want information on programs. They want information 

from ministers on program changes. That information has not 

been forthcoming. As a result, the details, the explaining has 

been picked up by Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Chair, the members opposite are asking how this relates to 

(EX08) and so on, House business, House research, all these — 

vote 10 — you can see in the book here. The expense is for the 

costs related to the transition of governments. With the 

transition of governments, there’s been program changes . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . It’s very true. And the ministers, the 

ministers, the ministers are not answering questions. Executive 

Council is picking up the work. They’re de facto those 

responsible for it. 

 

The Chair: — I know the Executive Council has always been a 

little more lively debate than it has been in other committees, 

but I would like to be able to hear the question put and also 

would like the answer to be heard. And I will expect that all 

members will just let the people that are on the floor talk. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, let me just say that I think 

that hon. member that just asked the question has a lot of, has a 

lot of promise. We don’t agree on a lot of things, I don’t think, 

about policy, but certainly we see a lot of . . . more so than the 

member for Prince Albert, I would say. A lot more promise than 

the — what’s the name of his constituency again? — than 

Prince Albert Northcote, more so perhaps than even some 

veteran members on the front benches of the government. 

 

But I would say this. I would say this. The question’s valid. It’s 

an important part of the discussion in terms of plans to recruit 

the young people to the province. 

 

It’d be a great question for, it would be a great question for 

question period. And if he can convince those cagey veterans on 

the front bench that have been here since I was in third-year 

university and since the hon. member was probably still in high 

school, who have been here for that long and won’t, and won’t 

let any of these new, young members ask questions, if he can 

convince the deputy leader from Nutana to allow him to ask this 

good question in question period, it would be dealt with. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, if I could just back up to a comment I made in 

a previous answer about whether or not premiers have ever 

dismissed or said that hon. members’ questions were lacking 

substance or perhaps wasted time. The former premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan, at the end of the last session that 

dealt principally with the Murdoch Carriere scandal, simply 

wrote off all of the questions as lacking substance in his 

summation over and over again in debate. And so again, I think 

the member from Nutana needs to be a bit more circumspect 

when it comes to the rhetoric she uses in this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the Premier for 

his willingness to answer questions and shedding some light on 

an area where a lot of people have been having some serious 

questions. 

 

One other area, Mr. Chair, that the people of Saskatchewan 

have had some questions about, and an area, Mr. Chair, where 

the ministry has not been providing information is tied to 

today’s announcement of the task force on housing, Mr. Chair, 

that will be operating. I would assume, Mr. Chair, that 

communications officers within Executive Council were 



364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

certainly involved in the press release. 

 

The Chair: — Sorry, I was just going to caution the member 

that even though these are valid questions, the budget will be 

tabled tomorrow. Some of these, you’ll be able to answer them. 

We will be sticking to the supplementary estimates. If you can 

tie your question to the supplementary estimates, I would ask 

the member to do that. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I apologize for the 

confusion, Mr. Chair. My light was off so I sat down and did 

not relinquish the floor. 

 

My question, Mr. Chair, is concerning the announcement today 

about a task force on housing. The news release that was issued, 

I am sure had . . . a role was played through the 

communications officer through Executive Council which is 

included in these estimates, some of the costs associated with 

that. 

 

And my question concerning the housing task force is that for 

some time the students in this province have had some serious 

questions about housing, questions about the availability of 

housing on campus and off campus. With an economy that is 

doing well, with the prosperity that we are experiencing at this 

time, there are certain pressures on the housing market. This 

press release, which was released today concerning the housing 

task force, which Executive Council played a role in the 

communications officer, I saw no reference on that press 

release, Mr. Chair, concerning the mandate of the task force in 

addressing student housing issues on campus. And my question 

to the Premier is, was that an oversight? Or was that an 

intentional omission? And will he be tabling the terms of 

reference for the task force on housing? 

 

The Chair: — I’m not quite sure how that ties into 

supplementary estimates although you did mention it a couple 

of times. But you are talking about programs. I will leave it if 

the Premier feels that it doesn’t deal with supplementary 

estimates. I will leave that up to the discretion of the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, you know, it’s interesting. 

The opposition asks for a certain amount of time for these 

estimates, and they come completely ill-prepared to deal with 

the matter at hand. They want to, they want to talk about all 

manner of all of these other issues — some that were 

announced today, an excellent announcement by the Minister of 

Social Services, employing the services of two former members 

from both sides of the aisle to deal with the housing taskforce. 

And it would have been the perfect opportunity to have this 

debate and discussion — it’s an important in the province — in 

question period on the day it was announced. 

 

But they didn’t have time for housing in Saskatoon or Regina 

— the issue — when it came to question period today. They 

didn’t have time for the issue of keeping young people in the 

province, when it came to question period today. 

 

We’re dealing with the estimates for Executive Council. I am 

prepared to answer all of the questions they have, and then to 

get into this general discussion. And I think it is unfair of those 

senior members opposite, some who have been here for a long 

time, to set up the new young member from Saskatoon as they 

have today. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I continue on 

questioning about the supplementary estimates, executive 

council vote 10. I appreciated the comments earlier today from 

the Minister of Social Services, recognizing the good work of 

the former government, particularly the former premier and the 

work that he did last year after the third quarter numbers were 

announced, and that we did some good work in terms of 

supporting inner-city communities — so, $110 million; $60 

million of which went to housing. 

 

The question I have for the Premier is, why was housing not a 

priority for this government, this Premier to go right into it? 

And why are those numbers not appearing in this 

supplementary estimates? 

 

The Chair: — Member, same thing. I’m quite not sure how 

that ties into supplementary estimates. I think the Premier has 

answered quite a few questions outside of that. I think this deals 

with a program. The budget will be announced tomorrow. 

 

Order. Order. The budget will be announced tomorrow; some of 

these deal with programs. The budget will be debated fiercely 

on this floor for the next month and a half, and I think that’s 

where some of these questions need to be directed. Right now 

we are just dealing with supplementary estimates. I would ask 

the member if he has a question dealing with Executive Council 

supplementary estimates. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour says that they 

were studying essential services legislation for some time. The 

former Health critic and now Minister of Health said that 

legislated essential services was not necessary. The Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour said that the 

Ministry of Justice drafted the legislation for essential services. 

Now we hear that the government had hired someone else, a 

Mr. Wilson, to do this. 

 

The question for the Premier. There seems to be quite a bit of 

confusion as to what direction the government is taking in this 

area. Could the Premier answer as to what instructions he 

actually gave to the minister. 

 

The Chair: — The same thing. We’re dealing with 

supplementary estimates, not with ministries here. If you have a 

question that deals with supplementary estimates, Executive 

Council, the chief of communications, cabinet secretary, cabinet 

planning, the funding was provided by special warrant for 

common law severance obligations and leave entitlement 

payments for former employees, the Executive Council for 

costs related to the transaction of government — I will ask the 

member, if you have a question that deals with Executive 

Council, to ask it. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I tabled an email the other day which 

directly linked Executive Council with these issues. Mr. Chair, 

the email directly linked the Executive Council with these 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

decisions. My question to the Premier is, what direction did he 

give in regards to these issues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think I earlier heard the 

previous member from Saskatoon who was asking questions 

say that this was all about choices. I hope that next time the 

opposition is preparing for estimates that they choose to get 

ready for estimates, that they choose . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I hope that they choose to come before this 

Assembly and prepare to use the people’s time at the highest 

value knowing full well that there are important issues to 

discuss here. There are issues of severance. My predecessor, the 

member for Riversdale, when he was the outgoing premier — 

and I have commended him publicly for this — made the right 

decision. They severed all of their political staff in this building. 

That’s a part of this estimate. We may want to talk about the 

cost there. We may want to talk about the scope of it. 

 

The hon. Member, when he was the premier, chose to fire every 

one of his employees including secretaries, some of them brand 

new to the building who probably weren’t necessarily very 

political at all, but they chose to sever them all. That would be a 

good question to ask. 

 

What’s a part of these estimates that we’re talking about today 

is a $199,000 consulting contract paid by that former premier, 

the now Leader of the Opposition, to the husband of a former 

NDP cabinet minister. There is $18,000 of a remainder payment 

in addition to the $199,000 paid to the husband of a former 

NDP cabinet minister. We could talk about that. These are in 

the estimates. Alternatively and to be fair, you could also talk 

about costs of the new government that are related estimates. 

You can talk about relocation costs and moving employees to 

work for the new government. We can talk about the 

administration costs of estimates. 

 

These are the kinds of questions that, well, a responsible and 

prepared opposition would come prepared to ask and fairly, and 

fairly that a government would need and a premier and with the 

help of officials better be prepared to answer. But that didn’t 

happen today. Probably of the — I don’t know — 15 questions 

asked today, 20 questions asked. There were maybe 3 that were 

on point, and this is precisely why, Mr. Chairman, the people of 

the province had enough of them and they voted for positive 

change on November 7. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don’t believe 

my questions are maybe as adversarial in nature, but I do have 

some questions about the estimates, and I do want to thank the 

Premier’s officials for being here today. Now it stems out of 

committee last night and rather forthright sharing from the 

Minister of Education last night which I thank him for and I 

thanked him for last night as well. 

 

Speaking to the piece of the Education property tax relief, I 

believe three point . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What number is that? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Line number (ED09), $3.2 million. Now 

this is to, I guess, is to address unbudgeted dollars. From our 

government, it has been announced that, you know, it was a 2 

per cent increase and also some economies of growth. 

 

What I would like to ask, but was also clarified in our 

committee meeting last night was that we will be seeing a 2 per 

cent increase in the coming year on property tax relief and that 

we’re aware that there’s a Legislative Secretary which has been 

appointed to study this task of more long-term, more 

substantive property tax relief which property owners and 

people of the province are asking for. But what was clear and 

what was . . . by the minister last night, is that he is comfortable 

with that, I guess, the implementation of that report, the more 

substantive broader changes to come until 2011. 

 

So my question for the Premier is, does he share the same 

comfort? Is he comfortable with the plans from the Reiter report 

of the Legislative Secretary to be implemented in 2011? 

 

The Chair: — So remember. This question, I believe, is to deal 

with education committee. I haven’t seen where you could have 

tied this to Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I misunderstood it then. I thought that 

vote . . . 

 

The Chair: — If the Premier wishes to respond, I would let 

him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Again, Mr. Chairman, this is not on point. 

It’s not part of estimates. We’re going to have the chance to 

debate all of these issues throughout the course of the session, 

throughout the budget debate, then through Premier’s estimates 

and the estimates that each minister will appear before 

committees appropriately and defend. 

 

However, the hon. member wants to talk about education 

portion of property tax relief. Fair enough. We can talk about 

that, I guess, though it doesn’t relate necessarily to the matter at 

hand. 

 

Certainly the question’s been asked. And the answer would go 

something like, for I don’t know how many years and how 

many elections, the NDP leader — first Mr. Romanow and then 

the current member for Riversdale — would appear before any 

convention that would have them, but principally municipal 

conventions like SARM, and he would make solemn promises 

to the people of this province that his government would deliver 

meaningful education tax relief for the province. They said the 

status quo is not on. 

 

There was this report commission by Ray Boughen, an eminent 

citizen from the city of Moose Jaw, who concluded that you 

could provide some education tax relief, but you would have to 

increase the PST [provincial sales tax] by a point. And what did 

the government do with that report, Mr. Chairman? Well they 

cherry-picked. They cherry-picked the nasty part. They 



366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

increased the PST a point, provided zero property tax relief to 

the people of the province. 

 

Then we saw through a number of rebate programs that were 

subsequently clawed back by reassessment, again we saw the 

NDP’s failure to deliver on solemn promises for meaningful 

property tax relief in the province. 

 

Then in the election that we just came through, there was the 

NDP talking about increasing the amount of education property 

tax relief in the province should they get elected on November 

7, ’07, but for whom? Was any of the money going to be 

earmarked for agricultural producers in the province? Was there 

one single dime of relief for where the problem is most acute, 

the education portion of property tax on farm land? The answer 

to that is no. 

 

So if that member or any member over there wants to debate 

their track record versus what you’ll see from us tomorrow in 

our budget, the beginning of our track record on property tax 

relief, we say bring it on. We’re here to serve all of the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, rural and urban, north and 

south, and that will be the nature of our property tax relief 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, any objective observer of this 

Assembly would wonder what has just happened. All afternoon, 

all afternoon the Premier says he will not address subjects 

which are not part of Executive Council estimates. All 

afternoon he refuses to answer questions on that basis. Now all 

of a sudden just as we get close to the end of this discussion, he 

now thinks it’s time to talk about other issues, and so we get a 

tirade about education tax on property in the former 

government. 

 

Well isn’t that interesting, Mr. Chair. Won’t answer questions 

about polling, won’t answer questions about why he fired 

valuable public servants or how much this is going to cost the 

people of Saskatchewan, won’t answer questions about how he 

and his Executive Council and his transition team have been 

influencing labour legislation that’s being developed in this 

province, can’t stand up in this legislature and talk about a 

housing announcement that was made this morning because he 

says that’s all out of order. 

 

But during his comments, he’s quick to refer to social service 

issues. He’s quick to stand up and try and re-fight an election 

campaign that was held in November. He’s got to get it through 

his head, Mr. Chair. He’s now the Premier. And you can’t get 

away with this. You can’t get away with this. 

 

Now I know his friend in Ottawa tries to do this with 

committees. They’ve got a playbook down there in Ottawa, and 

the playbook in Ottawa tells the Chair if the opposition’s asking 

something difficult, shut the thing down. Shut it in committee. 

Use the rules. Shut it down. That’s the kind of playbook they’ve 

got in Ottawa, and I’m afraid that’s the kind of playbook that 

this Premier’s trying to insist on in the legislature of 

Saskatchewan. 

Well it won’t work. It won’t work, Mr. Chair. The people of 

Saskatchewan now look to this group of men and women to 

give them the leadership and to give them accountability, 

answers to the questions that they have being asked by 

members of the opposition. I too had not heard a premier 

suggest that a member’s questions are a waste of time, a waste 

of time. 

 

Now I will then go back to the Premier, now that he’s much 

more forthcoming in his answers, now that he has opened the 

door in these supplementary estimates to any field of 

discussion, since he’s railed on about the property education 

tax. Let me go back to where we started. 

 

Can he tell us why, can he tell us why, specifically, long-term 

public servants were terminated? And don’t give me this 

argument, Mr. Chair. He doesn’t need to give me the argument 

about renewal. He doesn’t need to give me that argument. Let 

him explain, let him explain, Mr. Chair, why it is . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I know that we’re 

getting near the end of estimates, and I know it always gets a 

little more noisier, but I would ask that it be quiet so that I can 

hear the question and the answer. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, my question to the Premier is to do 

with the firing of valuable public servants. And I tell you no one 

is going to believe that John Wright, that John Wright with his 

experience in government couldn’t be part of a renewing that 

the Premier seeks. Nobody’s going to believe that. 

 

I want the Premier to explain why it is that he has fired these 

valuable public servants who have this long-term experience. 

And then will he explain for this Chamber, since he wants to 

explain everything now, will he explain precisely what it is that 

his Deputy Premier meant when his Deputy Premier was out in 

the rotunda speaking to journalists — when I’ve heard him live 

on province-wide radio — saying that a test now of the public 

service of Saskatchewan is whether or not they share and agree 

with the philosophy of the Premier? That’s what his Deputy 

Premier said on many occasions. 

 

And today is an opportunity for the Premier to tell us what does 

that precisely mean. What does that precisely mean? Does it 

mean that you now need to pass not only the political litmus test 

of the Saskatchewan Party; now you’ve got to pass the litmus 

test of the Premier? 

 

So would he please address again why it is that he chose to fire 

a host of valuable public servants and what it is of his 

philosophy now that is the litmus test on whether you can serve 

in a senior public service position in the province of 

Saskatchewan — those two very specific questions, Mr. Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, permit me to deal with 

some inaccuracies in the preamble from the hon. member for 

Riversdale, including his assertion that none of the questions — 

though they’ve all, though most of them have been out of order 

— have been answered. Certainly the last, the last, the last 

answer is an example of that. 

 

There was also a question on polling, that was not relevant to 

this estimates, asked. And it was answered. There was a 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

question with respect to assistant deputy ministers and whether 

or not they have been hired with respect to appointments or 

competition — asked and answered. There was a question with 

respect to order in council appointment of associate deputy 

ministers — also not part of these estimates, also not part of 

these estimates — asked and then it was answered. 

 

And his first question with respect to Mr. Wright, the long-time 

civil servant in the province, severed from the Ministry of 

Health, not related to Executive Council estimates, was also 

asked and answered, even though they were not part of the 

work of this committee. 

 

And it speaks, I think it speaks volumes, about the degree and 

the quality of opposition that the people of the province have 

now. I’ve been watching some letters to the editors all across 

Saskatchewan questioning whether or not that opposition has 

their priorities right when it comes to work in this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

But what I will say in answer, in direct answer to the hon. 

member’s questions — which again do not relate to the matter 

at hand — but our government will pursue change based either 

on renewal, in the case of our effort to attract new women and 

men to our civil service, and renew and respond to the new 

mandate that we have received from the people of the province 

on November 7. 

 

And if there are those like the former NDP campaign chairman 

that’s working within a Crown corporation, there’s probably 

going to be a change there as well, Mr. Chairman. It makes 

complete sense. And when you look at the numbers and you 

compare transition today with this government, compare it to 

the bludgeoning of the civil service that occurred by the 

members opposite when they won in ’91, and let’s review the 

record. 

 

On the November 29, 1991 after the NDP assumed office, they 

fired the deputy minister of Social Services. In 1991 they fired 

the presidents of SEDCO [Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation], STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company], the Crown Management Board. 

 

On December 3 they fired the president of SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance]. On December 6 they fired nine 

departmental staff, were dismissed. On the 7th, six more 

government jobs axed by the NDP. On December 10, six 

SaskPower employees were also dismissed. On December 14 

the deputy minister of Health was dismissed. All of these 

questions are about the deputy minister of Health. 

 

On December 14, by a government for which he sat on the 

Executive Council — the hon. member and so did his seatmate 

— on December 14, 1991, they fired the then erstwhile 

hard-working deputy minister of Health, because I would 

assume, because I would assume, his government — the 

government of Mr. Romanow — was pursuing renewal. 

 

On December 19 they fired Ted Urness, head of the 

Saskatchewan Liquor Board. The NDP had fired, by December 

23, 200 employees of provincial departments, of Crown 

corporations. 

 

And when asked about it, the then premier, the leader of that 

party that’s been sent to those benches by the people of the 

province, said this. He said if they are politically incompatible 

with the NDP administration, quote: “it makes the person not 

competent to carry out the job.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And moreover, and moreover if the member 

for Riversdale would have looked behind him and have a look 

at his former Justice minister, the now Justice critic, he will be 

looking square into the visage of the young erstwhile New 

Democrat whose job it was to deliberately and callously and 

without much class, frankly, fire professional civil servants in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:30] 

 

You know, Mr. Chairman, if that member, if that member is 

going to lecture any government, any government at all, or any 

premier about transition, he ought to call the former member for 

Riversdale, Mr. Romanow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. I will ask the members to come to 

order so we can carry on. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this will be my last question 

because . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the opposition . . . the 

government members seem to, are encouraging me. This will be 

my last, Chair. We made an agreement; we’ll stick to that 

agreement. 

 

Now we just had a rant. We just had a rant and then we had this 

great round of applause from the cheering section over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — But do you know what, do you know what we 

didn’t have, Mr. Chair? You know what we didn’t have? We 

didn’t have an answer to the question. We have rants, we have 

cheers, but we have a Premier who won’t answer the question. 

 

Now, Mr. Chair, the Premier rants on. He goes back to 1991. 

I’d be very pleased to debate 1991. I’d be very pleased to 

debate the 1980s when, by the way, he was working in this 

building at the same time I was elected, Mr. Chair. So let’s go 

back if he wants to debate 1991. I’ll tell you the difference. I’ll 

tell you the difference. 

 

When we came to government in 1991, we had to do what I did 

before we left government, and that’s to remove the political 

staff. We did it before we came to government. They did not. 

They did not. Our new government in 1991 had to remove all 

the political staff back in those days. That’s the difference, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

But here’s the question the Premier refuses to answer all 



368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

afternoon. Right from start to finish, he refuses to answer this 

question. Maybe he’ll do it this time. His Deputy Premier, at the 

time he was busy firing the public servants of Saskatchewan 

said, and said on more than one occasion, that the public service 

of Saskatchewan, in his view, one of the criteria for their 

involvement should be their willingness to be in agreement with 

the philosophy of the Premier. He said it many times. 

 

I invite the Premier to make it very clear to the people of 

Saskatchewan and the public service of Saskatchewan, just 

what does this mean? And where in the selection process, 

because clearly, we’re not having competitions. We’ve learned 

that this afternoon. Clearly we’re not having competitions any 

more. We hire our friends without competition. So I guess for 

those who are going to be hired, how does this work? How does 

this work? 

 

Will the Premier explain to this legislature how it is that his 

philosophy now is part of the criteria on whether you can serve 

in the public service of Saskatchewan? That’s the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, let me be very, let me be 

very, very clear about the intention of this government with 

respect to the civil service. We signalled this intention, by the 

way, some time ago when we were still in opposition, that what 

we seek for Saskatchewan is a civil service that is respected by 

the government and by the opposition, that what we seek is a 

professional civil service that is afforded opportunities to 

advance, that’s afforded opportunities for training. 

 

We signalled — more than signalling it — we backed up that 

intention when we campaigned on a platform that included 

increased funding for the Shoyama-Johnson institute of public 

policy at the University of Regina. And there’s only one more 

sleep to the budget, but we’ll see if that’s one of the many, 

many campaign promises that will be kept in that budget 

tomorrow. 

 

We seek for Saskatchewan to attract women and men from all 

over the province and outside Saskatchewan to help us, to help 

us renew the government, to help us deliver on our plan to 

secure the future, to help us deliver on our plan to make sure 

Saskatchewan is ready for growth. That is what we seek. These 

are the criteria for the civil service in Saskatchewan. And it will 

be a far cry — it already has been — our transition process has 

been a far cry. 

 

And I should say, I want to clarify something in terms of a 

previous answer about releasing the names of severed 

employees, that they are considered . . . the severed employee 

situation, their track record is considered part of their 

employment history and is considered personal. That’s a legal 

opinion we have. Once severance settlements are reached, then 

everything can be released. And we will do so, and we will do 

so at that time . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, well what a 

smoking gun that is. 

 

The hon. member for Riversdale is going, oh. What I just said, 

for the record, Mr. Chairman, to clarify an answer, is that when 

severance, when severance settlements are reached and agreed 

to by the parties — by the same civil servants that he purports 

to stand and defend, by the way — when their information is 

not in a sensitive state, then we’ll release it for the public 

record, including the costs incurred by the government. 

 

What we will not see in terms of transition from this 

government that we saw from the government that he was a part 

of, we won’t see articles from January, like we saw January 4, 

1992 that reported Saskatchewan Liquor Board employee — a 

single mom, a single mom — who was dismissed on Christmas 

Eve. You didn’t and you won’t see that from this government. 

You won’t see articles in the paper from January 11, 1992 that 

six more government employees were fired, including the 

president of Crop Insurance. They all lost their jobs. You won’t 

see articles from January 16, 1992 or like that article that 

highlighted the NDP government release of 45 more fired 

employees, including the Chair of the Public Service 

Commission, or 10 SaskEnergy employees fired, or 10 

SaskEnergy employees fired on January 23, or three SaskWater 

employees fired on January 28, or SGI claims managers fired 

and reported in the paper on January 29. 

 

You won’t see, you won’t see the kind of conduct that this 

province saw, that this legislature saw from the former minister 

of Justice, now the Justice critic for the opposition, whose job, 

whose job on behalf of those members opposite was to 

perpetrate this kind of bludgeoning of the civil service. You will 

not see that from our government. What you will see is our 

commitment for renewal. 

 

There will be changes to be sure. There was an election 

November 7. People made a choice. And those changes will 

reflect the priorities of the province, and that is a new 

government intent on ensuring that we sustain the growth, that 

we are ready for growth, and that we are building the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — Executive Council, vote 10, supplementary 

estimates for March, central management and services (EX01) 

1,286,000; 576,000, is that sum agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — The sum is carried. Premier’s office (EX07) 

314,000, is that sum agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Chief of communications (EX03) 204,000, is 

that sum agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. House business and research (EX08) 

315,000, is that sum agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is the cabinet secretariat 420,000 and 

cabinet planning unit (EX04) 527,000? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 18, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

The Chair: — Carried. Committee resolutions: 

 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 

months ending March 31, 2008, the following sums, for 

Executive Council, 3,645,000. 

 

Is that sum agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Vote 10 agreed to.] 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would move General Revenue Fund, no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2008, the sum of $160,195,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Regarding resolution no. 1: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2008, the sum of $160,195,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is that sum agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. I move resolution no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 

the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2008, which to the extent that they can remain unexpended 

for the fiscal year are also granted for the fiscal year 

ending on March 31, 2009, the sum of $9,000,000 to be 

granted out of the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Chair: — Will the members take resolution no. 2 as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. If I may, through 

you, I’d like to thank the members of the Executive Council 

staff who joined us to answer questions today: Garnet, Bonita, 

and Joe. Thank you for your attendance. 

 

I want to thank hon. members opposite for their questions and 

the debate that ensued. I know we’ll do this all over again in 

just a month or so. And I know in answer to the member from 

Nutana’s questions, I know they will be better prepared, and so 

will I, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — The loyal opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I want to 

join with the Premier in extending our thanks and the thanks of 

all members to the officials who have joined us today. And 

whenever we thank Executive Council officials, we know that 

we’re thanking not just those who are in the room with us, but 

others who work both in Executive Council and through them 

to all the public servants of Saskatchewan. And it will be the 

anticipation of this opposition that when we do come back to 

the Premier’s estimates or any other estimates, that they will 

come better prepared to answer the questions. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and ask for leave to 

sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee rise and 

that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to certain 

resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. Is that motion agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions and has instructed me to report the 

same and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 



370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2008 

Clerk: — First and second readings of the resolutions. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker 

 

The Speaker: — Later this day. Minister of Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 16 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 1) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — By leave of the Assembly, I move that 

Bill No. 16, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 1) be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has asked for leave 

to move that Bill No. 16, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 1) 

be now introduced and read the first time. Is leave of the 

Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Granted. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly and under rule 72(2), I move that the Bill be now 

read a second and a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave of the . . . Order. Is leave of the 

Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill 

No. 16, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 1) be now read a 

second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Clerk: —Second and third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — His Honour is here for Royal Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 16:47 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. In the 

name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 16 - The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 1) 

 

to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:48.] 

 

The Speaker: — Pray be seated. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to accept the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:49.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 339 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 339 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 339 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 339 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 339 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 339 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 339 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 340 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 340 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 340 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 340 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 340 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Regional Economic Development Association Week 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 340 

 2008 Global Citizen of the Year 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 341 

 Lakeland Citizens of the Year 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 341 

 Spring Free From Racism 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 341 

 Campfire Tax 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 341 

 New Home for the Moose Jaw Pottery Club 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 342 

 Federal By-election Results 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 342 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Prince Albert Pulp Mill 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 342 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 343 

 Federal Funds for Child Care 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 344 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 344 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 

 Labour Relations Board 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 345 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Flood Protection Funding for Fishing and Waldsea Lakes 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 347 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 348 

 Task Force on Housing Affordability and Availability 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 348 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 349 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 14 — The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Repeal Act 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 

 Bill No. 15 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 350 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 350 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 350 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 3 — The Potash Development Repeal Act 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 351 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 352 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund Supplementary Estimates — March 

 Executive Council Vote 10 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 354 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 354 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 359 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 362 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 364 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 364 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 365 

 Motions for Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 369 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 369 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 16 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 1) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 370 

ROYAL ASSENT ............................................................................................................................................................................. 370 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


