




















































Hansard: March 31, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 17A  MONDAY, MARCH 31, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 405 

 March 31, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure, an 

honour for me to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, His Excellency David Wilkins, the 

ambassador from the United States to Canada. Seated with him 

in your gallery today is Mr. Danny Fennell, the post deputy 

principal officer with the US [United States] consulate in 

Calgary and of course our own Deborah Saum, the chief of 

protocol for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, later this day we’re going to have the chance, the 

ambassador and I, to meet and discuss some of the very 

important issues that present themselves before our province as 

a major energy supplier, for instance, and the interests of course 

of the United States. 

 

It’ll be I think the third or fourth time I’ve had the chance to 

meet with the ambassador, and each time I very much enjoyed 

the discussion that has ensued, enjoyed the opportunity to hear 

of the interests of the United States with respect to 

Saskatchewan and our trading relationship, and also to be able 

to present some issues on behalf of the province. 

 

No doubt we’ll be doing that here this afternoon again, whether 

it’s the issue of country-of-origin labelling or the huge 

opportunity that presents Saskatchewan and our friends in the 

United States around energy independence, around energy 

security for North America. Mr. Speaker, we’ll look forward to 

the chance to discuss again how Saskatchewan sells more oil, 

exports more oil to the US than even Kuwait, that we are the 

providers of up to 6 per cent of the electricity in the United 

States that is uranium-based. We look forward to these 

discussions. 

 

We have found we agree on much. Not so much on the right 

NFL [National Football League] team to cheer for, and I hope 

to be able to make some progress on that issue as well with the 

ambassador later this day. Will all members join me in 

welcoming him to this Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the Premier, on behalf of the opposition, in welcoming 

Excellency David Wilkins to the legislature this afternoon, and 

Mr. Danny Fennell from the office in Calgary — welcome 

again. 

 

Ambassador Wilkins has shown since his appointment 

significant interest in Western Canada and in Saskatchewan. He 

has made himself available to Western premiers’ meetings, he 

has met with us at western governors’ meetings, and has always 

shown a very significant interest in the West and in 

Saskatchewan. And so I, on behalf of the opposition, would 

invite all members again to join me in welcoming His 

Excellency David Wilkins to our legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Enterprise and 

Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 

pleasure on this day, the first meeting of the initial board of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, for me to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly the initial 

board of Enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I start with the Minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations. And the other members in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d ask to rise briefly as I introduce them: member at large, Ms. 

Crystal McLeod; in the Aboriginal category, Mr. Gary Merasty; 

agricultural category, Mr. Bill Cooper; in the rural and north 

category, Mr. Dave Marit; urban municipal category, Mr. 

Michael Fougere; in the co-ops category, Ms. Myrna Bentley; 

in the post-secondary category, Mr. Mark Frison; in the natural 

resources category, Mr. Craig Lothian; in the labour category, 

Mr. Hugh Wagner; and in the business category and the Deputy 

Chair of the new board, Mr. Gavin Semple. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be associated with this board, 

and I expect that they will produce great results for the province 

of Saskatchewan. And I ask all members to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join on behalf of 

the official opposition in welcoming the initial board of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. I have read that the original meaning 

of the Greek word idiot was someone who only applied 

themselves to their own private affairs. Here we have today 

visiting us a group of people who have a history of public 

service long before putting their names forward and agreeing to 

serve in this capacity. 

 

We should take every opportunity we have to thank people who 

volunteer in democracy to engage in discussion and to engage 

in public service, and I want to join with the minister in 

welcoming the members of Enterprise Saskatchewan to the 

legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly, an individual seated in the Speaker’s 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

gallery. That is of course Avery Kelly. 

 

Avery Kelly is working with me out of the legislative internship 

program. I have very much enjoyed my time working with her. 

I find her to be very sharp, a very quick writer, a quick 

researcher. She comes from the University of Regina where she 

is just about finished a political science degree. She has worked 

in the financial services sector before that. I know that the 

University of Regina and the Faculty of Arts there takes a great 

deal of pride in terms of Avery participating in the legislative 

internship program. 

 

She is a world traveller. She’s got an avid and an active interest 

in the world around her, but also as public affairs unfold here in 

Saskatchewan and in Regina, Mr. Speaker, in food security, in 

terms of the environment, in terms of the First Nations and 

Métis issues that we’ve been working on, in terms of critic 

duties that I have to bring to bear. All that, Mr. Speaker, and 

she’s from the north end of Regina originally. 

 

So I’d like all members to join me in welcoming Avery Kelly to 

her Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I present this 

petition on behalf of my constituents in Moose Jaw, and it’s in 

support of improved health care services and the expansion at 

the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to present on behalf of Moose 

Jaw and its surrounding area. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present 

several pages of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on 

behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning 

the withdrawal of the proposed essential services legislation and 

the withdrawal of the proposed amendments to The Trade 

Union Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Davidson, Kenaston, 

Regina, and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, so I present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise and 

submit several pages of petitions concerning the provincial 

government’s recent decision to withdraw financial support 

from the much needed Station 20 West project in Saskatoon. 

These petitioners have a sincere hope that the government will 

reconsider this ill-advised decision. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these citizens come from across the city in Saskatoon. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Women’s Equality Dinner 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on the 

evening of March 27 in Regina, I had the distinct honour of 

joining over 100 guests for a dinner to launch a year-long 

national campaign by the Canadian Labour Congress to address 

women’s economic inequality. Hosted by the Canadian Labour 

Congress, the Regina & District Labour Council, and the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, the dinner, themed Raising 

the Wage, Closing the Gap, included a program of 

entertainment and speakers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to share remarks with two 

other panelists, Jenn Ruddy, a professor of women’s studies at 

the University of Regina, and Cindy McCallum-Miller, a strong 

leader in the Canadian Union of Postal Workers. Mr. Speaker, 

we acknowledged the existence of a wage gap between men and 

women and the significant gender differences in access to 

income and influence. We also considered the women’s 

movement as a whole and the need to close the wage gap 

between men and women once and for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all the members of this House to 

join with extending support to the organizers and the need to 

advance women’s equality in our own province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

Northcote. 

 

Hockey Greats 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday, 

March 19, athletes across the province were honoured at the 

Saskatchewan Sports Awards here at the Conexus Arts Centre 

in Regina. I’d like to congratulate the winners and recognize the 

efforts of one group in particular today. 

 

Today is also a birthday day for Mr. Gordie Howe, 

Saskatchewan’s native and hockey great. He’s 80 years old 

today, Mr. Speaker. Howe played 32 professional seasons and 

is a role model for young hockey players not only in this 

province, but around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Mintos AAA Midget Hockey 

Club took home the Team of the Year Award at the Sports 

Awards and are most deserving of this honour. 

 

Following the national championship in 2006, fans had high 

expectations for 2007 and the Mintos did not disappoint. After 

placing first in league playoffs, they went on to capture the 

provincial title for the second consecutive season. At the 2007 

Western regionals, the Mintos again placed first, sending them 

to the national championships in Red Deer, Alberta. Then, Mr. 

Speaker, the Mintos went on to do what no other AAA team in 

Canada has ever done. They won the national championship for 

a second season in a row. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that 21 young men from small town 

Saskatchewan did what no one else could do or expected is a 

true statement of the value of hard work, determination, and 

teamwork. For the young men and the entire city of Prince 

Albert, 2007 truly was their season of dreams. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, as MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for Prince Albert Carlton, I ask all members to join 

in with me in personally recognizing and congratulating the 

Prince Albert Mintos AAA Midget Hockey Club on a job well 

done, as well as wishing Mr. Hockey, Gordie Howe, a very 

happy 80th birthday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Constituent’s Contributions to Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to tell 

you about a constituent of mine, Robert Hinitt, who has done so 

much to promote the arts in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Hinitt was raised in Saskatoon by his mother, a single 

parent and a former costume maker who supported her family 

as a milliner and a seamstress. Mr. Hinitt completed degrees in 

French, English, and education at the University of 

Saskatchewan, Laval, and the Sorbonne in Paris. 

 

He was a teacher of French, English, and drama for 31 years in 

the city. Mr. Hinitt developed a lifelong passion for designing, 

directing, and teaching, and teaching theatre. 

During his tenure at Aden Bowman, he designed a theatre for 

the school, drawing his inspiration from time he spent in 

Stratford working in the set, property, and design shop. Castle 

Theatre was the result — a 600-seat theatre set in a circular 

design, based loosely on the Stratford festival stage. Completed 

in 1966, it is still in use today. 

 

He was a founding member of the Saskatoon Gateway Players, 

the Saskatoon Summer Players, and served on the first board of 

directors for Persephone Theatre, a professional theatre 

company in Saskatoon. He has won numerous awards including 

the Order of Canada and the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

In Eastview, Mr. Hinitt will perhaps be remembered best for his 

wonderland displays at his home every Christmas. He used 

these displays to raise funds for charity. Every Christmas cars 

full of children with their parents would be bumper to bumper 

as they drove past Mr. Hinitt’s home on Wiggins Avenue. It 

became an annual holiday tradition for my family as well, 

Saskatoon families, and we’re going to miss his beautiful 

creations. I wish him very well in his retirement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Wheel Challenge for Everyone 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 

weekend I had the pleasure of attending a wonderful 

fundraising event. On Saturday the Saskatchewan branch of the 

Canadian Paraplegic Association held their 10th annual 

fundraiser — Regina Wheel Challenge for Everyone — which 

was hosted by Craig Adam and was held at the new Centre for 

Kinesiology, Health and Sport at the University of Regina. 

 

Teams of four to six members had a great time while supporting 

those with physical disabilities. This event raised over $22,000, 

which will stay in Saskatchewan to help improve the lives of 

people right here at home. 

 

This event celebrated its 10th anniversary. This is a testament to 

its popularity and success. Saskatchewan residents are well 

known for our charitable spirit, and the continued support of 

this event showcased this. To that end, our budget helped out by 

providing over $20 million to support the inclusion of persons 

with disabilities in the social and economic life of our great 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope all members will join me in congratulating 

the organizers and the participants of this year’s event for a job 

well done for a great cause. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Red Cross Month 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, March is Red Cross Month, and 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

this is an opportunity to both thank the Red Cross and to raise 

awareness of the great work the Red Cross does in our 

communities, our province, our country, and the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Red Cross provides many services in our 

communities and province, from blood collection services to 

first aid and CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation] training to 

water safety and child care programs. 

 

The Red Cross makes a difference in our lives. The Red Cross 

provides emergency services, both here and abroad. Many 

Saskatchewan citizens help in these very important relief 

efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Red Cross Month it is appropriate to praise 

the Red Cross for the work they do, and thank them for the hard 

work they will do in the future. Mr. Speaker, victims of tragedy 

around the world have seen first-hand the work of the Red 

Cross. The Red Cross works in difficult circumstances where 

the need is the greatest. 

 

The Red Cross has a long and proven history of delivering those 

services in times of war and peace. It has a proud past, an 

important present, and a very bright future. Mr. Speaker, the 

world is a better place because of the Red Cross. We thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

More Good News for Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well well well 

— more good news for Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan is 

expected to take the lead in economic growth in the country. 

Not Alberta, Mr. Speaker, but Saskatchewan. For the first time 

in years, there are more than 1 million people living in 

Saskatchewan. The last time we were at 1 million people was 

the same year one of the members opposite was elected as 

Leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party], which is also 

when our population started to go down. Coincidence? I think 

not. 

 

There are almost 500,000 people working in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker — a new record. We lead the country in several 

important economic indicators. Saskatchewan is number one in 

Canada in wholesale trade, international exports, construction 

permits, residential building permits, retail sales, and new 

vehicle sales. The Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business says Saskatchewan business owners are the most 

optimistic in Western Canada and second in the nation. 

 

The stats are in, Mr. Speaker, and they paint a picture that 

members opposite must find hard to believe. Why is that? Five 

years ago, one NDP MLA was quoted as saying economic 

growth above the national average was, quote, “more wishful 

thinking than statistically attainable.” In 2007, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan economy grew above the national average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome the members opposite to a 

Saskatchewan where the impossible is possible, where budgets 

are balanced, where economic prosperity is shared with all, and 

where we are ready for growth. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

TheatreFest 2008 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Community theatre is alive and well in the province of 

Saskatchewan. From March 23 to March 29, The Battlefords 

played host to re-enacting TheatreFest 2008. Seven nights, 

seven plays from seven community theatre groups proved to be 

enlightening, entertaining, and exciting. Groups from The 

Battlefords, Prince Albert, Milestone, Kerrobert, Swift Current, 

and Yorkton produced dramas and comedies in competition. 

And everyone who attended were treated to the very best 

community theatre that this province has to offer. 

 

Congratulations to the major winners, Mr. Speaker: winning 

entry, The Battlefords Community Players; best director, Donna 

Challis, Battlefords Community Players; best actress, Sarah 

Dymund, Battlefords Community Players; best actor, Jim 

Walls, Battlefords Community Players. Mr. Speaker, also 

runner-up winning entry, runner-up director, best visual 

presentation, best characterization, and best supporting actor all 

went to Swift Current Little Theatre. 

 

For 74 years, community theatre groups in Saskatchewan have 

come together in competition, making TheatreFest the 

longest-running event of its kind in Canada. 

 

I urge all members to express their appreciation to Theatre 

Saskatchewan, its president, Lynn Wagner; the co-hosts of the 

event, Donna Challis and Barb O’Neal; the volunteers, the 

sponsors, and the participants who made this week-long event 

rewarding for all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Funding for Station 20 West  

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

questions will be to the Premier, and they will concern the 

government’s position on the funding to Station 20 in 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, rarely have, I think, we’ve seen such 

an immediate public outpouring of sentiment calling upon the 

government to reverse its decision regarding the funding of 

Station 20. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within days nearly 3,000 people have become 

friends of the Facebook site, the Friends of Station 20. Petitions 

have emerged. I know that cards and letters are being sent to the 

Premier in mail and by email. I know that in pulpits in churches 

across Saskatoon yesterday this was an issue. 

 

My question is to the Premier. Will he put this decision on hold, 

on hold, and respond to this public sentiment that has indicated 

to the government that this is the wrong decision? Will he put 

the decision on hold? 

 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on March 19 our Minister of Finance delivered a 

budget that is being so well received around the province it’s 

absolutely amazing. But during that budget process, decisions 

are made. Our government at that time — a new government — 

reviewed this project, Station 20, and decided at that time it was 

not a good use of taxpayers’ money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for many different reasons, for many different 

reasons, from the auditor’s perspective who had showed 

concerns with this project to individuals throughout the 

community of Saskatoon, there were many individuals that 

showed concern, not to mention the absolute deficit that that 

former government left us in when it comes to capital projects 

within the province. There are many, many arguments as to 

where this money could be better used. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question again will be to the 

Premier, and I want to say to the Premier and to the legislature 

this afternoon that this project — this Station 20 project 

bringing together health services, food services, housing 

services — this project, Mr. Speaker, is a project of the 

community, a project that had its genesis within the community. 

It’s not a project of the province of Saskatchewan. It is a project 

of the community of Saskatoon. 

 

Again my question goes to the Premier. Will he put this 

ill-advised decision made by himself and his cabinet colleagues, 

to destroy the funding for Station 20, will he put it on hold and 

will he meet, will he meet with the proponents of Station 20, 

with those community members who are leading this project to 

discuss this project because the people of Saskatoon know how 

significant and important this project is. Will the Premier put 

the decision on hold, and will he meet with that group of 

individuals? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I had mentioned in 

my previous answer, the budget that was read on March 19 

contains a number of initiatives that are good for not only all of 

the province, but the city of Saskatoon. Whether it’s $500,000 

for the Saskatoon Downtown Youth Centre Inc. to purchase two 

more houses for my house, Mr. Speaker; whether it’s 500,000 

for school lunch or anti-hunger programs in community 

schools; $8 million in new money to combat gang activity, Mr. 

Speaker, were contained in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are many, many other initiatives that go towards dealing 

with hunger and health within our communities — 5.5 million 

for 80 extra out-of-home spaces, Mr. Speaker, including foster 

care, stabilizing centres, therapeutic foster care, adolescent 

group homes, and treatment group homes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many, many dollars going towards 

hunger and health in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, these are good initiatives. 

These are good initiatives coming out of this year’s budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The funding for Station 20 came out of last 

year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. The funding for Station 20 came 

out of last year’s budget. It was in the hands of the community, 

and there are many within the community who are feeling 

robbed of the money that had been placed in their hands to 

build this very significant, very significant project. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are some who believe that the 

government has made this decision based on misinformation. 

Now that’s understandable when the Minister of Finance says in 

Saskatoon that there needs to be private sector fundraising of 

$12 million when in fact the entire project is only $11.5 million, 

misinformation when the Premier says publicly that they’ve 

only raised 75,000 in private donations when in fact it is 10 

times that much — almost 10 times that much, Mr. Speaker — 

a misunderstanding or misinformation when the Premier of the 

province calls this project a mall. I can tell the Premier it’s not a 

mall. 

 

Will he do the right thing? Will he meet with the community 

members? Will he get the right information? Will he put this 

decision on hold and reverse it ultimately? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there is so much good 

news in this year’s budget that it’s going to take three or four 

more questions till I read off all the initiatives . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — That this government has put towards, 

Mr. Speaker, whether it’s supporting community-based 

organizations, $5 million for community-based organizations to 

provide life skills and job training — Mr. Speaker, and it goes 

to one of the petitions or member’s statement that was read 

from the opposition earlier — plus 3.3 million to increase 

salaries and cover operating expenses of these CBOs 

[community-based organization], something that that 

government never did, never increased the salaries, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are many more initiatives that this 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

government is putting forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is another issue to this whole factor. 

And that is the deficit that that government left after 16 years of 

not repairing facilities in this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, some of our facilities are in desperate need of 

upgrades, Mr. Speaker, and there’s money that will go towards 

that because it’s a new Sask Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question again is to the 

Premier, the President of Executive Council, who should bear 

responsibility for the decisions of his government. Mr. Speaker, 

Saturday in the Saskatoon’s StarPhoenix it reads in the editorial 

and I quote, I quote, “But Wall’s clear lack of understanding 

about the dire needs of core neighbourhoods and the history of 

Saskatoon demonstrates just how out of touch he remains with 

urban Saskatchewan.” 

 

Now I’m sure the Premier wants to challenge that statement. 

Here is a chance. I challenge him again: will he put this 

decision on hold? Will the Premier of the province sit down, sit 

down with the community members in the city of Saskatoon, 

talk to them, get the correct information, and then make the 

right decision and restore funding to Station 20? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, after the last — I believe 

it is — 34, 36 years out of 40 in that constituency that has been 

represented by an NDP party, they haven’t once dealt with the 

issues. In fact the only capital improvement they made in 

Riversdale under his mandate was a new liquor board store, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Now on the 11th hour, on the 11th 

hour, the 11th hour prior to an election . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, on the 11th hour it 

doesn’t matter whether it was $100 million into Prince Albert to 

try and shore up a seat or $8 million into Riversdale to try and 

shore up the former premier’s seat, Mr. Speaker, because it was 

on the 11th hour after 16 years of government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the demands and the needs of our health care 

system are immense. And one of those needs is capital. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, that former government commissioned a study last 

March to look into the capital needs, and I’ll be very glad to 

talk about that in the next few questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — My question will be to the Premier. But, Mr. 

Speaker, is there any wonder they’ve made a mistake on their 

decision around Station 20 when the kind of information that 

the Minister of Health seems to have available to him is so 

erroneous? Let me just mention one or two things that have 

happened in Riversdale in the last four years: two brand new 

high schools, a new W.P. Bate School, a new addition to 

Montgomery School, White Buffalo Youth Lodge, and the list 

goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If that’s the kind of information this government has made a 

decision about this community-based project . . . And let me say 

again, Mr. Speaker, this is not a project of the province. It’s not 

a project of the NDP. It’s a project of the communities of 

Saskatoon, the university, the College of Medicine, the College 

of Dentistry, community-based organizations, the community 

clinic. On and on it goes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question again is to the Premier. Will he do the right thing? 

Will he do the right and responsible thing and meet with the 

community leadership from Station 20? Will he meet with 

them, get the facts, get the correction information and then 

make the correct decision? Will he do it or not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we talk about capital 

needs within our system, and that former government knew that 

there was huge needs within the health care system. Saskatoon 

in 2006 did a study through a company called VFA that looked 

at all the Saskatoon facilities and how much was needed, Mr. 

Speaker. There was about $404 million needed in deferred 

maintenance, just in Saskatoon alone. So the ministry under that 

former government felt that was interesting enough that they 

would commission a study for the whole province. 

 

Last March, and this is quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, because 

in their budget they offer about $5 million for maintenance. But 

last March, they put $2 million in to study the whole provincial 

infrastructure, which I will applaud because what it tells us is 

there’s about a $1.5 billion deficit in maintenance due to 

Saskatchewan health care facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour fancies himself a 

champion of Saskatchewan universities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Broten: — Before entering politics, he was a university 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

employee. His constituency of Saskatoon Greystone is right 

next to the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. He even gave 

the U of S president a sneak peek at his essential services 

legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, he’s completely offside when it comes to 

Station 20, a project that is important to all of Saskatoon. As the 

minister will know, Station 20 would involve the University of 

Saskatchewan through the College of Medicine, the College of 

Dentistry, and SWITCH, the student wellness initiative towards 

community health. U of S students, professors, and 

administrators were excited about this project, and now the 

minister has failed them. To the Minister of Advanced 

Education, why didn’t he speak up on behalf of universities 

when his cabinet colleagues axed Station 20? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

facilities in Saskatoon, and in the inner city there’s a number of 

agencies that already supply many of the services that would be 

housed in Station 20. There is a grocery store in the inner city in 

Saskatoon. There is a community clinic in Saskatoon that may 

need to be expanded, and we’ll certainly be there to help them, 

Mr. Speaker. There are facilities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what is more important is the facilities that 

we’re operating every day in Saskatoon and surrounding area in 

their health region that have huge, huge capital needs. In fact 

they were saying in this study that about 76 per cent — and I’ll 

just look at it here — are beyond their useful life. It’s not even 

that there’s maintenance; it’s beyond their useful life. 

 

Now the former minister of Health would know this because 

this study was commissioned in March. We believe there was 

an interim report done in June or July that that former minister 

would know all about. Did he turn his back on it? Absolutely, 

Mr. Speaker, and put money into something that would shore 

up Riversdale. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The Minister of Advanced Education is such a 

power broker that they won’t even allow him to answer a 

question in this House. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced 

Education was supposed to be a voice of reason within that 

caucus, a supposedly socially progressive voice to bring balance 

to their right wing views. But the minister, along with so-called 

other liberals, are nothing more than window dressing. 

 

With the decision to axe Station 20, it’s obvious the good old 

boys still call the shots in the Sask Party. It’s clear who’s really 

making the decisions. It’s clear who’s being shut out of the 

process. And most of all, it’s crystal clear who will suffer. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not surprised with the Sask Party’s decision to go 

to war with labour, but how on earth can the Minister of 

Advanced Education possibly justify going to war with the 

poor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there are many, many projects going forward after this 

new provincial government’s budget was read on March 19, 

many projects that will help the inner city absolutely. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, there is a housing project that is under 

completion in that very area, Mr. Speaker. There’s a library 

that’s under completion in that very area. Those projects have 

gone ahead and, Mr. Speaker, there are more funds going . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask the members to come to order, and 

allow the minister to respond to the question that he was asked. 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, then it doesn’t matter. 

There’s more money going to other programs, whether it’s $8 

million in new money to combat, combat gang activity, Mr. 

Speaker; whether it’s a $500,000 to the Saskatoon Downtown 

Youth Centre to purchase a couple more homes. Mr. Speaker, 

we heard the minister from Social Services this morning 

announce a couple more facilities being bought here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker. Money is going towards those facilities — 

absolutely. There is money going to the programs that are 

needed, Mr. Speaker. Housing facilities are being built in 

downtown Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We are filling our mandate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Planning and Consultation in the Ministry of Social Services 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Social Services has some explaining to do. Last week when it 

was revealed by media that ministry staff told employees that 

the budget included a plan that would result in about 200 

layoffs, the minister used the old deny-and-deflect strategy. She 

denied that plan was being put in place and blamed her officials 

for sharing information with employees. But the public isn’t 

buying it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister of Social Services: why won’t she accept 

responsibility for her ministry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Yes I will, Mr. Speaker. When I first 

learned of the proposal to modernize the income assistance, I 

agreed to one year’s provision of the plan, but I expressed 

serious concerns that needed to be addressed with some of the 

elements of that plan. I also expressed that I was not 



412 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

comfortable with the long-term elements of the plan. I, as the 

Social Services minister, take responsibility if some of my 

officials did not understand me. 

 

As such I have taken immediate actions. I have met with the 

employees in Saskatoon to apologize and to clarify. I have sent 

email to all of the employees to do the same. I have discussed 

this matter with my deputy minister, and I will be taking the 

issue to have a cabinet discussion. 

 

Going forward, I will be having consultations with the 

front-line workers. I value their opinion. I think they have 

absolutely important information to add to how we can deliver 

income assistance that is for the best of our clients. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that just simply isn’t good 

enough. She likes to throw up her hands and say she didn’t 

know and be done with it. I guess the minister’s decided it’d be 

better to admit that she didn’t have a clue than to take 

responsibility. But the facts aren’t going to make her little plan 

so easy, Mr. Speaker. You see, the minister’s signed off on her 

budget which includes a four-year plan. She also sits in cabinet 

and on Treasury Board. That’s three separate and surefire ways 

that the minister should have known the plan for her ministry. 

Even the official opposition doesn’t believe the minister could 

be that asleep at the wheel. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: does she really expect 

citizens to believe she simply didn’t know? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge that I did 

know about the strategy that was being proposed from my 

official, and I expressed serious concerns with some of the 

elements of that strategy, and I’m still concerned about certain 

elements of that strategy. 

 

Ultimately the priority of this minister and the priority of our 

entire government is that we need to have the best program 

possible to secure the future of our clients. Those are the people 

that are in the most need within our society. So I want to 

consult with the front-line workers. When I met with the 

front-line workers in Saskatoon, they treated me with the 

utmost respect and professionalism, and they deserve the same 

from their minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ran 

on a message of accountable and transparent government. But I 

guess it was one of their many short-lived commitments. 

 

The minister’s knee-jerk reaction to finger point and claim 

ignorance are not sitting well with Saskatchewan people. The 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix editorial Saturday put it this way, and I 

quote, “If even after four months on the job the minister was 

still unable to grasp the ramifications in this case, it casts doubts 

on her ability to understand how her ministry’s other policies 

impact on the lives of Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable 

citizens.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear people are doubting this minister’s 

ability to do her job. To the minister: why should Saskatchewan 

people have any confidence in her ability to do her job as a 

minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I will say once again, as 

the Minister of Social Services I take responsibility for what my 

ministry officials did not understand. 

 

The Speaker: — Allow the minister to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But I will 

not, I do not think that it is productive to point fingers. It is a 

matter of doing what is best for our clients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take responsibility. I will go forward with 

consultation. We are not going to put through a plan that I and 

my colleagues are not comfortable with. That is not going to 

happen, Mr. Speaker. Our clients must come first and the 

workers must be considered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, I have questions for the 

Premier. Let us review. We have a minister of the Crown that 

has said very clearly to the public that it’s her officials’ fault 

that a proposal went forward to change a system in the 

Department of Social Services. It’s the minister who has to sign 

her budget documents that go to Treasury Board. She sits on 

Treasury Board and the cabinet deals with it, and yet she says 

her officials didn’t know. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, she knew. She knew. And I ask the Premier, 

what kind of processes do you have in place where a minister 

signs off on a document, Treasury Board deals with it, and 

cabinet deals with it, how can a minister possibly blame her 

officials for this kind of situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what the process 

that this side of the House has in government with respect to 

these matters is pretty clear and markedly different than what 

we have received, markedly different than what the people of 

the province received when that member sat at the Executive 

Council table, when that member for Riversdale was the 

premier of the province. 

 

Witness if you will, Mr. Speaker, SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company]. When ministers, when 

ministers of the Crown, Mr. Speaker, knew that they were not 

telling the truth with respect to the nature of the relationship, 

did they take immediate action as the Minister of Social 

Services has? Had they been frank and accepted responsibility 

if officials were unclear as to the minister’s direction? No, Mr. 

Speaker. They covered it up for six years. You bet it’s different 

on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well with all due respect, the Premier didn’t 

answer the question, and I guess I have another question to the 

Premier given that he didn’t answer the last one. 

 

We have a minister of the Crown that has indicated to all and 

sundry the health status of a public service. And I would ask the 

Premier this question. Is it the policy of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to release private information to every newspaper 

journalist in the province when it comes to the health status of 

public servants in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I again will say that I 

was aware of the program. I had serious concerns about that 

program. I expressed those concerns to the ministry. Those 

concerns can be reviewed. We could have consultation. It does 

not change the financial allocation for the ’09 . . . 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — There are some members who continue to 

interfere and not allow the members placing the question or the 

members responding to actually be heard. I would ask the 

members to allow the minister to complete her comments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My concerns 

in the ’08-09 budget can be addressed without changing the 

financial allocation in the budget. We are not changing this 

year’s budget, and we can address the concerns that I raised 

with my ministry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well you see, Mr. Speaker, here is the 

difficulty. The difficulty is that each year in the budget they put 

forward a four-year plan for the financials. That’s what they did 

in this budget. And in the minister’s budget that she signed off 

on, there would have been a four-year summary of what was 

going to take place. But the minister says, I guess I understood 

but I didn’t make it clear. 

 

Well she signed off on it. It went to Treasury Board. The 

cabinet dealt with it, and now what she’s doing is she’s blaming 

her public service, and in fact what’s she’s doing is she’s also 

releasing private, confidential information about the health 

status of public servants. 

 

I ask the Premier, is that the government’s policy — whenever 

a minister gets into trouble they’re going to talk about the health 

status of a public servant in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I will 

say once again, as the Minister for Social Services I take 

responsibility for the ministry officials prematurely, in an 

internal communication, communicating a strategy that we are 

not certain that we’re going to go forward with in years 2, 3, 

and 4. Mr. Speaker, they are aware that I have concerns with the 

out years of this strategy. We will be looking at those out years 

in consultation with all of the stakeholders involved. Mr. 

Speaker, these are projections of future years. They are merely 

that, and they amount to about 1 million in an over $600 million 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Social Workers 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill 

No. 19, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 19, The Social Workers Amendment 

Act, 2008 be read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 



414 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, pursuant to section 

30(5) of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, I lay upon the 

Table a report of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my duty 

to move: 

 

That this Assembly concurs with the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner’s recommendations made pursuant to 

section 31 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act: 

 

That the member for Athabasca and the member for 

Saskatoon Eastview be reprimanded for failure to meet the 

filing deadlines for disclosure statements as required by 

the same Act; and further 

 

That this Assembly acknowledges that the members did 

subsequently file the required statements with the 

commissioner, and having expressed sincere regret for 

their oversight, this Assembly accepts the apologies 

expressed by said members. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I call the members to order. 

Will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 

behalf of the government to table answers to question 416 and 

417. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 416 and 417 tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Quennell: — It’s a pleasure to re-enter the discussion of 

the first budget of the Saskatchewan Party government after a 

spring break in which we had an opportunity to learn about 

some budget decisions that the Minister of Finance didn’t care 

to highlight in his budget address. One of these decisions that 

the public became aware about, and supposedly the Minister of 

Social Services became aware about by reading the newspaper, 

needs to be put into the context of how our style of government 

works, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A cabinet minister has a number of roles within the category of 

policy making and communication of policy, Mr. Speaker. The 

first is to bring proposals to cabinet as a minister — say you are 

the minister of Social Services — to bring proposals as that 

what might take place in that area of government, Mr. Speaker: 

perhaps a four-year plan, one-year plan, whatever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second category or the second role that one plays within the 

category of cabinet decision making, Mr. Speaker, is to 

participate in cabinet discussions about all policy areas, and in 

the case of the budget, Mr. Speaker, to participate in the 

discussion of the entire budget. 

 

If a member of cabinet — for example, the Minister of Social 

Services — is also a member of Treasury Board, that discussion 

is more intensive as the Treasury Board does its work and 

makes its recommendations to the cabinet, continues on at 

cabinet where that minister would again have a role in that 

discussion, as well as the discussion around every other 

ministry and agency of the government. 

 

The third role of a cabinet minister is to communicate the 

decisions, once they are made by the government, to the 

ministry. So we have a minister who would be responsible for 

bringing forward proposals to the cabinet, discussing them as 

member of a cabinet committee or in cabinet, and then 

communicating the decisions ultimately made in that area for 

which they are responsible to the public servants responsible for 

implementing those policies. In other words, government 

officials — public servants — learn about government policy 

and government decision making from their ministers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, of course, the public. The fourth role of a cabinet minister 

— and I know the member from Wood River is listening 

carefully in case he ever has the opportunity — and the fourth 

role of a cabinet minister is to communicate those government 

decisions to the public, Mr. Speaker. So a decision that’s made 

about funding and organization of the Social Services ministry, 

for example, may well have been brought forward, in all 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

likelihood would have been brought forward in the budget 

context or any other context by the Minister of Social Services. 

In the case of the budget, would have brought those proposals 

forward to the Treasury Board on which the Minister of Social 

Services happens to sit. 

 

Those proposals would be discussed in detail by the Treasury 

Board and decisions would be made. There’s lots of priorities. 

There’s lots of important things that could be done. They can’t 

all be done. They certainly can’t all be done in every year. But 

decisions have to be made about expansions of programs, new 

programs, and cuts. And I can certainly tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that nobody fires 270 social workers, for example, without 

considerable discussion and review, first at Treasury Board and 

then secondly at cabinet. 

 

Now after the Treasury Board discussion, the budget would be 

discussed by the cabinet — and I expect this government is 

little different from governments in the past — once cabinet has 

a recommendation for its caucus, discussed at caucus. 

 

So the Social Services budget, Mr. Speaker, and then the 

ramifications and the consequences of the decisions being 

made, would come to the minister’s attention first of all as the 

minister bringing those proposals forward; secondly as a 

member of Treasury Board in this case; thirdly as a member of 

cabinet; and fourthly as a member of caucus. Four 

opportunities, four opportunities and four decision-making 

points at which point the Minister of Social Services would 

have a chance to say, I want to do this, or I don’t want to do 

this. But of course if she’s in the minority, it goes ahead 

anyways. That’s what cabinet solidarity is all about. And again 

I note that the member of Wood River is paying close attention 

in case it ever matters to him. 

 

But after the decision-making points, then there’s the 

communication points. As I said before, Mr. Speaker, I know 

the members want to hear this. As I said before, public servants 

— and they need to learn this lesson, Mr. Speaker, if they 

haven’t learned it yet — public servants learn what public 

policy is, what government decisions are, from their ministers. 

It’s not the other way around. They don’t make decisions and 

then inform the ministers through the newspaper. It is, as a 

StarPhoenix editorial said, beyond belief that that could 

possibly happen. 

 

Now I do want to quote at length — and this is one of the few 

opportunities that I’ll probably ever take to do this, Mr. Speaker 

— but quote at length from an editorial that appeared in The 

StarPhoenix on March 29, 2008, my hometown paper. 

 

And I am going to quote from the editorial and that will involve 

me stating out the names of a few ministers of the Crown by 

name, but only within the quotation and only for the integrity of 

the quotation, Mr. Speaker. But I do want to read it into the 

record. Quote: 

 

If, as is generally the case, the Saskatchewan Party used its 

first budget to set the tone for its administration, the 

province has a growing list to worry about. 

 

Rather than appear to be competent managers of the 

public purse, Premier Brad Wall’s team has been 

extravagant in its spending, ham-handed in its 

communications strategy and incompetent in its delivery. 

 

The latest in a series of embarrassing events include a 

budget-day announcement of the disruption of hundreds 

of jobs that now apparently was made in error, and the 

deliberate cancellation of a much-lauded inner-city 

redevelopment project in Saskatoon. 

 

That no one from Wall to Health Minister Don McMorris 

to Finance Minister Rod Gantefoer can get their stories 

straight about why a previously made provincial 

commitment of $8 million to the Station 20 project, which 

would bring, among other things, medical, dental and 

community services to one of the most stressed 

neighbourhoods in . . . [Saskatoon’s] largest city, does 

little to foster confidence in their ability to manage public 

money. 

 

Until now, the government has requested patience from 

Saskatchewan citizens, suggesting the four months since it 

took office wasn’t enough time to properly redirect the 

flow of cash. But this excuse is wearing thin. 

 

Four months is more than enough time for Social Services 

Minister Donna Harpauer to understand how a major 

shakeup in her ministry would impact on the hundreds of 

lives affected by the “four-year modernization strategy” 

planned for its financial assistance division. 

 

For Harpauer to suggest on the one hand that she 

approved the first year of the strategy while opposing the 

rest, and on the other hand to claim she wasn’t [told] by 

ministry officials what was going on, is to ask 

Saskatchewan residents to suspend all belief. It took the 

employees but minutes to figure out what was happening 

after some 400 of them were summoned to a special 

meeting scheduled to coincide with the March 19 delivery 

of the provincial budget. 

 

If even after four months on the job the minister was still 

unable to grasp the ramifications in this case, it casts 

doubts on her ability to understand how her ministry’s 

other policies impact on the lives of Saskatchewan’s most 

vulnerable citizens. 

 

At least Harpauer is consistent in her proclamations of 

ignorance. There, however, was no such consistency 

among politicians when it came to the slashing of the grant 

to Station 20, which was made a year ago by the former 

NDP government. Gantefoer offered one reason for the cut, 

McMorris another and the premier yet a third. Separately, 

they made little sense. Taken together they look more like a 

raft of juvenile excuses rather than part of a coherent plan 

to run the province. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Gantefoer believed the grant was cut because there was 

little chance the proponents of the project could raise the 

“$12 million to $14 million” needed to come from private 

interests. By next day he was admitting he was in error, and 

the necessary private funds were a miniscule portion of that 



416 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

amount. 

 

Even more incredibly, McMorris suggested the money 

had to be pulled from a project that would make it easy for 

inner-city residents to access timely health care because 

the funds were needed to buy a fire alarm for St. Paul’s 

Hospital and to ward off a mould attack. The decision, he 

assured us, had nothing to do with politics. 

 

At least Wall’s weak excuse was credible, if only because 

it illustrated an ideological basis to the ill-considered 

decision. The premier suggested the grant was killed 

because his government saw the inclusion of a 

co-operatively run grocery store within Station 20 as a 

threat to private industry. 

 

. . . Wall’s clear lack of understanding about the dire 

needs of core neighbourhoods and the history of 

Saskatoon demonstrates just how out of touch he remains 

with urban Saskatchewan. Considering the role the 

province’s largest city is playing in the economic revival 

of Saskatchewan, such ignorance could have dire 

consequences. 

 

The proponents of Station 20 want a grocery store not 

because they want to compete with private industry but 

because many people in core neighbourhoods don’t have 

the wherewithal to keep hiring cabs to go shopping. The 

last of the downtown grocery stores left more than a 

decade ago. 

 

To ignore such realities for the sake of political 

partisanship and ideological reasons is an inauspicious 

beginning for a government that Saskatchewan people 

hoped could lead them to a prosperous future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatoon StarPhoenix thinks that the 

government has swung too far to the right in its attack on the 

citizens of inner-city Saskatoon, it’s time for the members 

opposite to listen. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ve received a number of letters. I’m 

sure members of the government have received a number of 

letters and emails. I’ve received a number of emails today. I 

would like to read into the record, Mr. Speaker, the first email I 

received today. It wasn’t the last. It would be one of many. It 

says: 

 

Frank, I live in your constituency. I do not need Station 

20. Many of the residents of Pleasant Hill do. Do not let 

the Sask Party off the hook regarding this blatant 

anti-urban, anti-poor, politically motivated, and utterly 

foolish decision. This Alberta-style disregard for one’s 

own citizens must not poison one of things that makes 

Saskatchewan a desirable place to live — social 

conscience. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I could hardly say it better. I quote this 

particular email because it’s a constituent of mine. It came 

today, spontaneous concern for his fellow citizens expressed to 

his Member of the Legislative Assembly. And this is a project 

— as the Leader of the Opposition pointed out during question 

period — a project of the community, a project of the people of 

Saskatoon, a project that was considered by the former 

government in a way that a government should consider 

decisions. 

 

Proposal was brought forward by a minister. Matters were 

discussed by a Treasury Board. I can tell you that, Mr. Speaker; 

I was on the Treasury Board that discussed this. It was 

discussed by the cabinet, and it was discussed by the caucus. No 

minister of an NDP government would get up and say, I found 

out about it by reading about it in the newspaper, as the 

Minister of Social Services says about decisions made by her 

government, in her ministry, in her area of responsibility. My 

question to that minister would be, has she figured out yet who 

is running her ministry? 

 

But to return to the question of Station 20, which the Minister 

of Health in question period said was an issue of this budget, 

Mr. Speaker. To return to the issue of Station 20, Station 20 in 

part came as a result of a study done in 2006 by the Saskatoon 

Health Region which found that residents of the core 

neighbourhoods had dramatically higher rates of a variety of 

health problems. It also demonstrated the link between low 

income and health issues by bringing non-profit organizations 

together with larger institutions like the University of 

Saskatchewan and the Saskatoon Health Region, and in the case 

of the University of Saskatchewan, specifically the College of 

Medicine, specifically the College of Dentistry which wants to 

put dental chairs in the inner city, in Station 20. 

 

Station 20 West was intended to provide integrated and 

expanded treatment services. It will also work to address the 

root causes of poverty to which the government paid lip service 

in its Throne Speech, but lip service only, apparently, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Working together in a holistic way, the co-locating partners 

intended to focus not only upon providing necessary services 

but also things like food security, adequate housing, access to 

employment and education which the health study identifies 

playing a large role in health status. In order for Station 20 to be 

effective, co-locating partners agreed that they needed to be 

housed together in a building designed to facilitate integration 

of services and the expansion of program activities. The 

Westside community clinic, for example, is bursting at the 

seams, Mr. Speaker. That is an understatement. And it needs 

additional space for specialized programs such as prenatal and 

immunization clinics, addiction treatment, and more. 

 

All subjects to which the government will pay lip service, but 

which they have now set back a million years in their decision 

to not allow the Westside community clinic to expand, to not 

allow dentistry chairs to be put in the inner city, to not allow 

these other services to come together in what was mis-described 

as being in the riding of Saskatoon Riversdale. The government 

can’t get the numbers right; they can’t get the purpose right; and 

they can’t get the location right — and on this basis they make 

decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The College of Dentistry requires proper space for equipment 

used to train dental students, and CHEP Good Food Inc. needs a 

proper kitchen to enable them to teach neighbourhood women 

about cooking nutritious meals. Organizations that would be 

locating in Station 20 include the University of Saskatchewan 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

dental services program, College of Dentistry. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you what an advocate the two deans were 

when it came to our government, the NDP government, 

campaigning for Station 20. The Dean of Medicine, the Dean of 

Dentistry, what strong advocates they were. I know government 

members have heard from those deans on their decision and I 

hope that their influence will help the government reverse what 

they have done. 

 

Outreach clinical services for the College of Medicine were to 

be located at Station 20. The Saskatoon Community Clinic, 

Westside, was to be relocated in proper facilities at Station 20. 

The Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, the Elizabeth Fry 

Society, the city of Saskatoon community development 

services, amongst others. The Station 20 initiative has been 

driven by the community, Mr. Speaker. It grew out of year-long 

community forums to identify the needs for better health 

services, housing, and access to employment in the core 

neighbourhoods. 

 

It also grew out of the community’s distress at losing the last 

grocery store in the core neighbourhood, and maybe members 

opposite need to know that those stores are gone, they are long 

gone, Mr. Speaker. The StarPhoenix knows it and I think 

members know that now, having had the opportunity to hear 

from opinion leaders and hear from the editorial board of The 

StarPhoenix. 

 

On February 23, 2007 the Government of Saskatchewan 

provided $8 million to Station 20 out of $100 million which had 

been allocated for inner-city and northern development projects. 

The vast majority of this money — $60 million or so, Mr. 

Speaker — was to go to social housing, non-profit housing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The government opposite likes to pretend that the previous 

government had taken no action. We had taken that action 

among other actions. Some of the money went to skills training 

in the inner city, Mr. Speaker, and specifically Mount Royal, 

taking skills training to the inner-city residents in the school, in 

their high school, so that they could go into post-secondary 

skills training without even leaving their neighbourhood. That 

investment was made there. 

 

The cutback of the Station 20 investment highlights the 

priorities or lack of priorities that this government had in its 

budget. As I said when I spoke last on this matter, Mr. Speaker, 

cutting in half the increase in training spaces from what the 

previous government achieved in the last year of its 

government, putting no money aside to fulfill or work on the 

recommendations of their study in housing compared to the 

work that the previous government had done in its investment 

in social housing. 

 

The Station 20 cutback — the smallest of the $100 million — 

perhaps will have the largest impact certainly in the 

consciousness of the people of Saskatoon who have, as my 

constituent who says, I don’t need Station 20; I don’t live near 

Station 20. The people of Saskatoon recognize that this is a 

necessary project for the health of the community, health of the 

entire community, not just the health of the residents of Pleasant 

Hill and the residents of west side Saskatoon. 

 

The people of Saskatoon know that this is their project. And if 

the government has accomplished something, if they restored 

the funding, the government has accomplished this. The 

government has given the people of Saskatoon the forum now, 

the opportunity to speak about their concern for their 

neighbours, their concern for fairness, their concern for equity, 

and their priorities as to what a government should do with 

surplus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the previous government had a surplus, $100 million — 

housing for low-income people, skills training for people in the 

inner city, money to address the health needs and health 

outcomes and the health disparities of the inner city of 

Saskatoon — you could see the priorities of the previous 

government. And in this budget and particularly in this decision 

to attack Station 20, you can see the priorities of this new 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This $8 million was targeted for infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, 

and that’s something we hear a lot from the government about. 

We hear a lot about infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. This was for 

infrastructure for people who do not usually see an investment 

on the part of their government — have seen investments on the 

part of the former NDP government, cannot look forward, if 

this decision is any indication, Mr. Speaker, to investments by 

this government. 

 

This government is setting a poor lack of priorities, Mr. 

Speaker, poor choice of priorities. A choice of priorities that, if 

they follow through in the budget decisions they made, in the 

words not of a harping opposition, Mr. Speaker, in the words 

not of a partisan or a particularly left wing commentators, Mr. 

Speaker, but in the words of my hometown paper, which has 

never been accused of being a supporter of mine. In their words, 

this poses “dire consequences” not for the people of Pleasant 

Hill, not for the people of the inner city of Saskatoon, not for 

the people of west side Saskatoon, not for the people of 

Saskatoon; this decision, in the words of The StarPhoenix, sets 

out “dire consequences” for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This, and for the other reasons I’ve outlined both today and the 

previous day that I spoke, are reasons I cannot support the 

budget, cannot support the amendment, but will be . . . why I 

cannot support the budget, cannot support the motion, but will 

be supporting the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

with our government’s recent budget prepared and presented 

under the leadership of our esteemed Minister of Finance, 

Saskatchewan’s ready for growth and ready to play a more 

creative and constructive role in Confederation. We are 

fulfilling a promise to help Saskatchewan realize its true, 

untapped potential. Our 2008-2009 budget takes important steps 

towards helping Saskatchewan sustain its economic momentum, 

secure our common communities, and we’re beginning to take 



418 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

some lessons learned from other provinces. We’re beginning to 

put a focus on sharing the benefits of growth with all the people 

of Saskatchewan while sustaining our growth. 

 

Within the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour, we’re focusing on setting specific goals and measuring 

real success, Mr. Speaker. Our focus is first to increase the 

number of people in Saskatchewan — and you’ve seen some 

recent successes there — thereby building more dynamic and 

cosmopolitan communities and paving the way for future 

economic growth. 

 

[14:45] 

 

As well we’re going to be increasing the number of people with 

literacy and basic skills training, sector-specific skills, and 

advanced education, thereby helping to ensure that as 

individuals meet their full potential, Saskatchewan can better 

meet its full potential. And, Mr. Speaker, with over 5,000 

training seats and opportunities in the recent budget, the people 

of this province will notice that more people will have more 

opportunities to engage the economic future of our times. 

 

Further, we’re also going to be fostering more fair, balanced, 

safe, and competitive labour environment, thereby ensuring that 

essential services are available for families during labour 

disruptions and that Saskatchewan workplaces are more 

democratic. Within the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour and across the government, we will 

take these goals and translate them into tangible, sustainable 

achievements. 

 

First we will work to support and train our people, ensuring that 

the people of this province have the opportunities they need to 

develop their talents to participate in and benefit from our new 

economy. This investment aims to nurture economic growth 

and foster the success of dynamic communities. As well, as our 

workforce grows, the Government of Saskatchewan is 

committed to creating a fair and balanced labour environment 

that respects the rights and responsibilities of workers and 

employers. 

 

Second we plan to partner and build. Our government will work 

to foster strategic partnerships between public institutions, 

community-based organizations, the private sector, and other 

entities to help meet our common objectives. The key here is to 

come up, come together, to develop a skilled workforce within 

Saskatchewan, and to attract educated and skilled workers from 

outside the province, thereby maintaining our growth, sharing 

its rewards with the peoples of this province while learning 

lessons from other jurisdictions. 

 

As well we will utilize the work under way to take the next 

step, which is to innovate and grow. We know that the 

innovation generated by Saskatchewan’s advanced education 

institutions and other centres of excellence is instrumental and 

integral to the fuelling of our provincial economy. To that end, 

the Government of Saskatchewan will make a fresh 

commitment to support science and innovation that contributes 

to a stronger, more productive, and more diverse economy. We 

will also be more innovative in the ways that we carry out our 

business, from post-secondary education and training to career 

services and immigration. 

In a few moments I’ll provide some details on my ministry’s 

budget investments but first I want to talk about how important 

these investments are to our new government and, most 

especially, to the people of our province. 

 

Saskatchewan leads the country in numerous economic 

indicators including earnings growth, retail sales, and overall 

construction permits, as well as international trade, to name but 

a few. Most notably, we’re number one in population growth 

now in Canada, with an increase of more than 16,000 people 

over the last year — the largest in 56 years — which stands in 

stark contrast to the numbers that were racked up between 2001 

and 2006 under the previous government. 

 

We also added an amazing 13,300 full-time jobs to our 

provincial economy over the last 12 months. On the other hand, 

current forecasts see that Saskatchewan will be short between 

10 and 13,000 workers in the next few years, and this number 

grows exponentially when we factor in retirements. While 

overly instrumental, this contrast illustrates why we must work 

harder and smarter to create a labour force that meets the needs 

of our new Saskatchewan. 

 

With a close eye on fiscal prudence, our 2008-09 budget 

prepares the province for growth while creating a fair and 

balanced labour environment, Mr. Speaker. This budget ensures 

that our message is clear within Saskatchewan, across Canada, 

and around the world: Saskatchewan is ready for growth. 

 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour’s total budget 

for the ’08-09 time is $761 million, Mr. Speaker. These new 

investments include $12 million for the new graduate retention 

program which will provide tuition rebates of up to $20,000 for 

post-secondary graduates who stay in the province for seven 

years. This is a platform plus initiative. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, 10.5 million to fund a 120-seat expansion 

for nursing education, which is so critically important in our 

province; $3.2 million to train more doctors by expanding 

medical student training to 100 and residency training to 120 by 

2010-11; almost $1 million to SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology] for 12 new medical 

diagnostic technician seats and 42 new training seats. 

 

4.1 million for regional colleges including support for a 

200-seat expansion of on-reserve adult basic education to 

ensure that our First Nations and Métis can better participate 

and benefit from our provincial economy; $33 million to 

enhance affordability for post-secondary learners including 

supporting a tuition freeze for university students for a final 

year and additional funding for SIAST; $5 million for 

community-based organizations including immigrant training 

programs, Mr. Speaker; $1 million to the Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technology for on-reserve adult basic education and 

skills training. 

 

45.8 million for post-secondary institution capital which was so 

lacking under the last government, Mr. Speaker, including 6.8 

million for health professional training capital; 2.2 million for 

the international vaccine centre at the University of 

Saskatchewan; 2.4 million to provide additional settlement and 

training supports for new immigrants and to quicken processing 

time for potential immigrants to Saskatchewan. 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

We’ve already achieved a 36 per cent increase in productivity 

within that branch of government, Mr. Speaker, and this 

investment will help us to do even more. 

 

Saskatchewan people are known for their talent, and we are 

working to meet the talent challenge of our province. To this 

end, we are committed to helping students and other citizens 

meet their education and training goals so that they can take 

advantage of our province’s remarkable job growth. We’re 

investing in a 120-seat nursing expansion. The 2008-09 budget 

marks the single largest increase in health training seats in 

Saskatchewan history and will benefit all of Saskatchewan. It is 

part of our promise to provide a health care system that 

Saskatchewan people deserve. 

 

In addition we’re working to expand adult basic education 

programming which will provide more learners with the critical 

first steps they need to engage and succeed in our new 

economy. The accurate number is over 5,500 new training seats 

and opportunities, Mr. Speaker, included within this budget. 

We’re keeping our promise regarding post-secondary tuition, 

and we’re committed to working with our institutions and 

student stakeholders to develop a long-term policy on tuition 

management in the coming months, an area that the previous 

government would not even look to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re keeping our promise to deliver the most 

aggressive youth retention program in Canada, providing up to 

$20,000 in tuition rebates over seven years for graduates who 

remain in Saskatchewan. We need to secure the future by doing 

more to keep our young people in Saskatchewan, again a track 

record that the members opposite cannot look at with very 

much success, Mr. Speaker. Between 2001 and 2006, they saw 

an out-migration of 35,000 people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, we want to make sure that Saskatchewan is and 

remains a destination of choice for potential immigrants, and 

we’re working to develop new and creative ways to attract more 

people from around the world and keep them here. In a time 

when other Western provinces are having significant success 

attracting newcomers, Saskatchewan is working to overcome an 

unfortunate deficit, a deficit accrued by the members opposite 

in building more cosmopolitan communities. Put simply, the 

province is increasing the 1 per cent share of newcomers to 

Canada that it currently attracts. We’re already demonstrating 

the promise of Saskatchewan to more people outside of our 

borders, and we’re delivering on that promise. 

 

Of course we’re also committed to ensuring that First Nations 

and Métis peoples participate more fully in our social and 

economic future. Their youth, perspectives, and energy provide 

Saskatchewan with a competitive advantage. This is the envy of 

other jurisdictions, and we will work with First Nations and 

Métis institutions and organizations to best determine how to 

achieve mutual growth and development. 

 

Finally we’ll continue to market our award-winning SaskJobs 

website to employers across Saskatchewan and well beyond. 

With more than 300,000 monthly visits, SaskJobs is a major 

tool for employers and job seekers alike. 

 

All this said, Saskatchewan people work best when we work 

together, and we’ve seen evidence of this where individuals and 

organizations have collaborated on programs and services that 

directly serve our provincial needs. Last month federal and 

provincial governments, First Nation and Métis organizations, 

training institutions, and the private sector including Cameco 

Corporation came together to help Northern Career Quest 

Partnership take flight. The partnership will enable First 

Nations and Métis peoples to participate in greater numbers and 

at higher skill levels in the current economic conditions, 

especially as it relates to the resource industries in Northern 

Saskatchewan. It is anticipated that 1,500 people will be linked 

to counselling, training, and employment and that the 

partnership, this partnership will result in 750 full-time, 

permanent jobs for First Nation and Métis workers. 

 

Also through the recently announced Canada-Saskatchewan 

Labour Market Agreement or the LMA [Labour Market 

Agreement], our government will fund a variety of active 

employment programs aimed at getting people the skills and 

training they need to work. Through the LMA we expect to 

serve more than 1,700 people through partnerships with our 

post-secondary institutions, community-based organizations, 

and businesses. And that number is just a start, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Together the LMA and ASAP [Aboriginal Skills and 

Employment Partnership] represent $123 million investment in 

about the last 45 days right here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

105 million of that is federal funding, reiterating that there is 

significant peace dividend for the people of this province since 

they opted for change on November 7 — 105 million, Mr. 

Speaker. This kind of investment could only have been made as 

a result of a new level of co-operation between all parties 

involved, most especially federal-provincial relations. And 

Saskatchewan’s new government will work hard to create more 

partnerships that help to sustain this economic momentum. 

 

As well, obviously we’re focusing on creating a fair and 

balanced labour environment that respects the rights of workers 

and employers and is competitive with other Canadian 

jurisdictions. This is a critical component and a component that 

has finally come to Saskatchewan. And Saskatchewan’s new 

government is taking most important steps forward. Through a 

combination of education, mediation, and assistance in meeting 

standards, we are working with employers and employees to 

create and sustain a new culture of fairness, productivity, and 

safety in the Saskatchewan workplaces. 

 

It’s also important to celebrate families and promote work and 

family balance for workers in the province, Mr. Speaker. The 

effective balance of work and family responsibilities contributes 

to a secure and prosperous future for us all. Furthermore we are 

proud to be part of a global community that celebrates and 

appreciates the endless efforts of women and envisions a future 

in which all women are recognized as equal members of our 

society. As the province moves forward, we strive to further 

improve the lives and opportunities of women. 

 

These are important statements of our values, Mr. Speaker, not 

only for our own citizens, but for the world. As we work to 

build more vibrant, tolerant communities and a safer more 

productive and more diverse labour force, Saskatchewan will 

continue to grow as a destination of choice for people here and 

around the world. 

 



420 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

Our government’s budget sets a clear course for Saskatchewan 

and for us all, and I’m honoured to serve this government and 

the people of Saskatoon Greystone and the entire province at 

such a pivotal time in our history. I’m also honoured to support 

our budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — . . . from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A mentor of mine, 

an old rugby coach, gave me some advice that I think fits this 

budget very well. He said keep your eyes open and recognize 

when opportunity knocks on your door. However don’t be 

fooled if he shows up in a hard hat and work boots because he 

usually looks like work. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this certainly has been true in my 

experience. In this budget, opportunity will be knocking on 

doors all across this great province. When opportunity knocks, 

he’ll be building roads to haul commodities. He’ll be spreading 

the word of our great lakes and parks, and he’ll be standing 

shoulder to shoulder with our farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan Party are not afraid of 

work. This government recognizes opportunity’s knock and has 

opened the door. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m certain that the members on the far side of the 

House will cackle and squawk about this budget. They will 

chase meaningless threads and pick around the edges, playing 

to their special interests and pet projects. They will try to take 

credit for the hard work of the men and women who have toiled 

in this province for so long under the NDP’s governance, but 

the reality is even the opposition has found it difficult to pan 

this budget. In fact the Finance critic’s first comment was this is 

an almost NDP budget. 

 

The NDP know a lot about almost budgets. Sixteen years of 

budgets they almost fixed the roads. They almost trained 

enough nurses. They almost raised taxes. I’m sorry, Mr. 

Speaker; after the last election they did raise taxes. 

 

This budget is not an almost budget; it’s a finally budget. 

Finally we have a change in government. Finally. This change 

in philosophy that has catapulted Saskatchewan into an exciting 

new era of opportunity and hope. This budget addresses the 

needs of the people of this province with a focus on keeping the 

promises that we made in the last election. 

 

Through the election, we put forward an exciting alternative 

which on November 7 the people of this province stood behind. 

Keeping our promises seems like a no-brainer, but these are 

commitments we made face to face on the doorsteps over a 

handshake. And, Mr. Speaker, we are delivering on these 

promises. We are focused on building our future, and what a 

future it will be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for too long the area of Lloydminster, the 

Lloydminster riding, has been the forgotten corner of this 

province. Although the former government was certainly happy 

to take the taxes and the royalties from this bustling oil hotbed, 

they would hardly admit that its productive centre was part of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:00] 

 

No longer, Mr. Speaker, no longer — this budget brings with it 

exciting things for my riding. The cornerstone of this budget 

was $1 billion for infrastructure, and I can tell this Assembly 

that during the campaign when I met with groups, towns, the 

city of Lloydminster, rural municipalities, infrastructure was at 

the top of that list. They would talk about their roads or their 

schools. And $1 billion is a massive investment, and it’s in the 

right place for this province. 

 

I’d like to talk about the 400 million that has been devoted to 

highways. Mr. Speaker, it’s again a massive amount. It’s going 

to do about 1,400 kilometres of highway improvements in this 

province. That seems like a phenomenal amount of highway 

work. But when I look at our party’s prioritized list of projects, 

not everything I think should be on there is. 

 

So you look a little further and what you realize is $400 million, 

1,400 kilometres of highway is just a drop in the bucket of the 

failing infrastructure that we’ve inherited from the NDP. Now 

when I think of Highway 55 and access to our parks in northern 

Saskatchewan from Alberta, it isn’t on this year’s list. And it’s 

just because our roads are in such terrible state that we’re 

investing a massive amount of money, and we are improving 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m also very confident that our party is putting together a 

five-year plan for road prioritization. And it’s based on 

economics of a road, and it’s prioritized in that manner. And 

I’m left wondering, how did the former government prioritize 

their construction? They didn’t. They didn’t invest in it, so how 

can you prioritize in it? And that is what we have inherited on 

this side of the Chamber. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about a couple of 

positive points in this budget. Highway 16 through the middle 

of Lloydminster, it isn’t a twinned highway through 

Lloydminster. Highway 16 is a national corridor. It runs across 

most, all the Western provinces. It’s twinned almost all the way, 

but through Lloydminster it narrows down to a single lane. Now 

in this budget we’ve addressed that, and it will now be twinned 

through Lloydminster. And this is a great, great thing for our 

city, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another thing I’d like to point out is again $5 million for 

municipal roads resources program. The Lloydminster oil field 

is a heavy oil. It can’t be flowlined; it has to be trucked. All the 

oil in the Lloydminster area is trucked, tri-axle trucks. The 

infrastructure in the rural municipalities gets pounded out, and 

the royalties get filtered off to Regina. 

 

Now our Minister of Finance has recognized this issue and has 

put $5 million into our local municipalities to make up for the 

pounding out of the roads from the oil traffic. And that is very 

welcome news by our municipalities and very welcome news as 

far as I can see it. 

 

I would also like to address where our government is investing 

160 million into education — 160 million is, again, a 

substantial amount of money to put into education 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 421 

infrastructure. 

 

And when the rest of the province in the last 16 years was 

losing population and getting smaller and smaller, the 

Lloydminster area was getting bigger. Lloydminster has been 

growing at a 3 per cent growth rate for about 30 years, and all 

the small towns in our area as well have been getting bigger and 

bigger mainly due to the oil boom. 

 

Now when I saw the number $160 million into infrastructure 

for schools, I thought this is terrific because our schools are 

getting crowded; they’re getting overcrowded. And when we 

looked a little further, it turns out that there’s a backlog of 

infrastructure debt. There’s an infrastructure deficit left over by 

the NDP government. In fact going back to the 2003 election, 

that government made commitments for projects which are still 

in the backlog.  

 

Now I would expect that those commitments were for needed 

projects, but why that government wouldn’t have funded it, I 

don’t know. It’s been left on the shoulders of this government, 

and we have put $160 million into addressing it. Now it’s a 

starting point, and it’s a great investment. It’s going to do very 

good things. But the city of Lloydminster, it’s going to continue 

to grow. And we continue to need more investment and 

infrastructure, and I’m certain that this government takes it 

seriously where the other, where the previous haven’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also are investing 190 million into health care 

infrastructure. And it might not surprise you to find out that it is 

the exact same situation as highways and schools. It seems like 

a phenomenal amount of money. It seems like if we were to 

apply this money, it would just solve all the problems, but the 

truth is we inherited a huge deficit in health care infrastructure. 

 

Now I’ll tell you about Lloydminster’s situation. I mentioned 

that it’s been growing very quickly. It’s a very young, vibrant 

community. Lloydminster is less than 30,000 people, but we 

have over 1,000 births a year in the Lloydminster Hospital. 

Now it isn’t built for that. In fact the hospital’s undersized in 

general. But when you look at maternity or some of the more 

specific needs of our town, we need infrastructure funding. And 

the deficit we’ve inherited is huge. And 190 million I am proud 

to stand behind because it is going a long way to addressing 

these issues. 

 

Now I make light that the former government wouldn’t plan for 

this. Now the adage comes up, did they fail to plan for this or 

did they plan to fail? Because the reality is they failed, but I 

don’t know if it’s because they planned to or they just failed to 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also committed $20 million to nurse 

recruitment in this budget. Now this is one of those promises 

we made during the campaign. We said 800 new nurses in our 

mandate — 800. That’s a substantial number, and we have had 

a very successful recruiting trip overseas. And we have 

answered that in this budget with funding. We’re putting money 

where our mouth is, Mr. Speaker. There will be no empty 

promises. This is promise made, promise kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re also putting $10 million into nurse training 

seats. In the mid-’90s that NDP government chopped training 

seats down to, I believe, about 135. Now 135 nurse training 

seats, that was so short-sighted, Mr. Speaker, that as you can 

imagine, we found ourselves in the year 2008 with a major 

deficit in nurses. So the government changes. We’ve taken 

aggressive action to recruit new nurses. We’ve put the money in 

place to fund that recruitment, but we’ve also put training, $10 

million worth of training for nurses — long-term solution, an 

investment in the future, forward thinking. And I’m very proud 

to stand behind that. 

 

Another one that’s close to my heart is $6 million for doctor 

training seats. Well, Mr. Speaker, this one’s close to my heart 

because in rural Saskatchewan getting a doctor is very difficult. 

And my understanding is that we’ve been training doctors for a 

long time, and once they get to a certain stage in their 

education, they need to do an internship. But there wasn’t 

enough money provided by the former government to have 

enough intern spots into Saskatchewan to accommodate them. 

So we’ve paid for their education up to almost ready-to-go 

doctors, and they had to go out of province to do their 

internship. So the Saskatchewan taxpayer has paid for them to 

become doctors but yet lost them at the last possible moment. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have put $6 million into doctors’ 

training, and in coming from small town Saskatchewan, having 

a doctor in that small town makes all the difference in the 

world. It really does. 

 

The commitment to a sustainable drug plan. Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that during the campaign got fairly heated. The 

opposition or the other party in the campaign, they had a drug 

plan but it wasn’t sustainable. It was just one more example of 

let’s throw money at a problem that’s popular today; we won’t 

have to worry about the consequences for, say, 15 years from 

now. But after 15 years of those sorts of commitments and 

promises, we find ourselves in a situation where a little more 

foresight might play the day. 

 

Another thing that I find interesting, Mr. Speaker, is we’re 

investing in patient exit surveys. We’re also investing in a 

patient-first review of our health care system. Now why 

wouldn’t, when we’re looking at health care, why wouldn’t we 

look at patient first? Why wouldn’t we give it that angle of 

analysis? 

 

It almost seems to me to be an investment in common sense, 

that if you’re going to be putting people through a health care 

system, let’s look at how those people are being treated by it, 

being serviced by it, and from there we can start making some 

decisions going into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the property tax promise that we kept during the 

campaign — very popular in my area, very popular in rural 

Saskatchewan, and in urban Saskatchewan. So often they ask 

when there’s a problem in agriculture, everybody says what 

program can we offer? What program is there? Now as a person 

that is a rancher, I don’t want a program. I just don’t want you 

to take the money out of my pocket in the first place. 

 

So let’s look at the basics here. If we are saddling the property 

owner with an in-proportionate amount of property tax so we 

can then save money somewhere else to make a program, to get 

a photo op, to hand it back to the . . . you know, it gets very 

complicated. 



422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

So I’m very proud. We’re doing the right thing. We’re keeping 

our promise on property tax, and I’m proud of that one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the 300 million that we’re 

putting into a loan program for municipalities. I said earlier that 

Lloydminster area is growing very quickly. 

 

Our small towns are filled up. The lots are all sold and the 

mayors and councils of those towns are coming to us and 

saying, we want to sell more lots, people want to live here, but 

it costs so much upfront to put in sewers, plumbing, water. Now 

in this budget we put money forward that will allow 

municipalities to put in a subdivision, put in a group of houses, 

and over the next five years sell them and pay off the loan 

interest-free. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, last week we heard that our population is 

now over 1 million people. We’ve had as much immigration 

last year as we have had since 1952, I believe it is. Now this 

program hits the nail on the head, allowing small towns to 

revitalize themselves. It’s terrific. I think of Pierceland, 

Marshall, Paradise Hill, and Greenstreet — small towns that are 

just doing terrific, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Parks, investment in tourism — all great things. Thirty new 

police officers, I think that is an initiative — $3 million — that 

is good for our province. It’s good for the people here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am going to talk about one last direct 

thing. Now it isn’t, quote, “sexy”. It isn’t a photo op. It’s really 

rather boring. It’s a quarter billion dollars for debt repayment. 

For most people it is dull, but as a fiscal conservative, it touches 

me somewhere down deep because I know that is what is going 

to be good for my children and my grandchildren, Mr. Speaker 

— a quarter of a billion dollars paying down the debt. It isn’t a 

photo op. You can’t stand in front of it. You know, it’s the right 

thing to do, and we have done it, and I’m very proud of our 

Finance minister for having the guts to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can all agree that this is a great budget. We’re 

going to debate it here in the Chamber for the next week. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in five, in 10 years we will look back, and 

we’ll look back at this budget as the starting point of when 

Saskatchewan really turned around . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes. I have a degree in economics, and I got thinking that 

students in the future, in that 5- or 10-year range, they will be 

looking back. They’ll be going through the numbers, and they 

will be writing thesis on the Gantefoer budget of ’08. They will. 

They’ll look back and they’ll think Gantefoer. It’ll have a ring 

to it. 

 

The Gantefoer budget — it’ll be looked at with reverence, and 

it’ll be the starting point of what’ll be known as the prairie tiger, 

in the spirit of the Asian tiger or the Celtic tiger. The prairie 

tiger will rage. Through the lens of time an investment in our 

infrastructure made today will be viewed as a substantial 

building block upon which everything in the future could now 

stand. 

 

I also expect that those same students writing papers will have 

to write a quote or an appendix to, what the heck were the NDP 

doing before 2007? How did you squander this province for so 

long? It will make interesting reading I am sure. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I wrap up, I’d just like to share a story 

with yourself and through you to the Chamber of a constituent 

of mine that some of you people know here. Now for 16 years 

Orval has gone to the roadside coffee shop south of Lloyd, and 

it’s located on the Alberta side. And he’d drive into the gravel 

parking lot in his beat-up old Ford truck, and he’d have to pull 

in alongside his rich Albertans’ black dually one-tons, and he’d 

go into the coffee shop. And over a cup of coffee, he’d debate 

with his Alberta neighbours in good nature that in fact 

Saskatchewan if managed properly would be the richer of the 

two provinces. And they’d laugh and they’d dismiss him. And 

they’d call him a blatherskite, that, you know, you don’t know 

what you’re talking about. And they’d denounce Saskatchewan 

as just a poor, threadbare cousin of its Western provinces. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, things have changed. Yes. The vision of 

Saskatchewan as the envy of the other provinces is now starting 

to ring true. As of this budget, Mr. Speaker, Orval’s life has 

changed. His favourite football team has won the Grey Cup. 

Wheat is now $22 a bushel. The road outside of his house may 

get paved. He just signed his second oil lease. One of his sons 

has moved home, and his wife’s prescription drugs are now 

covered under the Saskatchewan drug plan. He’s still driving 

the beat-up truck, for those who care. That’s for next year. He’s 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. One might say that he has 

an embarrassment of riches, but, Mr. Speaker, Orval is not 

embarrassed at all. He walks with his head held high into that 

coffee shop every day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is for constituents like Orval that I am proud 

to support this budget and that I will not be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to participate in this debate. I’d like to say right off the 

top, to dispel any sort of questions that might be there, I will be 

voting for the amendment and against the budget. 

 

Although, Mr. Speaker, although it’s interesting. In this budget 

there are a number of hallmarks, a number of — how should we 

say — planks that this budget rests upon. A number of 

foundational elements that bear a striking resemblance to things 

that have been brought forward in budget debates in this 

Chamber in the past and that the members opposite, to a person, 

voted against time and time again. 

 

And it wasn’t enough to go voting against them, Mr. Speaker; 

they also had to talk about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund being a 

slush fund or an NDP election fund, the fact of, you know, 

lacklustre debt payments. You know, that that was never 

enough. You know, I think last year the theme was, we’re 

blowing the boom because we had the largest infrastructure 

budget in the history of the province. 

 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

I guess it’s like this, Mr. Speaker. I understand that from the 

money that’s put into the Department of Highways, there’s 

enough there — above and beyond what we’d had in terms of 

the five-year plan that we’d laid out — there’s enough there for 

30 extra kilometres of highway this year. And I guess, you 

know, that makes sense in one respect, Mr. Speaker, because 

it’s probably just enough for the road to Damascus conversion 

that the Sask Party’s undergone in terms of the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, in terms of balanced budgets, in terms of 

any number of things that they promised over on the other side 

of the House that they have not delivered on. 

 

But what they have delivered on is a continued balanced 

budget. You know, for every Finance critic over there that I 

listened to talk about how it wasn’t a financial, a fiscal . . . it 

wasn’t a balanced budget; it was somehow cooking the books, 

or there was some kind of jiggery-pokery going on, you know, 

it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, on this budget they talked about 

it being one more in a long, long string of balanced budgets. 

And I guess, you know, that’s just travel on the road to 

Damascus. 

 

They talked about the growth and securing the future fund or 

securing the finances fund, financial security fund — there we 

go — as somehow new. And for every backflip that they had 

their Finance critics go through over on the other side, Mr. 

Speaker, about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and about how it 

was wrong and, you know, again based on some kind of suspect 

principles, well here they go, Mr. Speaker, implementing the 

very same thing. So what’s changed? Well they’ve changed the 

title. They’ve changed the title, and I guess that’s hard work 

over there, Mr. Speaker, because we know how much they like 

hard work. They talk a lot about it, but apparently when it 

comes to hard work, changing the title suffices. 

 

We know that they talked about putting big bucks on the debt. 

Well this budget, 250 million, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, 

again given the hype that we’ve been subjected to in this House 

for so many years, you’d think it would have been a little bit 

more than that, but not so much, Mr. Speaker. Instead what we 

get is talk about how this is a historic budget, how it’s, you 

know, never been seen before. And the hype just doesn’t add up 

to the reality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the money that they put on schools, I’ll be the first 

to say again, there are some good things in this budget. The 

province, in terms of education, they have a well-defined capital 

project system. 

 

One of the things I was very happy to see this past summer was 

the fact that Scott Collegiate climbed to number two in terms of 

priorities for provincial capital in the K to 12 [kindergarten to 

grade 12] sector. I was glad to see that it was mentioned in the 

budget, and I guess I wait to see what happens, Mr. Speaker, 

because when you drill down into certain of the features of this 

budget, it’s often the fact that the hype over-strips the reality. 

So I’m happy to see the early . . . [inaudible] . . . on it. I’m glad 

to see that they’ve got some dollars earmarked, but we’ll see 

exactly just what they’ve got there for the expenditure. 

 

You know, the speakers before have been patting themselves on 

the back about what a historic budget and, you know, how this 

was so great and, you know, how the light is shining from one 

corner of the province to another, Mr. Speaker. And I guess one 

of the things I found interesting was, you know, if we’re so 

proud of Saskatchewan, how is it — how is it — that when the 

NDP brought in record infrastructure budgets before, they to a 

one voted against them? They voted against them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, and maybe this is where the road to Damascus 

comes in because in the comments around the budget, the 

Finance minister has talked about how the key to them cluing 

into the infrastructure situation was that they talked to Alberta. 

They talked to Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And Alberta told them, 

well what you should spend on is infrastructure. So Alberta 

says, you know, go hard on the infrastructure, and suddenly you 

can’t get enough of that, you know. 

 

Then they like to talk about the $1 billion for the ready to grow 

and all this. And mind you, 30-plus kilometres, which again is 

enough to make the road to Damascus up, but apparently not 

much more than that. 

 

It’s funny. We’re so proud of Saskatchewan that it takes the 

Alberta government to tell the Saskatchewan Party what to do 

in Saskatchewan. But when it’s the NDP that’s doing it, 

somehow it’s blowing the boom and it’s trickery and it’s 

jiggery-pokery. I find that more than passing strange, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What was the headline? 

 

Mr. McCall: — Oh the headline. Well I guess it’s interesting. 

There are a number of things to talk about in this budget. 

 

You know, they talked about some of their election campaign 

promises being met. And that’s certainly the case in some 

respects, Mr. Speaker. But I note that in some material that 

they’ve got on their website they talk about the promise to 

strengthen relationships with First Nations in the province, how 

that’s been kept. You know, it’s like mission accomplished. 

You know, it’s everything except for the big fanfare with the 

aircraft carrier and the big banner behind — you know, mission 

accomplished. 

 

But what did they do in the budget, Mr. Speaker? You know, 

First Nations and Métis Relations, okay, central management 

and services, estimate 2007-2008, $3.8 million; estimate 

2008-2009, $2.8 million. And you know, that $1 million cut, 

they transferred that over into duty to consult, and they’ve 

proclaimed that as a big victory for the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the same time they take the First Nations and Métis 

business development fund and cut it in half — cut it in half, 

Mr. Speaker. And this at a time when we’ve got unheralded 

economic opportunity in this province, where First Nations and 

Métis people are crying out to get the tools they need to get the 

job done, to participate in the mainstream of social and 

economic life in Saskatchewan. So we take one of those 

valuable tools and cut it in half, Mr. Speaker. I find that strange. 

 

The promise that was made around strengthening the 

relationship: there was a feast that was held here in December, 

which was a good step — and I don’t deny that, Mr. Speaker. 

But that is held up as somehow strengthening the relationship 

with First Nations and Métis people in this province. And you 



424 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

know, again, the feast is a good step, but when you take your 

. . . You know, it’s always the proof is in the budget when it 

comes to politics, Mr. Speaker. And if you want to measure the 

importance of something, check out the dollars that are assigned 

to it in the budget. 

 

So what did they do? The only new money in the budget, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that wasn’t shuffled or cut, the only new 

money comes from the gaming agreement that was signed by 

the NDP government. And that I guess we should thank fortune 

that the Sask Party hasn’t torn that up because, with Station 20, 

we’ve seen how they like to take money that’s been promised 

and dedicated and take that away. So I guess we should be 

thankful for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess one of the things that’s also interesting about this budget 

is the fact of the steps that were taken around training and 

providing new training spaces. We’ve heard a lot in the past 

few days, Mr. Speaker, from the opposite side about how we 

should be so thankful that the federal government has put 

forward some dollars on this file. 

 

The federal government has a treaty obligation, a treaty 

responsibility, and they have a constitutional responsibility to 

provide for education for First Nations people in this country. 

And for them to come forward with half measures and the level 

least that they can do in terms of bringing First Nations the 

educational opportunities they need to take place to bring them 

into the mainstream of economic and social life, I find it, I find 

it, you know, not hard to understand, given the relationship 

between the provincial Saskatchewan Party and the federal 

Stephen Harper Conservatives. You know, that’s not hard to 

understand, Mr. Speaker. But you’d think that they would take 

these half measures and say, you know, fair enough, but it’s not 

enough. 

 

But what do they do? They celebrate it from one end of the 

earth. It’s like the $250 million on the clean coal project that 

was promised in the budget, Mr. Speaker. And from that we 

find out that, if there are overruns on the clean coal project, 

guess who’s on the hook for that? The people of Saskatchewan. 

And the Premier’s answer to that, Premier Wall’s answer to that 

is that it will be subject to further negotiation. I apologize for 

using the member’s name, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier says that we’ll negotiate that with the federal 

government. And of course this is the federal government 

though, you know, despite the Premier being the apple of the 

Prime Minister’s eye, despite him being the favoured boy in 

Confederation, it’s interesting that this is going to be negotiated. 

 

So this is a government that signed on in the black and white on 

paper that they would honour an equalization deal with the 

province of Saskatchewan for $800 million. And it turns out of 

course it’s not worth the paper it was written on. But the 

recourse that we had in terms of the federal court gets traded 

away in terms of the clean coal project, where we don’t know 

what the meter’s going to be at the end of the day. 

 

It’s a massively inflationary environment, Mr. Speaker, and that 

we sign off a blank cheque in terms of whatever the payment’s 

going to be. Don’t worry about it, federal government. You 

know, you want to do something that benefits the whole of 

Canada, but we’ll sock it out of the people of Saskatchewan in 

terms of making them pay for this project that should be 

benefiting the people right across this country. You know, it’s 

hard to understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I guess it’s further interesting when you compare this 

budget, one of the things that’s held up again is the inner-city 

comparison in terms of the charges and the costs of living in 

different jurisdictions. And of course one of the things that 

makes the cost of living so affordable in Saskatchewan, you 

know — inflation in the housing sector notwithstanding — one 

of the things that makes it so affordable in Saskatchewan is the 

low-cost utility bundle. And you stack that up against other 

jurisdictions, and it’s plain to see that the Crowns are a huge 

advantage to the people of Saskatchewan. And the first sort of 

shot we’ve had across the bow from the members opposite is 

that the low-cost utility bundle, well that’s just so much 

political gamesmanship; we’re not committing to the low-cost 

utility bundle. 

 

And so we’ve got them doing away with the bundle, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We’ve got them signing blank cheques for 

Ottawa in terms of what clean coal’s going to cost. And I think 

that adds up to a big, fat problem for the people of 

Saskatchewan in terms of affordability and the cost of living in 

this great province of ours. 

 

So is it fair that the federal government off-loads this great 

expense, this great potential expense on the people of the 

province? And we get no more than a, 

well-they-gave-me-some-magic-beans approach from the 

provincial government. Again, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s why 

I’m sitting on this side of the House and that’s why I’m going to 

be voting against that budget because the reality over there 

never matches up to the hype. 

 

Four particular areas where this budget fell short, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in terms of property tax relief, in terms of new training 

seats, in terms of housing initiatives for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and in terms of green initiatives. I mean we’ll 

start off with housing. Today we had a news conference where 

the minister of housing participated in a ribbon-cutting 

ceremony with the mayor of Regina. And you know what, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? That took place in the riding of my colleague, 

the member from Regina Douglas Park. He was there for the 

announcement of that project. It’s been going along great and it 

was started under the previous government. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And I guess one of the things that’s interesting to look at this 

budget in terms of money, money that’s been set aside for 

housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that when it comes to 

actual budget allocation — again the talk versus the walk — 

when it comes to budget allocation, what did this government 

across the way do with the budget? They cut the budget for 

Sask Housing Corporation by $5 million. 

 

Now I don’t know if that’s been reallocated as the per diem for 

the task force or what’s been thought of there. But in terms of 

there being a housing crisis in this province, what’s the 

response of this government? They cut the budget to the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

They’ll go to the ribbon cuttings today for projects that were 

started under the NDP, that were nursed along by the NDP, that 

the previous government put hundreds of millions of dollars 

towards, but when it comes to actually putting up or shutting up 

on the other side, they cut the budget for Sask Housing by $5 

million. I find that hard to understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When it comes to training spaces, again there’s a lot of 

back-patting and self-congratulation that goes over on the other 

side. But when it comes to actually getting the tools in the 

hands of the people that get the job done, they’re falling short, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think of the allocation around the 

provincial training allowance, you know, what was put forward 

for the provincial training allowance for people that are 

low-income, people that want to get out of social assistance, 

that want to find better lives for themselves and their families, 

and they want to find that through more education, through 

adult basic education. And what was done with the provincial 

training allowance? Nothing, nothing. 

 

And in terms of the costs of expense . . . Oh no, and we’ve got a 

member who bears a similar name over in the corner, chirping 

away from his seat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m sure he’ll 

have a chance to get up in this debate and we’ll see what he has 

to say then. But I’ll tell you this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He’s a 

poor substitute for the person who used to represent that 

constituency. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they talk about, they talk about 

the . . . Oh well we seem to have struck a chord there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, so you know, I guess we can let the chips fall 

where they may. 

 

One of the things that’s really interesting in terms of the 

provincial training allowance is the fact that again these are 

people that are showing initiative. They’re trying to make a 

better life for themselves and their families, and there’s nothing 

in there for them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They increased the number of adult basic education seats by a 

largely negligible amount in terms of the overall scope of the 

budget. But again when all is said and done, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, will there be a waiting list for adult basic education in 

this province? Well we’ll find out in estimates, but I’ll bet you 

right now that there is. 

 

They talk about it being a record capital budget, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And again there’s some good money put towards the 

universities, good money put toward SIAST. But in terms of 

capital to the regional colleges, there was nothing for capital to 

the regional colleges. How does that work, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? 

 

You know, we’ve got this great advantage in terms of bringing 

education to students across this province in our regional 

college system. And what was there for capital dollars in that 

part of the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Nothing. So again it’s 

hard to cut through the hype to get to the reality, but we’re 

working on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the other things I found good in the budget was that they 

finally came forward and said that, you know, maybe we should 

have some more child care spaces in this budget despite voting 

against every other child care space that has been increased by 

this government, despite the fact that some of them as federal 

Conservatives ran against the former national child care plan 

that was put forward by many different levels of government. 

But I guess that I’m glad to see that they wandered down that 

particular part of the road to Damascus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and saw the light in that regard. 

 

Here’s another one that’s quite interesting. In terms of green 

initiatives, you know, they’ve kept the targets, but they cut the 

funding. So how did . . . you know, as they used to say in the 

Old Testament — some of the folks over there will be aware of 

this — you know, as the Hebrews said to Pharaoh, how will we 

make bricks without any straw? And apparently the folks over 

there think it’s fine to keep the targets out there, but we’re just 

going to hope along I guess. 

 

One of the members over there and I were at a lecture given by 

Professor Tom Flanagan who of course has, you know, a storied 

career in academia as well as the political science faculty at the 

University of Calgary, but is a long-time activist and worker for 

the Reform Party, for the United Alternative, for the Canadian 

Alliance, for the Harper Conservatives — you know, depending 

on what year you’re referring to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Sometimes it’s hard to keep up. 

 

Anyway, what he had to say about the Harper plan on the 

environment was that, you know, it didn’t really go beneath 

slogans. It didn’t really get beyond sort of, you know, talking a 

bit about it, but they had an environmental virage and the whole 

thing with Rona Ambrose, and you know . . . Oh, pardon me, 

pardon me. Of course they’re all very close and personal friends 

over there, so I thank them for the correction in pronunciation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But the thing that he had to say about the platform of the 

Conservatives, you know, it sort of strikes a chord. It sort of 

rings a bell when it comes to the approach of the Sask Party 

across the way when it comes to the environment. It’s okay to 

keep the targets, and we’ll try and, you know, sort of keep that 

hushed down in terms of an issue on the election hustings. But 

when it comes to the actual plan, I guess we’ll find out. I guess 

they’re going to continue making it up as they go along. And of 

course the clock is ticking, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The clock is 

ticking. 

 

And you know, this is something where we need to have the 

funds . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No. And we’ve got some, 

again some interest in the speech from the other side, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that’s fine. But I guess, perhaps what they 

could yell over is where they’re going to get the money from. 

Where are they going to get the money to meet the goals? 

Because this budget speaks volumes about their actual 

commitment to how we’re going to meet the goals that have 

been set out in terms of climate change, in terms of carbon 

emission reductions. So I guess we’ll find out. I guess we’ll find 

out. You know, I guess the response on this is just, trust us. 

Trust us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’ll see how that works 

out. 

 

I guess I’d ask the Deputy Speaker if the Minister for Education 

would like to include his threats in his speech, so then we could 

get him on Hansard . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh no. Well 



426 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If he’s going to threaten us 

from the floor, you know, maybe he could do it in his speech so 

then we could get it on Hansard and then we can tell people in 

Saskatoon, where he talks about how we’re going to cut 

schools. Then maybe we can get that straight . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, no, no. And I guess I’m waiting for him to 

participate in the debate so I can understand him clearly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker — Order, order. I’ll ask the member to 

direct his comments through the Speaker, and I’ll also ask that 

the members allow the member who has the floor to speak. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Have no fear. Have no fear. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again, one of the other interesting 

points in this budget — property tax relief. And you know, this 

is something where we’ve heard so much from the members 

opposite in terms of, you know, the plan they’re going to bring 

to bear and so on and so forth. And when it comes to this 

budget, what do the people of Saskatchewan get, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? 

 

On average 27 bucks — 27 bucks. And I guess . . . My seatmate 

is telling that me that’s enough to buy a pizza. And I guess 

that’s the pizza politics being practised by the politicians 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the other things in terms of training in this province, the 

members opposite in past have said different things about 

tuition freezes. I can remember well the member from Silver 

Springs talking about how we needed to have, you know, 

tuition at the national average at very least; how that got turned 

around in the campaign. And you know, was there going to be a 

freeze? Maybe there would; maybe there wouldn’t be. And I’m 

glad to see that there’s a freeze in this budget, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. There should be. In fact I would of course have gone 

further and have cut tuition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we ran on 

in the campaign. 

 

But I find it interesting that what’s promised in terms of getting 

past this stopgap, this one-year freeze that they’ve proposed, 

well they’re going to study it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re 

going to study it some more. And I guess what students and 

their families are going to tell them is that, you know, tuition’s 

too high. Maybe that’s what they’re going to tell them. Because 

that’s certainly what they told myself and my colleagues as we 

went across this province, that tuition has gone up too much and 

that we need to make sure that there’s some sustainability there, 

some predictability for students and their families as they plan 

to make sure that they can afford their post-secondary 

education. 

 

I guess again there’s a lot of interest in the speech, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I’ll take that as a compliment. But apparently . . . 

Oh they’re reneging on that now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Anyway 

I guess again in terms of the speech . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . I think the member is protesting too much but, you know, 

that’s perhaps his due. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the fundamentals of this 

budget, in many ways it’s an almost-NDP budget despite a few 

sort of add-ons in terms of things like the 30-extra kilometres 

— you know, enough for the road to Damascus. And despite 

things like renaming the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, despite 

things like spending on infrastructure —not because it’s the 

right thing to and that’s what people in Saskatchewan tell them 

to do, but because they got their marching orders from the 

people of Alberta or something along those lines — there are 

things in this budget that are almost NDP. So it’s, you know, 

it’s good to see those. 

 

And we look forward to the days ahead in terms of how they 

play out and how they really impact the people of 

Saskatchewan because it’s always one thing to listen to the 

hype, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it’s another to see it play out on 

the ground. So we’ll be watching very closely on that. 

 

But of course for so many reasons — in terms of what’s 

happened to First Nations and Métis Relations, in terms of the 

housing portfolio, in terms of property tax relief that doesn’t go 

near far enough, in terms of keeping the goals for climate 

change but not making sure that there’s the wherewithal to 

achieve those goals, in terms of the overall failure to make sure 

the the training spaces are there to meet the opportunity that is 

there to bring more people into the mainstream of social and 

economic life in Saskatchewan — for all those reasons, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’ll be supporting the amendment and voting 

against the budget. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s kind of nice to get up and speak to the 

budget after a socialist’s been up because now you can actually 

get some of the facts straight in what the previous member 

talked about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — And I’d just like to give a couple, just a 

couple of short ones right now in favour of what the member 

. . . or against what the member had talked about. One, he 

talked about highways and his five-year plan. And the NDP 

government went 16 years trying to create a five-year plan, and 

it never was published. I have never seen an NDP five-year plan 

for highways, and yet the member has the audacity to get up 

and say something about our five-year plan. 

 

Now he also gets up and he talks about, he talks about tuition 

freeze. He talks about tuition freeze and rollback of tuition. And 

I would like to just let that member know some of the facts. It 

was under the NDP from 1991 to 2005 that tuition rates rose 

217 per cent — 217 per cent thanks to the socialists. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now have a budget that looks forward. 

We don’t have a budget that looks in the rear-view mirror like 

in the past. We have a budget that has a plan to it. 

 

We have seen for the last 16 years a government that had a 

failure to plan. Now whether that was intentional that they 

failed to plan or they purposely wanted to plan to fail, but you 

look at the 16-year history of the socialist government and 

identify what they’ve done and where they’ve gone, and I 

would suggest it’s both of those. They have failed to plan and 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

they actually planned to fail. And we could look at a number of 

issues where that relates to. 

 

All we have to do right now is look at where we’re going with 

this budget. We’re going forward. It’s a forward-looking 

budget. One of the first things happened after we got elected — 

and then we saw what the budget was — it’s like there’s a great 

big sign over the province that we’re open for business. Finally, 

finally after 16 years, this province is open for business. 

 

Now we hear the socialists talk about programs. Oh, you cut 

$12 from this program. You cut 57 cents from this one. Where 

did they get the money from? That was the problem with the 

socialists. Where did they get the money from? The member 

from Douglas Park yipping at his seat, what does he want to do? 

Up taxes. What did he do? He upped taxes. And where does 

that money come from? The pockets of the people. What we 

have to do in this province is grow. We grow business. We get 

the number of people up. That’s where we get the money to pay 

for all of the programs. 

 

[15:45] 

 

What did they want to do? Socialize, centralize, demoralize, and 

get everybody, take into their pockets and give it to them, and 

they’ll try and run it. You almost wonder where they get their 

doctrine from. Well we have an idea. We have an idea where 

they get it from. We know what the manifesto, the Regina 

Manifesto was created from. There’s only two manifestos that I 

know of in the world, and one of them’s the Regina Manifesto. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we even hear the economy is going well. We 

hear members opposite. They say, well, well, thanks to the 

NDP, thanks to the NDP, this is our . . . We set the basis for 

this. Let me ask members over there — if they want to take 

credit — what did they do in 16 years that helped create the 

economic situation that we’re in today? I don’t know if 

anybody over there can honestly answer that, what they did to 

help create it. 

 

They did lower the taxes — that was right out of our platform. 

That was a positive. We gave them credit for it. What else did 

they do? Most available hours of work legislation. I’m sure that 

really helped people outside of the province wanting to come in 

here. Thank goodness that was scrubbed. How about unionizing 

management positions? There’s a couple Bills that did that. If 

you were outside of this province and wanted to come in, what 

kind of message would that lead to if you looked on the website 

and you saw this happening? 

 

Now if you’re a business person from some other country, some 

other jurisdiction, and you go onto a website and the first thing 

you come across is the NDP manifesto, the Regina Manifesto, 

and then you further look and you see where they’re talking 

about unionizing management positions — what they did — if 

you look a little further and you’ve got a Bill that nationalizes 

potash and it’s still on the books, if you’re a business coming 

into this province, what would you do? You’d say, nope, sorry, 

sorry, we’re going to wait until at least there’s a thinking 

government in this province where we can deal with, and we 

will do that. And that’s exactly what happened. 

 

It’s interesting to note members opposite . . . the member from 

Douglas Park, he’d like to call this, well it was almost an NDP 

budget. I will assure that member that this is nothing like an 

NDP budget. This is a positive budget. This is a budget looking 

forward. This is a budget for growth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — This is a budget that is identifying 

shortfalls, and we are fixing it. Infrastructure. Somebody just 

said I could go for an hour. 

 

It’s very interesting to hear some of the comments from the 

other side, and again where they’re looking at the rear-view, in 

the rear-view mirror, we’re looking forward. Their failure to 

plan and planning to fail. I found a couple of things very 

interesting in the last little while. We had the member from 

Riversdale on the radio the other day, and he had commented 

on Station 20, which he did in question period today. He 

commented on Station 20. 

 

Well what really got me, the audacity of that member to say one 

of the reasons we really need Station 20 is for accessibility for 

health care for our people. He’s the same person that helped 

close 52 rural hospitals. Talk about accessibility. Accessibility, 

he is worried that somebody has to go four or five blocks, and 

we’ve got people that are having to drive 150 miles to get to a 

centre. Accessibility, that’s the NDP record on health care. Let 

me tell you; we have a three tiered health care in this province 

under the NDP. There’s those that can afford it go out of 

province, those in the rural areas, and those in the urban areas; 

and they created that health care system in this province, and 

they should be totally ashamed of it. 

 

Another one that I find is very ironic . . . We get the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow gets up and reads a petition, well 

we want you to do something for the Moose Jaw Hospital. 

What did she do in 16 years? Absolutely nothing. In the last 

eight years or last four years she was a member of cabinet. 

What did she do for the Moose Jaw Hospital? Absolutely 

nothing. And now she says well the Sask Party better do 

something for it. 

 

They created an infrastructure deficit so bad in this province it’s 

going to take years to fix, and yet she has the audacity to get up 

and say something now like, do something for our hospital 

please because we couldn’t. And that’s basically what she’s 

saying. That’s the undertoning of what she’s saying . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . She, I said. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have an interesting email that I received, 

and I would like to put it on record because it was not too long 

ago when the Leader of the Opposition was asked about a report 

card for the Saskatchewan Party government. And in the report 

card, he had said, I’m going to give the Sask Party a D. Well I 

have this individual that was so upset with that he sent me a 

very long email, and I’d just like to read a couple of excerpts 

from it, and I’m quoting. It said: 

 

I recently read on the news that Mr. Lorne Calvert gave 

the “Sk Party” a D grade so far, well here’s one for Mr. 

Calvert and I give him a minus F for his failure to hire 

sufficient staff to operate the multi-million dollar hospital 

they built in Swift Current . . . and the waiting period we 



428 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

the electorate are continued to be put through as a result of 

his lack of foresight and/or negligence. I hope to face him 

in person one day and tell him what I think, but until that 

time I only have you to inform. 

 

Here’s another one: 

 

What kind of planning was done there? Was that a failure 

to plan or was that a plan to fail? 

 

An Hon. Member: — It was a plan to fail. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — And that’s very, very sad. 

 

And this fellow goes on and he said, he says: 

 

Millions spent on a building but little or nothing spent on 

hiring new staff does not make sense to me. For that [and 

I’m quoting] Lorne gets a -F and thank God he’s out of the 

Premier’s office. 

 

That’s the sentiment out there by people of Saskatchewan. They 

are just totally upset with what has gone on in the past, and 

they’re so relieved and pleased to see a government now that’s 

looking forward. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk about when members 

opposite get up and they talk about spending. And with their 

socialist mentality, you know, what they’ve done to centralize 

and socialize, you can’t help but bring to light what the amount 

of money that they’ve squandered over some of their business 

deals. 

 

We have heard of SPUDCO. And where would that 35 or $38 

million go to help out the people in the inner cities that they’re 

talking about? Station 20, would that help? And I’m wondering, 

I’m wondering if Station 20 was not an issue like SPUDCO, 

public-private partnership where the public didn’t have to put 

any money in. I think SPUDCO — what was it? — $49 that 

they put into SPUDCO? And that was a public-private 

partnership but the public of Saskatchewan was misled for six 

years, and the public of Saskatchewan were not told the truth on 

that whole issue. 

 

But I want to go on, on some of these other ones because we 

talk about the failure to plan and where this government or that 

government has gone. 

 

Let’s look at, let’s look at . . . one of my favourites is Navigata. 

How much planning went into Navigata? Did they really plan to 

fail on that one? And what is Navigata up to now, 

100-and-some million dollars of loss? 100-and-some million? 

And they’re talking now about well, if you would have taken 

this $100,000 or this million dollars. What about the $100 

million that they lost in Navigata? And who was held to account 

for that? Is there anybody on that side of the House that can tell 

anybody in this Chamber who was held to account for that? I 

think not. I think not. 

 

Now here’s another one. We talk about the great business 

acumen of those people on the opposite side of the House. How 

about ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]? ISC is a very interesting story. It could have 

been bought off the shelf for maybe 5 million, maybe 10 

million. Put in some unique Saskatchewan enhancements, 

maybe 20 million. No, no, no, no. No, no. 

 

We had a socialist government says we know better. What did 

ISC end up costing — 110 million, $120 million? There’s about 

another $100 million squandered by that group of men and 

women on that side of the House. And they’re now wishing to 

talk about a couple of million bucks in the budget that didn’t get 

to one of their special pet projects. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s 

a lot of these. 

 

How about the $800 million in the Meadow Lake pulp mill? 

You know I’m waiting for somebody from the other side to yip 

and say, well that wasn’t ours; that would come under some 

other administration. Well I said this before in the Throne 

Speech; it’s typical of the NDP. It’s like them betting on a horse 

race. The horse loses every race, but they keep betting on it and 

blame the owner of the horse. That’s what they did with the 

Meadow Lake pulp mill. They threw something like $700 

million more into a losing venture. Why? Because of politics. 

That’s the only simple reason was because of politics. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a host of business deals that that 

government went through. And I could list them off. I’d love to 

list them off — tappedinto, tappedinto.com. Into the dot-com 

business. Now you look again at the business acumen of those 

people on that side and how they could justify to get into 

something like the dot-coms. And look at the dot-coms; what 

they’ve got: tappedinto, Craig Wireless, Retx, Clickabid, oh my 

gosh. And their business dealings that . . . These are all losses, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are losses that those men and 

women engineered the losses. Were they planning to fail or 

failing to plan? Again both. They failed to plan and they really 

planned to fail. 

 

We could go back and look at Guyana and Channel Lake. 

Fifteen million dollars in Channel Lake — that was brutal, 

brutal, absolutely. And what do they do about it? Well they say, 

well in years past somebody lost $1,200 and we took them to 

court for it. Add these up. 

 

Oh and I read another one that that I really want to talk about. 

Talk about a socialist organization to take over the bingo of the 

province — mega bingo — again the business acumen of those 

men and women, and they lost $8 million to try and take over 

the bingo industry and can’t even win at bingo. Planning to fail 

or failing to plan? Both. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s kind of ironic when you 

start looking at how the socialists really try and work. Look at 

the Belle Plaine, look at the Belle Plaine ethanol plant. Was that 

a failure to plan or plan to fail? And it was both. 

 

We had a photo op — what was it? —$750,000 photo op. 

That’s what it was. All it was, was a photo op. And I have a 

feeling. It is my real deep feeling that this was nothing more 

than SPUDCO in disguise. It was a public-private partnership 

with no private money in it. 

 

Broe industries were right, front, and centre . . . And notice the 

people are pretty quiet over there on that side now because 

maybe they have some more information on it. But 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

public-private partnership with no private money — what a 

deal, that’s a typical type of a socialist deal. 

 

So anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I look at all of the failed 

business ventures, when those men and women wish to get up 

and talk about $1 million here, $1 million there, I would remind 

them what they have lost. And that what I have just given you 

adds up to over, well over $1 billion, $1 billion in failed NDP 

ventures. Now when they want to talk about $1 million here or 

there, I think they should take that into account. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget that we put forward is a total 

inclusive budget. It is for the whole province. It’s not like the 

group on the other side that wanted to pick winners and losers 

every day of the week — more losers than winners, I might add. 

But this is all-inclusive. And I look at stuff around the province, 

and I can speak for a long time on it. 

 

The cattle industry is one. I asked in every speech — budget 

and Throne Speech — what they have done to help the cattle 

industry. In my seven to eight years here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there was absolutely nothing. Now, now at least, with a $1 

billion infrastructure fund, there’s some light at the end of the 

tunnel — finally. 

 

Tourism. We heard members opposite get up and talk about 

tourism. Tourism is a saving thing for the province of 

Saskatchewan, and I remember standing up in this House and 

talking about the infrastructure, road infrastructure in southern 

Saskatchewan. How do tourists get into this province? They 

don’t come by boat or very few. The flying, we know that the 

flights in and out of Saskatchewan have, under their regime, 

have not been the greatest, so I would suggest that by vehicle is 

the greatest way to get into this province for tourism. And what 

did they do with the highway infrastructure? It was just totally 

decimated over the last numbers of years under the NDP. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now we also look at how the NDP operate. And I just have to 

touch a little bit because we talk about, we talk about property 

taxes and we know, we know that we have done more in 

property taxes. They talk the talk but don’t walk the walk. Yes, 

you know, go right back to big Tommy, and he said in ’44 

about property taxes were the worst form of taxation. And they 

talk about that every year, but they didn’t really do anything 

about it. They’d throw out a little handful here and there. We’re 

working on a plan to have property taxes, education portion of 

property tax, dealt with. In fact our member from Rosetown is 

looking after that. 

 

But let’s look at the NDP record on that. What they did was 

forced amalgamation . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow wants to speak, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I guess it’s her turn next. But let’s look, let’s look at 

the forced amalgamation. The forced amalgamation of the 

school divisions, that was, that was designed by . . . I think that 

member was actually involved in it. That was designed to save 

education portion of property tax. What was the result? It cost 

taxpayers in this province multi-millions of dollars, and all it 

did was basically centralize and socialize the school districts. 

Mr. Speaker, another case of failing to plan and planning to fail. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on for a long time, but I will 

adhere a little bit closer to the time constraints that we had 

asked for, so I am going to, I am going to end my remarks, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I’d say I would definitely vote against the 

amendment to the budget that I think was very not 

well-thought-out, and I will definitely be supporting the budget 

which is the most, it’s the most progressive and outstanding 

budget that this province has probably ever seen in its history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to rise in the House today in support of the 2008-2009 

provincial budget. 

 

The first budget of the Saskatchewan Party government outlines 

our plans to make this province ready for growth. It sets forth 

the plan to sustain this growth in the coming years to ensure a 

lasting prosperity for all Saskatchewan people. I can’t think of a 

better time for Saskatchewan than right now. We are leading the 

nation in key sectors of the economy, and many forecasters are 

predicting that our edge will grow even greater in 2008 and 

2009. We are committed to follow through on our promise of 

growth and security. 

 

There’s a new vibrancy in our cities and rural areas with the 

growing strength of our economy, and we are all beneficiaries 

of the high quality of life in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The 

rest of the country is really trying to figure out what we’ve 

known for a very long time — that Saskatchewan is a great 

place to work, live, play, and do business. 

 

We have all heard just in the last few days that the province is 

experiencing a rise in the population that it is not seen since 

1952. Private sector forecasters estimated that in 2007, 

Saskatchewan’s growth rate was second or third in this country. 

In the first quarter of 2008, those forecasters are already saying 

that our growth rate will rank first in Canada. As you heard in 

the budget address, Saskatchewan is already leading in key 

sectors of our economy. 

 

There’s a whole list, Mr. Speaker, of number ones that we can 

be proud of. In income growth, we are number one in Canada. 

In wholesale trade growth, we are number one in Canada. In 

retail sales growth, we are number one in Canada. In overall 

construction growth, we are again number one in Canada. In 

residential growth, construction growth, we are number one in 

Canada. In new vehicle sales we are again number one in 

Canada. As many of you have heard the Premier say, when it 

comes to the great sport of football, we’re number one in 

Canada. 

 

National and provincial publications have recognized our 

province, our great province of Saskatchewan, as a place for 

business, a destination for tourism, and an attractive place to 

live and work. The future does look bright for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Employment levels went up 2.1 per cent in 

2007. We exceeded one-half million working people for the 

first year ever. 



430 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

Clearly this is a time of growth for Saskatchewan, and we’re 

gaining momentum. Our government’s job is to look at ways to 

sustain this growth and secure it for the future. I believe that 

economic growth will attract people, but it is the quality of life 

that we can offer in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that makes 

people want to stay here and raise their families. 

 

Saskatchewan’s tourism industry plays a vital role in both 

economic development and in promoting pride in our province. 

That emphasis on quality of life and pride in our province is 

manifested in the structuring of the new Ministry of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport. This structure reflects our priority and 

focuses strategically on tourism enhancement, quality of life, 

and economic growth. 

 

The tourism industry is key to our new vision for the province. 

Our government certainly realizes that tourism is an important 

economic engine for Saskatchewan. In fact it is a $1.5 billion 

industry in Saskatchewan, employing nearly 53,000 people. 

When you think that one in nine workers is employed in 

tourism and seven out of 10 workers got their first job in the 

tourism industry, this is truly significant. 

 

We are taking an integrated approach to developing our tourism 

industry through bringing together key components such as 

parks, sport, culture, and heritage. For these activities, the 

budget, the Saskatchewan Party government budget announced 

an extra $8 million, double overall tourism spending. This 

demonstrates our true commitment looking forward and a belief 

in our province and in what we can be. 

 

This funding will cover a range of tourism-related initiatives 

that include increased support to Tourism Saskatchewan, 

improved signage for tourism attractions on Saskatchewan 

highways, capital investment in ecological, paleontological 

museum and heritage facilities, support for Saskatchewan’s 

presence at the 2010 Vancouver Olympic Games, and greater 

support for event hosting. 

 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport will work with Tourism 

Saskatchewan and form creative partnerships with private 

sector organizations to promote tourism and attract more 

visitors. 

 

Another major component of the vision is our commitment to 

increased funding to Saskatchewan parks. Our government sees 

a lot of interrelated potential to grow and to improve both the 

tourism industry and the provincial parks system, and we are 

excited about getting to work on that agenda in 2008. Our 

provincial, regional, and urban parks are a source of pride to 

Saskatchewan residents, and they offer some of the prime 

recreational sites in the province. We are increasing funding to 

parks by $5 million. Initiatives to improve our parks will 

significantly enhance them as valued tourism destinations. 

 

In order to relieve the pressures of growth and build capacity in 

our parks, we are committed to several improvements to park 

programs and infrastructure. New initiatives to meet visitor 

demand and enhance camping opportunities include adding 

1,000 electrified campsites over the next four years, starting 

with electrifying 274 sites this year in a combination of three 

parks. We have recently eliminated the campfire fee. We are 

improving park programming, maintenance, and the 

infrastructure. 

 

We are modernizing and expanding the campground reservation 

service, reserve-a-site. In addition to adding more sites to many 

of the existing reserve-a-site locations throughout the provincial 

parks system, now park visitors can also reserve at Buffalo 

Pound, Danielson, Makwa Lake, and The Battlefords Provincial 

Park. We are increasing customer service, maintenance, and 

security in our provincial parks. 

 

We are enhancing conservation and interpretation of natural and 

cultural resources in the parks. Provincial funding to regional 

parks will increase from $75,000 to $600,000 per year. And we 

will be consulting with First Nations and key stakeholders to 

formally preserve more Saskatchewan wilderness for nature 

conservation and wilderness recreational purposes. 

 

Urban parks, Mr. Speaker, are also an important part of 

Saskatchewan parks network that contribute to a high quality of 

life for all residents. We are providing over $4 million to urban 

parks this year, 2008. We are making these investments because 

provincial urban and regional parks are a source of pride to our 

residents and are a significant tourist draw, especially to our 

neighbouring provinces. 

 

We also want to ensure that Regina, the provincial capital, 

continues to remain a source of pride for the people of 

Saskatchewan and the visitors to the province. The provincial 

budget earmarked $700,000 to commence establishment of a 

new capital commission. The capital commission is intended to 

make Saskatchewan’s capital city an expression and glowing 

reflection of the province’s identity, values, culture, and 

heritage. It will work to preserve and promote the history and 

culture of the province through its capital. 

 

Consultations have already been initiated, Mr. Speaker, with the 

city of Regina, the University of Regina, and Wascana Centre 

Authority, who will all play an integral role in the development 

of the capital commission. Broader consultations will also be 

held in the final creation of the capital commission. 

 

Some of its activities will include enhancing existing tourism 

and heritage assets and identifying and soliciting the 

development of new tourism and heritage assets. 

Saskatchewan’s natural advantages and cultural heritage draw 

tourists from around the world. We will continue to conserve 

heritage resources of environmental, recreational, and of 

cultural significance. We will work to promote a healthy and 

sustainable creative and cultural community that is recognized 

and valued throughout the province and beyond. 

 

Participating in arts, culture, recreational, and sporting activities 

benefits children and youth, their families, communities, and 

indeed the entire province. It also contributes to an enhanced 

quality of life that increasingly makes Saskatchewan a place of 

choice to live and raise a family. 

 

Government is keeping its promise, Mr. Speaker, to maintain 

arts and cultural funding support by providing 4.2 million in 

new funding to ensure a vibrant and sustainable arts and 

cultural sector in the province of Saskatchewan. Supporting the 

commercial development of the arts sector remains a priority of 

our government. Commercial development is one of the best 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

means of improving the socioeconomic well-being of the artist 

and the creative sector workers. Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport will consult with the arts, culture, and creative industries 

to form and develop a plan for the new allocation of the monies. 

 

We will also be encouraging healthy, active families through 

sport and recreation. The purpose of the new active families 

benefit program is to assist families with the cost of their 

children’s participation in cultural, recreational, and sporting 

activities. We will be providing $150 per year per child 

refundable tax credit. It is anticipated that up to 120,000 

children will benefit from this program. The Ministry of 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport will be consulting with 

global organizations involved in cultural, sport, and recreation 

in order to develop the guidelines for defining eligible cultural, 

recreational, and sport activities. It is expected that these 

guidelines and a listing of the eligible activities will be 

completed by the fall of 2008. This new program will take 

effect beginning in 2009 tax year. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Vibrant communities are destinations that attract businesses and 

retain a skilled and creative workforce. High quality of life, 

tourism growth, parks enhancement, conservation of our vital 

natural areas, and the nurturing of our cultural resources are all 

initiatives that will enhance our quality of life. 

 

These initiatives help secure Saskatchewan’s future as a great 

place to live, work, and do business, as do the other initiatives 

and new plans that were outlined in the budget address. It’s 

about time Saskatchewan stood up and said, here we are; this is 

what we’re about. And this is what this budget addresses and 

allows us to take our rightful place in this country as a cultural 

and a great place to raise a family and that we are looking at 

furthering economic growth in this province and improving our 

quality of life. 

 

I do not support the amendment proposed by the opposition. 

Therefore it gives me great pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to express 

my support for the 2008-2009 provincial budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker — The member for Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to stand and rise and speak to the budget debate. What 

a great time it is when Saskatchewan’s got such a hot economy 

— just hotter than a $2 pistol. The real question that people 

need answered and that will be answered is, can the Sask Party 

government maintain the momentum that has built up? Can they 

maintain the economic activity that’s happened in 

Saskatchewan where we’ve got such a hot economy, where 

we’ve got growth in population — 16,000 year over year in the 

last quarter. That incidentally is just phenomenal. We’ve got 

things turned around coming exactly the way we wanted them 

to be happening in Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve got, Mr. Speaker, lest someone thinks that it’s just me 

that says there’s a hot economy, I want to point out just for 

reference the Saskatchewan Institute of Public Policy authored 

Winter 2008 and it is co-authored by Jim Marshall and one 

Adam Mills. And I just to refer to a few things in this book just 

so that we understand what I’m saying when we have a hot 

economy in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to refer, on page 11 they have a nice little chart that 

shows the gross domestic product per capita in current dollars. 

So we’re talking, you know, apples and apples, current dollars, 

Canada and Saskatchewan from 2001 to 2006. 

 

I’m not going to beat these numbers up, but I want to point out 

in 2001, GDP in Saskatchewan, gross domestic product per 

person, was 31,000 and change. For Canadian the average was 

35,000 and change; so we were roughly $2,000 lower in 

Saskatchewan, gross domestic product per person in 1991; not 

that long ago. 

 

In 2006 Saskatchewan goes to just about $47,000; Canada, 

44,000. We’re now 3,000 per capita ahead of the rest of the 

total of Canada. That happened in, as I say, a remarkably short 

period of time, and I’m very proud that that was a period of 

time that coincided with New Democrats having formed 

government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Coincidence? 

 

Mr. Trew: — What a turnaround. A colleague asking, if it’s a 

coincidence — well how can it be a coincidence when we go 

from below the national average to above the national average 

during our tenure? 

 

I want to refer to the very next page, and there’s an average 

annual growth of gross domestic product by province and I 

point out that from . . . this is a shorter time period now, 2001 to 

2006, so just a five-year time frame. And Alberta was 7.5 per 

cent growth in the per capita GDP. We were at 7.1 per cent. The 

national average during that time when we were at 7.1 per cent 

growth in Saskatchewan, the national average was 4.4 per cent. 

Coincidence, I think not. Good management, I think so. 

 

I’ve got one more chart before I leave the numbers, and then I 

just ask people to bear with me on this. This one is the value of 

Saskatchewan exports. This one really ties into how people are 

working, what they’re building when they’re making farm 

machinery for export — be it export to Manitoba, Alberta, 

Montana, the Dakotas, or Australia. We export manufactured 

goods all over the world because we’ve got such good work 

force and a whole host of reasons. But the value of 

Saskatchewan exports from 1991 to 2006 grew — now get this 

— from $10 billion to, get this, $30 billion, more than tripled in 

that time frame. Coincidence that we had a New Democratic 

Party government? I think not. I think not — a credit to many 

hard working people around the province, a real credit to the 

men and women that work in the manufacturing sector but what 

phenomenal growth. 

 

We had, many of those years we had the second, some of the 

years the highest growth in the manufacturing sector in all of 

Canada, some of the years we slid to third but first, second, 

third all the way through that time frame. And the record, Mr. 

Speaker, speaks for itself. I’ve already talked about 16,000 

people population growth in the final quarter of last year alone. 

We got population growing like we have not seen for decades, 



432 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

for decades. We’ve got things really coming our way. 

 

Then we get to what this budget is about. Now remember I said, 

and I stand by it, the real question is going to be can this new 

government opposite, can it maintain the economic activity. 

Can it maintain the growth? Can it keep the benefits coming for 

the people of Saskatchewan or, more personally, for the people 

in Regina Coronation Park that I am so blessed to represent, for 

everyone in Saskatchewan? Can they keep that momentum up, 

that economic momentum up? I hope the answer is yes. I 

suspect that at some point in the future there’s going to be a 

New Democratic Party government asked to clean up the mess 

from the right wingers again. 

 

In this budget and by their own announcements, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve got things like — I’m not going to beat on anything for 

very long — but highways, big announcement on highways, 

lots more money they say, despite that by their very own 

announcements, less than 30 kilometres of highways, additional 

to what was paved under our budget, is going to be paved this 

year — less than 30 kilometres more. Well that borders on 

deceitful. It is really, really questionable when you can claim 

victory, and yet the proof in the pudding is going to pave 

something less than 30 kilometres additional to the total 

kilometres that were paved last year. 

 

I want to flip to agriculture. And here, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

say, if you were to check around with most farmers in 

Saskatchewan, most farmers would tell you that their friends 

are on the government side — Sask Party. Most farmers would 

say that. That’s their friends. Well, Mr. Speaker, in last year’s 

budget we spent on agriculture $313 million. What is this year’s 

budget for agriculture? $302 million, $302 million. Mr. 

Speaker, they claim somehow this is more. 

 

Let me say to my farmer friends — and I have farmer friends — 

let me say specifically to my farmer friends and farmers 

everywhere in this province, be careful who you call your 

friends because your friends will have their hand in your 

pocket, and they’re pulling money out just as fast as they can 

possibly grab it. I say shame on you, shame on you, $302 

million for agriculture at a time when livestock prices are 

plummeting; at a time when you look at the pork industry, 

they’re experiencing hardship. Farmers are coming off some 

pretty tough times. Yes, we’ve got good commodity prices right 

now, but you know what? That’s going to be too late for some 

farmers. And what’s their answer? Go from $313 million to a 

total commitment of $302 million for all of agriculture. I again 

say shame. 

 

Then we go, in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we go to 

post-secondary education. And oh boy, I hear; and oh boy, it is. 

I’m not going to beat on this one. But I want to say, they’re 

proud of what they’ve done in post-secondary education. 

They’ve got a tax credit that’s worth less than the tax credit that 

we campaigned on. It’s okay. You won the election. You won 

the election. You’re delivering that part that you promised. 

 

But what they didn’t say and what they didn’t promise or what 

they aren’t delivering is the training jobs. At a time when we’ve 

got an economy, as I’ve said before, hotter than a $2 pistol; at a 

time when the economy is red hot; at a time when we have an 

opportunity and a need to train people up and get them 

absolutely involved working in our economy, and there are 

people ready, willing, and able; at a time when they need the 

training spaces — the answer of the government is they 

increase the training spaces at a rate less than half, less than 50 

per cent of what we increased the training spaces a short year 

ago when we were in government. 

 

Well how is this progress, Mr. Speaker? I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to be scratching their head and saying, 

how does this help my son or my daughter, my nephew, my 

neighbour’s children? How does it help our province when their 

answer is trimming the rate of adding training spaces at a time 

when they should be adding? I say on post-secondary 

education, I say shame. 

 

Now we turn to health, Mr. Speaker, health care. This one I find 

particularly galling. In this budget, seniors, to claim the 

prescription drug benefit, Mr. Speaker, before they can claim 

any benefit under the new seniors’ prescription drug plan, 

seniors have to prove they’re poor, have to prove poverty, have 

to prove poverty, have to prove that their income is below a 

certain amount. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, I have been so proud all of 

my life to be a Canadian and from Saskatchewan. Why? 

Because we have a progressive income tax structure. If you 

make lots of money, if you’ve earned it, you should pay it. I 

have some friends that tell me, oh I paid . . . and they’ll name 

what sounds like an outrageous amount of income tax. To every 

one of them, I look them right in the eye and I say 

congratulations because you have to have the income before 

you can pay the income tax. It’s as simple as that. 

 

We need to have an absolutely straightforward income tax 

structure. And I’m like everyone else; I wish that we could 

lower it, lower it, lower it. And in fact lower it, lower it, lower it 

we did, many, many times while we were in government. 

Many, many times taxes going down. 

 

Anyway so we have a drug plan that . . . it absolutely appals me 

that seniors have to prove that they have not an adequate 

income to qualify for the seniors’ drug plan. And everybody’s 

circumstance is different. 

 

Then the other question I have is, what is it that happens 

magically to young people that have their prescription drugs 

covered under the new plan up to age 14, and then they have a 

birthday? What a difference a day makes. What a difference a 

day makes. All of a sudden they can have some catastrophic 

problem that requires significant drug use all the way through 

their life, but all of a sudden, they’re a day older, a day older. 

Their drug needs haven’t changed one penny’s worth, but all of 

a sudden they and their family are responsible for those 

prescription drug plans. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Oh and they say well but we’ve got a plan for that; all they have 

to do is prove they’re really poor. Well isn’t that wonderful. I 

say shame, that when we leave, when we leave a billion and a 

half dollars cash, that that’s the best that the new government 

can come up with. There’s a billion and a half extra dollars left 

there, left there, and that’s the best you can come up with . . . is 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

let’s charge children when they have a magic birthday. Let’s 

make seniors prove that they’re poor. Shame. 

 

Then we have the situation, Mr. Speaker, where I want to say 

on the card, the budget card, they claim, they claim in their very 

budget card, this year’s budget card — here it is; there, I wanted 

to be able to quote from it, Mr. Speaker — a $250 million debt 

reduction. In other words, they’re paying the debt down $250 

million. Leave aside what you’re going to do next year or the 

year after, the year after, where you’re making no provisions at 

all for that, but they’re claiming, Mr. Speaker, a $250 million 

debt paydown in 2008-2009. 

 

Well here we are. The ink isn’t even dry on this budget, and 

what did we get announced? We had the spectacle of the Prime 

Minister of Canada, the Hon. Stephen Harper came with a 

wheelbarrow full of pennies, dumped it. And this government 

said oh good, $240 million, let us put Saskatchewan taxpayers 

on the hook for an immediate $758 million for the clean coal 

project — $758 million for a clean coal project. Where is it in 

the budget, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Here we are debating this year’s budget. We’re in — what is 

this, day two? — day two of the budget debate. Day two of the 

budget debate, they’ve added $750 million that’s nowhere in 

these books — nowhere, nowhere. The ink isn’t dry on the 

books. They could take a Magic Marker and put that 758 

million in. That’s not even talking, Mr. Speaker, if there’s a cost 

overrun in this clean coal project. Doesn’t mention that at all. 

But we do know for sure, we know for sure from the media 

reports, from the press releases that they put out, 758 million — 

that’s the dollars that provincial taxpayers are going to be on the 

hook for. 

 

Well you’ve got to wonder, Mr. Speaker, what this is all about. 

We’ve got an unproven coal technology. And I want to say for 

the record, I think it’s wonderful that we have a government 

looking at clean coal. 

 

When we were in government, we were looking at clean coal. 

And we didn’t sign it; and we didn’t sign it. The member from 

Kindersley points out we didn’t deliver it, and let me tell you 

why, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t deliver clean coal because the due 

diligence wasn’t complete. It wasn’t done. 

 

Now in three months, they’re going to tell us the due diligence 

is complete and they know everything. I got it, then table it. 

That’s all I ask. Just table it. Show the people of Saskatchewan 

you’ve done the due diligence. The member for Kindersley has 

nodded yes, we have. Table it. Table anything beyond, anything 

beyond your press release, anything at all instead of trust me, 

Mr. Speaker, trust me. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having trouble 

hearing the speaker that has the floor. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess I’ll have to 

speak louder. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to leave the clean coal now. I’ve made 

my point that they’ve added three-quarters of a billion dollars to 

the budget without it appearing in the budget anywhere. And 

don’t say, oh but it’s in the Crown corporation sector, therefore 

it won’t show up in the budget. Not so. The Crowns are fully 

reported in the budget — every one of them fully reported. So 

here we are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, we’ve just come through the Easter break, just come 

through the Easter break. I’m happy to report that one of my 

favourite aunts came through some pretty important surgery and 

the last report I had is she’s doing pretty good. I was talking 

with the uncle of this aunt and he said, you know Kim . . . 

Pardon me. I used my name and I’m not supposed to do that, 

Mr. Speaker. I apologize. He said, you know, you started in 

opposition — and it’s true — and now you’re back in 

opposition. He says, what’s it like to go back? And you know, 

we made a few jokes about it. I said well it wasn’t plan A, but 

you know, Mr. Speaker, it caused me to stop and reflect. And so 

I reflected a little bit on what it’s like to go back into 

opposition. 

 

And what I do know is that the last time I was in opposition we 

had a government that was adding more than $1 billion in debt 

per year, piling that on to the people of Saskatchewan . More 

than $1 billion a year their spending was greater than the 

revenue. And they had no plans, no ability to change that. 

Saskatchewan was an economic basket case. 

 

Well now after I’d had this conversation with this uncle, we’ve 

got a $758 million bump in debt. They’re right on track. This 

new government is right on track taking over where Grant 

Devine left off. Right on track on debt and not reporting it. 

Again I say shame. Day two of a budget and there’s nothing in 

this budget about that clean coal project. Shame. No allowance 

for borrowing at SaskPower . I suspect, Mr. Speaker, if you had 

the ability to call up SaskPower and talk to their chief financial 

officer or anyone else there and said, where’s the 758 million 

coming from, they’d say, well I’m not sure. That’s what I think 

would happen. 

 

So we had a government that was adding debt. We had a 

government that was in office at a time when we lost population 

— 18,000 people in their final year. Saskatchewan’s population 

went down 18,000 people. More people left than came in their 

final year. Things were desperate. Saskatchewan people were 

concerned and rightly so. 

 

We had job numbers going down. To get a good job in 

Saskatchewan at that time was difficult. I remember very 

distinctly driving down Albert Street and thinking, my 

goodness, how tough it is because there was a significant 

number of vehicles that didn’t have much tread left on their 

tires. I know it’s a small thing, but I remember it. And I 

remember it and I’m proud to tell you that’s not the situation 

today. 

 

We had a government, Mr. Speaker, that allowed the debt . . . 

The debt peaked at beyond the wrong side of $15 billion. I 

already said they were adding $1 billion a year. The debt was 

peaking and there was no plan, no ability to pay it down. In 

fact, when we first formed government, we had difficulty 

meeting payroll. We had difficulty borrowing the money. Ah, 

says the member for Kindersley. Oh I wish, in many ways I 

wish that they had won the ’91 election and seen how badly 

they’d have bungled it. Mr. Speaker, we had a debt/equity ratio 

in Saskatchewan that was well beyond 40 per cent debt to our 



434 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

GDP. Today, it’s about 17 per cent — our ratio of debt to 

Saskatchewan’s GDP. 

 

I’ve talked about our economy being very hot. I’ve talked about 

the growth. I’ve talked about the good things that we were able 

to do. I’ve talked about having left an extra billion and a half 

dollars in revenue and the frustration that I have, Mr. Speaker, 

the frustration that I have on behalf of my constituents and the 

people of Saskatchewan, that the best they could come up with 

is this budget. What a shame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment but I will not 

be supporting the main motion. I thank you for your time. It has 

been my pleasure to again stand on behalf of the people 

primarily of Regina Coronation Park, but to have my say on the 

budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great deal 

of pride that I rise to speak on this first budget of the 

Saskatchewan Party — pride in our party, pride in our leader, 

but most of all pride in our province. Our province that has been 

up until recently been referred to as the have-not province, the 

place to be from, not the place to be, or as the truckers refer to 

Saskatchewan, the gap. Today we are referred to as the land of 

opportunity, the last untouched wilderness, the future economic 

powerhouse of Canada. 

 

Today the people of Saskatchewan have a new optimism, a new 

outlook. They now have hopes and dreams for the future. They 

are now proud to say they are from Saskatchewan. Today 

people from around the world are watching to see what is 

happening and wondering how much and how quick they can 

invest in this resource-rich land, a place they have vaguely 

heard of and ask, how do you pronounce the name? 

 

On November 7, 2007 the moon was in the right phase and the 

stars aligned, shall we say, and a paradigm shift happened and a 

new chapter began. The people of this province made a choice 

of not just a new government but a new direction, a direction 

that will cast off the old ways, the loser mentality, the wee 

province mentality that has loomed over us like a plague for 

generations. The people of this province have made a choice to 

boldly go forward with our heads held high and proclaim the 

new Saskatchewan and all that it can be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is their budget, the people of Saskatchewan, 

yet it was written by the Sask Party and eloquently, I might say, 

delivered by the member from Melfort. But it is truly the budget 

of the people, a budget that they have been waiting for for 16 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget stands on two mighty pillars. The first 

pillar is ready for growth. The foundation of this pillar is the $1 

billion ready-for-growth initiative. Four hundred and eight 

million of that is for roads and highways across the province. 

For the last 16 years roads and highways have fallen into a 

deplorable state. The time has come. The new government will 

act and we will start, shall we say, on the long road back. 

 

Health care has been left on the back burner for far too long by 

the previous government. The Sask Party has made health care 

a priority not only with lip service like the previous government 

but with action — $191 million to fix hospitals and health care 

facilities, purchase medical equipment, and continue 

construction of the new provincial laboratory. Now that’s $191 

million worth of action. 

 

Education is key to our future. All our hopes and dreams 

depend on the education of our youth; therefore 164 million for 

new K to 12 school projects and post-secondary capital projects 

in this budget. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, at last the government that can take the stand for 

rural Saskatchewan and deliver 139 million for municipal 

infrastructure, and there’s almost 100 million worth of other 

initiatives. They include forest fire renewal, FleetNet, fire 

towers, parks, provincial correction centres, and numerous other 

endeavours. This is an abbreviated list for the first pillar for 

growth that will launch us on our new and exciting future. 

 

The second pillar is keeping promises. This is a major shift in 

the political style and philosophy of this new government over 

the previous one. The previous government had no problem in 

making promises, but there was no follow-through with keeping 

the promises. In fact the opposition happened when in ’03 

election the NDP promised not to raise taxes, but in their first 

budget — yes their first budget — the NDP raised PST 

[provincial sales tax] two points. 

 

Our new government has decided to rise above that style of 

politics and set a new benchmark in Saskatchewan. The 

standard of this new government is, a promise made is a 

promise kept. Our government is barely five months into our 

mandate and in our first budget 40 of our campaign promises 

kept. Mr. Speaker, this is a statement worth repeating. A 

promise made is a promise kept. This is an unprecedented step 

by a new government. 

 

Following are some of the promises made and kept in this 

budget: 12 million graduate retention program; up to 20,000 

tuition rebate for post-secondary graduates from Saskatchewan 

institutions who make their career here; 38 million funding 

increase to post-secondary institutions; 25.5 million to continue 

the university tuition freeze. 

 

These are all key to the future of our province. We must stop 

the outflow of our youth in order to grow, and these are giant 

first steps. These steps are a balanced approach to bringing our 

youth home and keeping the ones we have. 

 

For generations the NDP have claimed to be the keepers of 

medicare. This has been their mantra, their sacred territory, but 

no more. From the province that gave birth to medicare, health 

care has been eroded to the point where we have the longest 

waiting lists in all of Canada, plus huge doctor and nurse 

shortages. SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] says 800 

nurses alone. In its first budget, the Saskatchewan Party has 



March 31, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

made the following gains: 20.7 million for nurse recruitment 

and retention; and already we can proudly say we have recruited 

300 new nurses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — 10.5 million for more nursing training seats; 6.1 

million for physician training seats, recruitment, and retention; 

at last a drug plan for children; 10.7 million increase for cancer 

care. These are just a few of the highlights for health care. As 

you can see, once again we’re already making huge progress. 

 

In our first budget the Sask Party addressed First Nations and 

Métis relations. The most prominent issue that showed the 

weakness of our previous government was the duty to consult 

which too often did not happen. I have stated before, we must 

arrive at solutions with the Métis and Aboriginal people, not for 

the Métis and Aboriginal people. 

 

In this budget there is 1 million consultation fund increase, 

200,000 consultation round table, 1 million for additional 

training funding, 235,000 to the Dumont Technical Institute, 1 

million adult basic education, 3 million special needs funds. 

These are a few of the first steps taken by our new government. 

With careful and deliberate negotiations on both sides, it will 

lead to a brighter future for all. 

 

The next item we shall address is agriculture. For far too long, 

agriculture has been neglected. And the Sask Party has started 

to address the issue: 91.5 million to fully fund agriculture risk 

management programs, 129 million for crop insurance. Our 

government is also addressing the education portion of property 

tax, and this is just the beginning for agriculture. The 

government is continually looking for a new program and ideas 

to help agriculture reach its full potential in the 21st century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the time has come to address the needs of 

municipalities, and the Sask Party has: 300 million in 

interest-free loans to municipalities over four years; a 7 per cent 

increase to municipal revenue sharing. There’s also 3 million to 

hire new police officers. There’s also 7 million in new funding 

to toughen security in prisons and improve rehabilitation. To 

show a balance on both ends of the spectrum, we have 5.1 

million for addiction treatment. 

 

Because green is the colour of our future, our government will 

invest 10 million in green initiatives. 

 

One of the most important items in our budget I have left until 

last, and that is debt reduction. We have to have a balanced 

approach to debt reduction in order to achieve full value for our 

economic wealth and at the same time reduce our debt. 

Therefore our government will pay $250 million to debt 

reduction, and finally a balanced budget balanced with real 

dollars, real money this time. 

 

There are some things you won’t find in the first Sask Party 

budget. You won’t find 100 million given to a private company 

in a last-ditch, pre-election attempt to save our political hide. 

We have seen the results of such tactics. I am of course 

referring to the infamous SPUDCO. 

 

You will see careful and conscientious negotiations that will 

give rebirth to an industry that will make us both productive and 

sustainable. The member from Prince Albert Northcote keeps 

referring to the Sask Party’s forest report and says he hasn’t 

seen it. Well, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t write it for him. 

 

The member also stated, and I quote from March 18 Hansard, 

“with their government’s embarrassment of riches . . .” Why 

should any government be embarrassed with riches? This 

embarrassment is going to pay for highways, hospitals, schools, 

and health care. If that member thinks this is embarrassing, then 

he better get used to bigger embarrassments . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Because the days of that socialist rhetoric are 

over. A new day has dawned. And it is time to be proud of what 

we have — not embarrassed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — To sum up the history of our economy’s ups 

and downs, the more government intervention in the economy, 

the less economy happens under that government. As I said in 

my maiden speech here in the legislature more than four years 

ago, let governments govern and business do business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, life is often referred to as a 

voyage. I would like to draw on that parallel now. You might 

have the best ship in the fleet but if you don’t have a captain, 

you are no better off than a ship without a sail. It is not the size 

of your ship or the number of guns or the size of your crew. 

And, yes, these are all factors to your success, but it is the 

captain who determines the destiny of the ship. It is the captain 

who leads you to victory. It is his skill as a leader. It is his 

ability to make decisions in the heat of the battle that will lead 

to victory. It is the captain’s ability to chart the right course. It 

is the captain who moulds his people into a crew that will 

determine the final victory. It is the captain whose decision 

determines whether you sail or sink. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party is led by such a captain, a young man 

with the vision and determination to stay the course, to stand at 

the helm through fair and foul, to lead Saskatchewan into the 

future. Mr. Speaker, I am of course referring to the member 

from Swift Current, the Premier of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget launches the new ship Saskatchewan 

Party. We have put into place the right people to do the job both 

in this Chamber and in the offices in this historic building. We 

have brought together the right ideas and plan for the future to 

lead ship Saskatchewan into the unknown waters of our destiny, 

to chart a course that this province was destined to sail 100 

years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this course that we are embarking on will have its 

sunny days, its blue skies, but it will also have its challenges. 

We will be besieged by pirates of the left who will try to alter 

the course of ship Saskatchewan but we will not be deterred. 

We have a vision of the new Saskatchewan, a bright and 

prosperous Saskatchewan and it is waiting on the horizon. 

 



436 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2008 

So let’s hoist the sails, raise the green and yellow flag to our 

topmost mast, and let us together sail into the future. And for 

those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget and 

not the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to get up and 

speak on the budget that was presented here a short period of 

time ago by the Finance minister of the province. It was a great 

budget that’s being heralded all across Saskatchewan as 

visionary, certainly one that the people of Saskatchewan have 

looked at in a very favourable way. 

 

The $1 billion infrastructure program is something that is 

needed dramatically here in this province, as everyone knows. 

We have infrastructure crumbling all across Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s highways, whether it’s education facilities, whether 

it’s health care facilities. And people across this province 

certainly recognize that. 

 

We’ve got a long ways to go, and everyone, I think, 

understands that in terms of the amount of infrastructure deficit 

that there is. I think the Minister of Finance has indicated that 

it’s probably somewhere in the magnitude of $15 billion deficit 

in terms of that magnitude, of that nature. It’s going to take a 

long, long time to make that up. Even at $1 billion a year, at 15 

years we’ll have another 15 billion at that point in time. And I 

dare say in another 15 or 20 years when we decide to turn over 

to another premier, perhaps at that time we’ll have another 

20-year run at things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — But the fact of the matter is it’s a budget 

that is very visionary for the people of Saskatchewan. And it is 

precisely the reason why we see the level of optimism that we 

see in Saskatchewan these days, where we have people moving 

back to Saskatchewan in unprecedented numbers, where we see 

investment in Saskatchewan in unprecedented numbers. 

 

The Premier and myself were in Washington and New York the 

last little while, last couple weeks ago, speaking to investment 

opportunities, investment bankers. And they were certainly very 

familiar with what’s happening in Saskatchewan. And I can say, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there was a tremendous amount of 

interest in the opportunities that there are in Saskatchewan. And 

I think we will literally see hundreds of millions of dollars of 

investment in Saskatchewan in 2008 that we weren’t likely 

going to see prior to this year. 

 

So it’s a tremendously good news story for Saskatchewan, the 

amount of oil and gas activity, the amount of potash activity 

that there is in Saskatchewan. I understand there’s going to be 

some further announcements coming up very soon in terms of 

expansions here in Saskatchewan that are going to be in the 

magnitude of billions of dollars once again. 

 

So there’s tremendous optimism. And if you go around 

Saskatchewan — doesn’t matter whether you’re in Regina; 

doesn’t matter whether you’re in Saskatoon or smaller cities or 

smaller communities all across Saskatchewan — you see an 

unprecedented level of optimism, houses being built all over 

Saskatchewan, investments in businesses all over the province, 

tremendously successful times for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I couldn’t help but note with interest when the member 

from Coronation Park wanted to talk a little bit about 

agriculture and the concern that he has for agriculture. Well I 

can tell you that in agriculture today we have never seen the 

level of optimism that there is in this province right now. In 35 

years of farming in this province, I have never seen the level of 

optimism that there is. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you went to dealerships across 

Saskatchewan, farm implement dealerships, you can’t buy a 

new combine. You can’t buy a new four-wheel drive tractor. 

You can’t buy a new two-wheel drive tractor. You cannot buy a 

high-clearance sprayer. And the reason is really quite simple — 

because they’re all sold. They’re all sold. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., this House now 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 405 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 405 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 405 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 405 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 405 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 406 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 406 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 406 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women’s Equality Dinner 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 406 

 Hockey Greats 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 407 

 Constituent’s Contributions to Saskatoon 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 407 

 Regina Wheel Challenge for Everyone 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 407 

 Red Cross Month 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 407 

 More Good News for Saskatchewan 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 408 

 TheatreFest 2008 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 408 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for Station 20 West  

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 408 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 409 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 410 

 Planning and Consultation in the Ministry of Social Services 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 411 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 411 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 412 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 413 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 19 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 413 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 414 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 417 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 420 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 422 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 426 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 429 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 431 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 434 

  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 436 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


