




















































Hansard: April 08, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 22A  TUESDAY, APRIL 8, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 659 

 April 8, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, if I could, we have a special guest 

in the Assembly I would ask to have the privilege of 

introducing. I would like to introduce to you today Mr. Gilbert 

Parent. He‟s seated in the Speaker‟s gallery. He‟s the former 

Speaker of the House of Commons. 

 

Mr. Parent was first elected in 1974 and served for 27 years in 

parliament. In 1994 MPs [Member of Parliament] chose him as 

their Speaker in a vote by members that required six ballots and 

nearly seven hours. I‟m glad I didn‟t have to face that. Mr. 

Parent was re-elected Speaker in 1997. 

 

During his time as Speaker he founded the Teachers Institute on 

Canadian Parliamentary Democracy where he met with teachers 

in the Chamber of the House of Commons. A participant 

recalled that Speaker Parent sat in the historic Speaker‟s chair 

and shared his thoughts and deep affection for what he called 

our House. It was the most powerful unity speech the teacher 

had ever heard. The words came from his heart. 

 

Tonight Mr. Parent will be the keynote speaker at our own 

Institute on Parliamentary Democracy, this Social Sciences 

Teachers‟ Institute. 

 

Joining Mr. Parent is Mr. Brent Toles from the Ministry of 

Education. Mr. Toles attended the first Ottawa Institute and the 

first Saskatchewan Institute and has served on the SSTI 

[Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers‟ Institute on 

Parliamentary Democracy] steering committee for nine years. 

He‟s referred to as Mr. SSTI. 

 

Would you please join me in welcoming — and I‟d ask them to 

stand — Mr. Parent and Mr. Toles. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s an honour 

today to introduce someone very, very special that‟s seated in 

your gallery. So if I may, to you and through you to all of my 

colleagues in the Assembly, introduce Jennifer Lozinski who is 

this year‟s Easter Seals ambassador. She‟s joined in the gallery 

by Michelle Hunter and her dad. Mr. Lozinski‟s joined us as 

well today. 

 

And it‟s a great pleasure to have Jennifer here. She is 14 years 

of age. She attends Riffle Collegiate in Regina. In addition to 

her official duties as ambassador which will take her around the 

province representing the great cause of Easter Seals, she has a 

number of other passions. She, well like a lot of kids her age, 

she enjoys Facebook, I‟m told. We chatted a little bit about that 

earlier. She‟s a fan of Avril Lavigne, Hedley, and Green Day. 

And unlike the member for Thunder Creek, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve 

actually heard some of those, some of that music. 

 

I just want to say to Jennifer that I had a chance a few moments 

ago to meet her, and we had a wonderful visit. And I know she 

is going to do an outstanding job for Easter Seals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask all members of the Assembly to join with 

me in welcoming her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it‟s my 

honour as well today to introduce to this Legislative Assembly 

some individuals who are part of the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Police Officers, so to you and through you, Mr. Speaker, to 

all members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Today I was able to meet with some of my former colleagues 

who I sat with on the Saskatchewan federation board of 

directors till about six months ago actually as a member of their 

association. 

 

When I call your names, would you please stand, please: Stan 

Goertzen, Saskatoon Police Association; Nolan Berg, 

Saskatoon Police Association; Murray Zoorkan, Saskatoon 

Police Association; Lorilee Davies, Regina Police Association; 

Donovan Steffenson, Regina Police Association; Shane St. 

John, Weyburn Police Association; Jay Pierson, Estevan Police 

Association; and Bernie Eiswirth, the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Police Officers‟ executive officer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these individuals represent over 1,100 police 

officers from Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Regina, Weyburn, 

Estevan, and Moose Jaw. And like I said, up to about six 

months ago it was my privilege to work and serve with them on 

the streets of our fine cities and to serve and protect as they do, 

as two of my colleagues have as well. 

 

It‟s because of them and the people that they represent that 

we‟re safe at night, Mr. Speaker, and the daytime period. Thank 

you and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

join with the minister and welcome our guests from the 

Saskatchewan association of police officers. Mr. Speaker, 

because of these individuals and many like them throughout the 

province as the minister indicated, we have safer communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I look forward, as do other members of Her 

Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition, to working with these members to 

help to continue to improve the safety and well-being of our 

province. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



660 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to present a petition that speaks to the 

shabby way that employees at the South Hill liquor store in 

Moose Jaw were treated and the residents of my constituency. 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 

petition. This one‟s in support of affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan. Many citizens are concerned about the process 

in terms of the openness and accountability. I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability hold open, public consultations for all 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions on 

Station 20 and in support of the 2,500 people who showed up 

last weekend at a rally in support of having the funding 

restored. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to Station 20 

project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people in Saskatoon and area. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my honour today to 

present some petitions, a petition against means testing the 

seniors‟ drug plan: 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

legislature assembled, the petition of the undersigned 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth 

. . .  

 

And it describes the problem of means testing: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to means test seniors 

and ensure that all seniors continue to have access to 

affordable prescription drugs. 

 

I am delighted to report these signatures are all, in this instance, 

from Regina Coronation Park, the constituency I‟m honoured to 

represent. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Women of Strength and Distinction Banquet 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 

honour of recently attending the Women of the Dawn‟s second 

annual Women of Strength and Distinction banquet. The 

Premier and I had a wonderful opportunity of networking with 

the guests in attendance. 

 

Last year the member from Kelvington-Wadena, the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview, and myself had the distinct pleasure 

of being three of the women honoured. It is important, Mr. 

Speaker, to publicly showcase the many distinguished First 

Nation women in Saskatchewan so that the First Nations youth 

have role models to emulate. 

 

The banquet was held to raise money for a homeless shelter. 

The Women of the Dawn, through the proposed Regina Centre 

of Hope Homeless Shelter, will support homeless women, 

youth, and children at a time of critical need. This government, 

Mr. Speaker, also recognizes the challenges posed by affordable 

housing, and hopes to be part of the solution through the task 

force on housing affordability created on March 18. 

 

It is not too far-fetched to hope that one day we will be able to 

rise in this House and honour the achievement of someone who 

found her strength, courage, and potential with the help of the 

Regina Centre of Hope Homeless Shelter. Mr. Speaker, Ivy 

Kennedy and the Women of the Dawn need to be congratulated 

for the good work they do. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 661 

Multiple Sclerosis Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Saturday night, April 5, I along with the Minister of Health, the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone; Ralph Goodale, Member 

of Parliament; Mayor Pat Fiacco, and over 400 guests enjoyed a 

slice of paradise at the Conexus Arts Centre. Paradise was the 

theme for the evening‟s fundraiser for multiple sclerosis 

research here in Saskatchewan. We were treated to an evening 

of fine food, great entertainment, followed by a live auction. 

 

The magnificent, seven-course meal was prepared by 10 

outstanding chefs from across Saskatchewan. And the 

entertainment was simply breathtaking; the live auction, with a 

chance to bid on luxurious holidays from around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest number of MS 

[multiple sclerosis] cases per capita of anywhere in the world. 

MS is a disease that steals from its victims their opportunity to 

reach their full potential. As a result, MS robs society of their 

talents. 

 

I want to congratulate the evening‟s co-hosts: Angel Blair of 

CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] and Dr. Lynda 

Haverstock and their committee for a very successful evening. 

And I wish them all the best in their continued efforts to find a 

cure for multiple sclerosis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

2008 Oskana Cup Hockey Tournament 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday 

I had the great honour of representing the Government of 

Saskatchewan at the 2008 Oskana Cup hockey tournament. This 

is an annual event dedicated to promoting and supporting 

Aboriginal youth in reaching for their dreams through 

participating in competitive hockey. 

 

Dozens of teams from First Nations in our province enter each 

year and the quality of play, the level of enthusiasm, and the 

sportsmanship displayed by the team members is just amazing. 

 

I watched the incredibly exciting final game between two very 

evenly matched teams from Standing Buffalo and Gordon First 

Nations, and then assisted with the presentation of trophies 

afterward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all young people need role models to look up to 

for guidance and encouragement. For youth in the Oskana Cup 

tournament, hockey legend Reggie Leach very generously fills 

this essential role. A Stanley Cup and Conn Smythe Trophy 

winner, high-scoring star of the Philadelphia Flyers in their 

glory days, and recipient of the National Aboriginal 

Achievement Award in sports, Mr. Leach is the perfect mentor 

for aspiring young First Nations hockey players — someone 

who balances world-class abilities with modesty and a burning 

desire to assist youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Reggie Leach‟s personal endorsement shows, 

Oskana Cup is a shining example of leadership, co-operative 

effort, and personal growth in Saskatchewan‟s Aboriginal 

community. It was both a privilege and a pleasure to be 

involved, and we wish everyone involved continued success in 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatoon Junior Achievement 

Business Hall of Fame Dinner 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I, along 

with many of my Saskatoon colleagues, attended the 2008 

Saskatoon Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame dinner. 

 

The Junior Achievement program encourages young people to 

learn about business and entrepreneurial activities. They do this 

through actually starting a business and following it through the 

year, guided by mentors, volunteers, and corporate sponsors. 

Both the public and separate school divisions encourage their 

students to participate. 

 

I want to congratulate Walter Murray in the riding of Saskatoon 

Eastview for winning the Educator of the Year Award for 

showing leadership and promoting and encouraging JA [Junior 

Achievement] programs within their school. SaskEnergy and 

Junior Achievement will present a scholarship or bursary in the 

school‟s name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Northwest read the names of the 

winners in each category yesterday, and I also want to 

congratulate all the achievers, the volunteers, the corporate 

sponsors, and the winners in the various categories for their 

wonderful work in promoting JA‟s mission statement: “To 

inspire and educate young Canadians to experience free 

enterprise, understand business and economics and develop 

entrepreneurial and leadership skills.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Emergency Telecommunicators 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, today it is my pleasure to inform 

the House that Saskatchewan‟s Telecommunicator of the Year 

is Janice Marcotte with MD Ambulance in Saskatoon. 

 

Janice is credited with saving the life of an individual who 

nearly froze to death in January of this year after being involved 

with a single vehicle rollover incident in rural Saskatchewan. 

Janice has been recognized for outstanding perseverance, 

loyalty, and dedication to her work and the people who call in 

in an emergency. Later this year, Janice will go on to represent 

Saskatchewan in a national event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to bring to the attention of the 

members that the week of April 6 to 12 has been proclaimed 



662 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Emergency Telecommunicators Week in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, these individuals can be counted on to be available 

24-7 to respond to emergency telephone calls, dispatch 

personnel, and generally help people in emergencies stay calm. 

They not only provide direct advice, but they are the assurance 

that help is on the way. They are the 911 operators and other 

service dispatchers from police, fire, and medical services who 

handle emergency calls across this province. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in congratulating 

Janice as well as thanking all of Saskatchewan‟s emergency 

communication professionals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Girl Guides of Moose Jaw 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, earlier this spring, members of the Girl Guides of 

Moose Jaw participated in an event known as the Walk Across 

Saskatchewan. The event was held in our beautiful urban park, 

the Wakamow Valley. The goal of the event was to raise 

awareness and to purchase metres for the Trans Canada Trail. 

 

Now Girl Guides consist of different age groups: the Sparks are 

the youngest group, and they‟re five- and six-year-olds; 

Brownies are seven and eight years old, and Guides nine and 

eleven. The oldest group, known as the Pathfinders, includes 

ages 12 to 14. 

 

Each group started in a different area around the city and 

walked to meet up as one large group once they hit the valley. 

The day was meant as a fun outing, not only supporting a good 

cause but to get exercise for the girls and highlight that hiking is 

part of Girl Guides. Family members also joined in the support 

group. 

 

In all approximately 75 people were out to enjoy a grand day, 

get a bit of exercise, and spend some time with the children. 

The entire group then met up as they marched to Kiwanis River 

Park in the Wakamow Valley for refreshments and a snack. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 

congratulating the Girl Guides, not only for their long 

involvement in each and every one of our communities, but for 

holding this event and for finding a great way to kick off spring. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Heroism Recognized 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

with a great deal of pleasure that I rise in this Assembly to 

inform the members of the legislature of a constituent who was 

recently recognized for an act of heroism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this year Barry Kessler of Pangman was 

awarded the Medal of Bravery by Her Excellency the Right 

Honourable Michaëlle Jean, Governor General of Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Kessler received this decoration of bravery for 

rescuing his neighbour and a fellow farmer. 

 

On August 30, 2004, Mr. Kessler was working in his field when 

he noticed smoke coming from a nearby field. As he got closer 

to the field, he noticed a tractor was on fire and his neighbour 

was slumped over the wheel. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kessler tried to 

contact emergency services through both his cellphone and his 

Fleetnet Radio but was unsuccessful. 

 

Due to the fire and smoke, Mr. Kessler was unable to get to the 

tractor door. Instead he moved to the back and smashed out the 

back window and after several attempts was able to pull his 

neighbour, Mr. Tom Merritt, from the burning tractor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while Mr. Merritt‟s life was saved that day, he 

succumbed to illness eight months later. His widow, Loretta, 

not only thanks Barry for saving her husband‟s life on that 

August day, but for also giving her an extra eight months with 

her husband. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of the Weyburn-Big 

Muddy constituency, I want to offer my congratulations to 

Barry Kessler of Pangman on his feat of heroism and on being 

awarded the Medal of Bravery. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Infrastructure Agreement with Federal Government 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in November of last year the federal government 

announced a national infrastructure program worth $33 billion 

over seven years. But in order for the funds to flow to 

municipalities, the members opposite need to do their job and 

negotiate a deal. 

 

Many other provinces have already begun receiving this 

funding, including Newfoundland and Labrador. And if 

Newfoundland and Labrador can have a deal signed by now, 

Mr. Speaker . . . Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and British 

Columbia have already signed and they are starting to see the 

benefits of this agreement. 

 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: why is the Saskatchewan 

Party government so incompetent they can‟t sign a framework 

with the federal government? When will the minister quit 

bumbling this file at the expense of municipalities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 663 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, harsh words 

indeed, and undeserved. If the hon. member opposite had been 

listening to the news, we have said repeatedly, clearly and 

consistently, that this is a very complicated, overarching 

agreement with several different programs in it. Think about it 

from the federal government‟s perspective. Mr. Speaker, they‟re 

negotiating with several provinces and territories from coast to 

coast to coast, all at the same time, trying to meet the needs of 

infrastructure for a wide variety of constituencies all the way 

from small communities in remote northern districts to 

provinces with a third of the population, like Ontario. 

 

On the provincial side, our folks are working day and night with 

the federal people trying to hammer out a deal that meets our 

needs too, as varied as the largest municipalities from Regina 

and Saskatoon to small northern hamlets and rural 

constituencies as well. It‟s going on and on and we certainly 

hope for an early and successful conclusion to the negotiations. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well our Minister of Municipal Affairs has 

failed to give a timeline for signing on and has refused to tell 

the public what the plan will mean for their communities. In 

fact, the minister has refused to tell the public how much money 

is even on the line. Thanks to the minister‟s federal counterpart 

who wrote a letter to the editor, we now know that there‟s over 

$755 million waiting to flow to our province — $755 million 

just waiting to be accessed, Mr. Speaker, yet this government 

continues to sit on its hands and community projects go 

unfunded. 

 

The minister owes the public more than a shrug and a smile. He 

owes them an explanation as to why he has failed to get an 

agreement. What on earth is he waiting for? When will the 

agreement be signed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you again 

for the hon. member‟s question. We haven‟t actually refused to 

do anything and all we‟ve decided to do is to fix problems left 

over by the previous administration. A perfect example there is 

we inherited the underfunding of the provincial share of the 

IPSCO upgrading project right here in Regina. They didn‟t do 

anything about that. In fact, they left it broken and we‟re fixing 

it as we speak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well that‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that he 

would specifically mention IPSCO because IPSCO Place . . . 

The mayor of Regina has said if this government doesn‟t sign 

on to this Building Canada fund, that project won‟t go ahead. 

But he uses it as an excuse and as an example of how wonderful 

the work is they‟re doing. 

 

They‟ve also announced the intermodal project but, Mr. 

Speaker, in their own press release the intermodal project is said 

to be contingent on this agreement being signed. So they‟re 

tearing around the province saying what a wonderful job we‟re 

doing, what a wonderful job we‟re doing, and they haven‟t 

actually signed the agreement or have any ability to do it. When 

will the minister get his job done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well a 

classic example once again, Mr. Speaker, of the hon. member 

opposite not doing her homework and therefore coming up with 

questions of this kind. It is inconceivable in this day and age 

that projects as significant as IPSCO Place and the intermodal 

facility, just to use two examples, could possibly proceed 

without funding from the federal and provincial and municipal 

levels of government. That‟s what it‟s all about. 

 

We keep working day and night to make sure that this 

agreement is struck in a timely fashion and to meet all the needs 

of the residents of Saskatchewan. We will succeed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Jobs for Northerners 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the North contributes an incredible amount to the 

province as a whole. We know that we make a great effort in 

improving and contributing to the GDP [gross domestic 

product] of our province. However in northern Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, every local job counts, and every job that‟s out 

there people want to hang on to it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one area that‟s of great promise is, of course, 

the men and women who work in the fire protection branch for 

the Ministry of Environment. These are dedicated civil servants 

that work hard to protect our northern communities and the 

valuable northern forests. Mr. Speaker, many of these workers 

have been with the department for many, many years. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Northern Affairs. How could 

the Minister of Northern Affairs not defend these northerners‟ 

jobs when these jobs . . . Recently six people were fired as 

kitchen support staff from the northern protection office in 

Buffalo Narrows, Mr. Speaker. Why didn‟t the minister defend 

against those cuts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



664 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for his question. And I share his concern 

about the economic situations in the North and jobs for people 

in northern communities. And, Mr. Speaker, we are addressing 

that. 

 

While there were a few seasonal staff that their positions were 

discontinued when we closed the ministry-operated kitchen 

facility, the fire base will continue to make a significant 

contribution to the local economy as the fire base will use local 

businesses, local restaurants to feed the people within the fire 

service. And we think that‟s good for their economy. It provides 

jobs and it adds money into their local economies. And I would 

expect the member opposite to be happy with that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let me be perfectly clear. I am 

not happy about those job cuts. These are six women, six 

women that have dedicated many, many years to northern 

Saskatchewan and many years to the Saskatchewan 

Environment. And, Mr. Speaker, it is not very proper, it is not 

very proper for the minister to get up and say, you should be 

happy with these cuts. Absolutely not. We are not happy. We 

are angry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once again, to the Minister of the Environment or Minister of 

Northern Affairs, whom we thought would defend our northern 

interests: why did you cut these jobs, which were jobs for 

people that have dedicated their lives to this Environment 

ministry and people that have protected northern forests for 

many, many years and are part of the support staff? Why did 

you cut these jobs, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, what I said is that I would 

expect the members opposite to be pleased with the fact that we 

are contributing to the local economy by allowing local 

businesses to contribute to this process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, this actually brings into 

line the Buffalo Narrows facility as other areas such as Stony 

Rapids and Weyakwin fire bases are practising the same 

approach that we have taken in this budget and that is to help 

promote the local economy by letting local restaurants and 

businesses be involved in the provision of food services for the 

fire base. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Actions of Public Servant 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that was one of the weakest 

excuses I‟ve ever heard in my time here, Mr. Speaker. 

However, Mr. Speaker, I want to have a question towards the 

Minister of Northern Affairs. 

 

In December a Northern Affairs employee and a vocal 

Saskatchewan supporter in La Ronge callously handed out big 

pink slips to fellow employees, suggesting that the Sask Party 

government would fire them. This individual caused people to 

fear for their jobs and upset several workers and their families, 

and many of these are loyal public servants of the North and in 

the North, and they are left wondering what would happen to 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the incident, the Minister of Northern Affairs 

said she would get some answers to the question that these 

workers were asking. That was in December, Mr. Speaker, and 

we still haven‟t heard from that minister. My question is for the 

Minister of Northern Affairs: how could she allow a senior 

manager in her department to play this cruel joke and this cruel 

hoax on employees that have dedicated their lives to Northern 

Affairs and northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for First 

Nations and Métis affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we agree that the actions by 

the employee of the Northern Affairs department wasn‟t right. 

It wasn‟t right to have somebody in fear of their job, but at the 

same time we took the actions that we thought were important. 

We discussed the issues; the member was talked to, the 

employee was talked to. No one lost their job, and I think at this 

time everybody is pleased that this government is working 

towards fulfilling our agreement to make sure the economy is 

rolling and people have a chance to get a job in the North. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Diversity in the Public Service 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it didn‟t take long for the Sask 

Party to break their promise to deliver a non-partisan and 

professional public service. They started by firing civil servants 

who had decades of experience working for governments of all 

partisan stripes. They quickly graduated to firing 70 civil 

servants and Crown employees for failing the Sask Party 

ideological purity test. And their budget continues the attack by 

axing programs that were aimed to build a more representative 

and diverse civil service. To the Minister of the Public Service 

Commission: can he explain to this House why he decided to 

eliminate the $500,000 in funding for the Aboriginal Career 

Connections program? 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 665 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say very clearly 

that it‟s the intent of this government to ensure that the public 

service is representative of the public that it serves. And so we 

want to ensure that First Nations, people of Métis origin as well 

are involved in the civil service. 

 

An indication in terms of our government‟s commitment to a 

professional civil service was also evident in the budget. I noted 

that, Mr. Speaker, when this party, when our party kept its 

promise to fund the Johnson-Shoyama institute of public policy 

at the University of Regina with a view very specifically to 

ensure that we‟re encouraging . . . We‟re always encouraging 

people to join the civil service, people to pursue public 

administration as a post-secondary career, and that goes, Mr. 

Speaker, for all peoples, whether they are First Nation, Métis, 

or non-First Nation, non-Aboriginal in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we heard some big words and 

well-meaning phrases from the Premier yesterday on the subject 

of tolerance and open-mindedness, but actions speak louder 

than words. 

 

They‟ve extended their mean streak by cutting funding to a 

program which their own website still describes as providing 

Aboriginal graduates with an, and I‟ll quote, “. . . an 

opportunity to put your expertise to work while further 

developing knowledge and skills on the road to building your 

career.” 

 

All of this while you‟ve got $1 billion in the bank, Mr. Premier. 

To the Minister of the Public Service Commission: what other 

successful programs can we expect to be cut while the Minister 

of Finance sits on more than $1 billion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

initiatives in the budget that the hon. member is conveniently 

forgetting to mention, including funding for the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technology; additional training funding 

under the Canada-Saskatchewan labour market agreement of $1 

million; $80,000 very specifically for an Aboriginal recruiter 

within the public service, an Aboriginal recruiter whose job it 

will be to ensure that we are recruiting people of First Nations 

and Métis origins in the province, Mr. Speaker; $1 million for 

Aboriginal Health Transition Fund; $200,000 for the 

consultation round table on the duty to consult and 

accommodate — maybe the most important issue facing First 

Nations and Métis people in the province and an issue, Mr. 

Speaker, that that party opposite when in power completely 

ignored, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will not ignore those issues. We will not ignore the need for 

strategic investments with respect to First Nations and Métis 

people. We will not ignore the need to ensure that our civil 

service is recruiting actively from First Nations and Métis 

communities in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the government cut the Aboriginal 

Career Connections program, but they seem to have forgotten to 

mention it to the people who run their website. In fact their 

website is still loaded with glowing testimonials from people 

who have benefited from this program. 

 

Since they seem to have forgotten already, I‟ll quote from some 

of them. One says, quote, “My experience in the Aboriginal 

Career Connections program has been incredible.” A second 

one says, “As I begin my . . . career . . . I know that the 

Aboriginal Career Connections program was the best career 

decision I ever made.” 

 

With such damning testimony, it‟s no wonder they decided to 

axe this program, but to do it in such an incompetent manner as 

to leave positive testimonials on their website . . . To the 

minister: how come they can‟t even cut a program correctly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the work done by the initiative 

that the hon. member refers to is going to get done. It‟ll get 

done more effectively through the investment that this 

government‟s going to make in a very specific First Nations and 

Métis Aboriginal recruiter in the Public Service Commission. 

And all those testimonials that will exist, that exist on the 

website today will apply to this approach, Mr. Speaker. It is an 

investment in exactly the same goals that the hon. member is 

advocating. It is an investment in a different way, mind you, 

one where we will have in place in the Public Service 

Commission an Aboriginal recruiter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, frankly, you know, I think it‟s interesting to hear 

questions coming from members opposite on this issue because 

when they ask them, they ignore the very many numerous 

numbers of additional investments that this government is 

making in First Nations and Métis issues, Mr. Speaker. They 

ignore the fact. They speak not a word about the duty to consult 

and accommodate, the most important issue facing First Nations 

and Métis people, because they did nothing on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



666 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For the 

benefit and knowledge of the members opposite, there have 

been Aboriginal recruitment individuals and specialists in the 

Public Service Commission for more than 20 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Aboriginal Career Connections 

program isn‟t the only PSC [Public Service Commission] 

program aimed at building a more representative and diverse 

public service. The PSC also has a program aimed at the 

recruitment and retention of persons with disabilities, whose 

aim is to achieve a more representative workforce by recruiting 

people with disabilities. 

 

We heard earlier this year that the Sask Party government had 

axed the Saskatchewan Council on Disability Issues without a 

plan to replace it. And now I‟m hearing concerns about the 

future of the program aimed at helping people with disabilities 

enter the public service. 

 

To the minister: what is the status of this program, and has your 

government taken any additional steps to help build a more 

representative public service? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you for that question. I find it kind of interesting when it comes 

from the members opposite. They had, as a government they 

had a number of years as a government to a policy that was 

inclusive of people with disabilities and they had an action plan 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They had an 

action plan drawn up and presented to the government and do 

you know what happened with that action plan, Mr. Speaker? 

They sat on it for five years. Five years they sat on it before 

they came with the disability inclusion policy framework. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a good document. It‟s a good piece of 

work. Have they implemented, did they implement everything 

that‟s recommended in this document? No, they did not, and 

that would have included people with disabilities in the 

workforce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

 

Literacy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the Premier 

told this House, and I quote: 

 

Our best hope to find our better selves and to build a 

better province is not in this room today. It is with our 

kids. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I couldn‟t agree more. That‟s why I am all the 

more surprised and dismayed by this government‟s decision to 

cut literacy funding by about $500,000 — all in this budget 

with a $1 billion surplus. To the minister: can he explain why 

he cut almost a fifth of the Saskatchewan literacy budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to take that question from the member 

opposite. Mr. Speaker, as everyone knows, the Literacy 

Commission was created by that government as a stand-alone 

entity. It had office space that were not within the confines of 

the Ministry of Education or the former Ministry of Learning. 

And as a result of strategizing about how we might do the job 

better, how we might conduct literacy forums across the 

province, Mr. Speaker, we decided to bring it in-house. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what‟s going to be happening on April 13, 

14, and 15, a project that is going to be hosted in five sites 

across Canada, including Saskatchewan, we‟re going to be 

hosting a forum on literacy, on Aboriginal literacy, to ensure 

that the public in Saskatchewan, that the people in Canada 

know that literacy is important. And it doesn‟t mean that you 

have to have an office space of significance; it means that you 

have to move forward with good initiatives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a conference is excellent 

but we need dollars behind this. Saskatchewan‟s booming 

economy needs more skilled and trained workers, not less. 

Basic literacy programming helps to build a skilled workforce. 

It helps to build healthy communities and it helps to build 

opportunities for people young and old. Mr. Speaker, let‟s not 

forget that literacy is a good in and of itself. But instead of 

building for Saskatchewan‟s future, instead of being ready for 

growth, this government is once again mimicking Stephen 

Harper‟s Conservatives with their cuts to literacy organizations. 

To the minister: will he use his $1 billion surplus to reserve this 

decision and restore funding to literacy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 667 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think I‟ve explained that the Literacy Commission in fact is 

going to be working in a different way and it will be achieving 

the same results. But you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk 

about what is going on within education, the fact that the 

Education budget was increased by 25 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I had the privilege of being in Moose 

Jaw, I had the privilege of being in Moose Jaw this morning to 

announce some extra funding for early childhood and 

pre-kindergarten programs, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 2 million 

additional dollars for the pre-K program. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. One member‟s been recognized 

to be able to respond and I invite the minister to finish his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re doing a number of things. We‟re spending a lot of money 

to ensure that we provide the necessary opportunities for young 

children . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Prince Albert and 

the member from Regina Rosemont, please allow the minister 

to finish his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it is clear. If the member would look at the estimates, he 

will see that there is significant funding to achieve better results 

for education. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Cancellation of Program and Response 

to Newspaper Article 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Social Services has had one do-over on her budget and we‟re 

hoping she gets a couple more. We learned today that the teen 

and young parent program will cease to exist as of June 1, 

thanks to the members opposite. 

 

A ministry spokesperson says the decision was necessary so 

that resources could be diverted elsewhere. The spokesperson 

goes on to say the ministry hopes the CBO [community-based 

organization] sector will pick up the slack left by the program 

being axed but that the ministry is still working out that part of 

the plan. 

 

To the minister: with the other billion dollars in the bank, was it 

really necessary to cut this program? Why has this minister not 

figured out a plan before putting the program on the chopping 

block? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for that question. The priority of this 

government and this minister is going to be our children at risk 

and we made budget decisions accordingly. The teen and young 

parent program was initiated in 1986 — sorry, Mr. Speaker — 

and it was already being phased out by the previous NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government. It only had about 135 clients 

left and I am positive we can find very, very competent CBOs 

that will offer the services to those young teens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the workers, the workers will be moved into child 

and family services to work in the child protection file which is 

so critical. These are our children at risk. The caseload is 

increasing and we need the extra help. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Premier spoke of the need for greater inclusion and said he‟d 

been instructing his ministries to find ways to increase the 

inclusion of all people. But today we know programs are being 

cut that help young parents build a better life for themselves and 

their families and the only reason being, by that minister, is a 

lack of cash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they say an ounce of prevention is worth a pound 

of cure. To the minister: is this how her government works with 

young parents to ensure their inclusion, by slashing programs 

and not even bothering to come up with a new plan? Will she 

do the right thing and use some of her $1 billion surplus to 

restore funding? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the government deputy leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think it is time for the people of Saskatchewan to understand the 

position of that opposition that sits opposite this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve listened for days that the members opposite 

talk about Bill 5 and 6. We‟ve listened to them take positions on 

certain programs and certain initiatives. Mr. Speaker, I want the 

Leader of the Opposition opposite to respond to this article that 

is in the Leader-Post that shows crosshairs of a rifle scope that 

is aimed at a young woman, and it suggests that someone 

should take aim, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is the message from the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour. It talks about taking aim at young people. It talks about 

taking aim at this individual. And I want to know whether the 

members opposite support this article and what they‟re going to 

do about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 



668 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Severance Payments and Response to Newspaper Article 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Deputy Premier. We learned before Christmas 

that a number of very senior public servants had been 

terminated by the transition team of the Saskatchewan Party. 

These long-term public servants had 30 years, 32 years, 33 

years of public service. Can the Deputy Premier advise us this 

afternoon how much taxpayer money has been paid out in 

severance pay to these long-time public servants? 

 

[14:15] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this article is from Saturday, April 5. It‟s just a few days ago 

when that opposition that sits opposite who has been, on behalf 

of the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] and labour 

groups across the province, raising concerns, raising concerns 

about tolerance, raising concerns yesterday about the abuse of 

power, Mr. Speaker. We heard those concerns in this 

Legislative Assembly, and we see an article that is in support of 

suggesting that someone should take aim with a rifle, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, is that the kind of position that that 

member opposite has? I would . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Final remarks from the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I want the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana to unequivocally say that she does not support the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour‟s position taken that would 

suggest that somehow a young lady should be in the crosshairs 

of a rifle scope, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Saturday, April 8, 2008, the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association held its spring convention and annual general 

meeting. There are 100 regional parks in our province which are 

managed overall by independent regional park authorities 

whose board members are appointed by local municipal 

governments. Individual regional parks are self-financed 

through user fees, donations from member organizations, 

municipalities, and other fundraising efforts; and with much 

volunteer dedication. 

 

I attended the regional parks‟ annual general meeting and 

announced that, in addition to the $75,000 the association had 

been receiving from the province to run its affairs, the 

government is fulfilling its campaign promise for increased 

funding to parks, and they will thus be receiving an additional 

$525,000 this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — This money will be used to further support 

the functions of their association and for distribution on a 

cost-shared basis to their members for capital projects 

according to the criteria established by a peer group. 

 

These parks make a very important contribution to the quality 

of life in Saskatchewan, particularly in our rural communities 

where they offer a wide range of services and facilities. They 

could not function or be the source of public enjoyment and 

recreational opportunity without the tireless efforts of many 

committed volunteers. At the spring convention banquet, 

awards were presented in four categories to these volunteers. I 

would like to take this opportunity to recognize the individuals 

who were the award recipients for this year. 

 

The first award, called the Park on the Move, is given to a park 

that has survived a low period and bounced back to become a 

successful park once again. This year‟s winner of that award 

was Big River and district regional park and was accepted by 

Barry Nontell. 

 

The second award, Mr. Speaker, for Volunteer of the Year, 

given to a volunteer who has tirelessly donated his time to 

ensure the success of a park, went to Lyle Beaulieu from 

Struthers Lake Regional Park. 

 

The George Rathwell Lifetime Achievement Award 

acknowledges long-time service to either a regional park 

association or a local regional park. This year‟s winner was 

Bruce Anderson from Big River and district park. 

 

Finally, the Park of the Year Award — the big one which goes 

to the park that has offered outstanding facilities and customer 

service — this year‟s award went to Carlton Trail Regional 

Park and was accepted by Bernie Mikolas. 

 

On behalf of this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, may I 

offer congratulations to these recipients and our thanks for 

maintaining these beautiful spaces so all of us can enjoy the 

wonderful benefits of our great Saskatchewan outdoors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Regional Parks Association does a tremendous job providing 

recreational facilities, places where people can lease lots so they 

can have their summer vacations. I think in many ways the 

regional parks, along with our provincial parks, are part of the 

Saskatchewan memory bank because virtually everybody that 

you talk to will have good memories of the times that they‟ve 

spent at regional parks. 

 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 669 

I think it‟s a good idea that the government has returned to the 

Saskatchewan centennial funding program that we had a few 

years. It didn‟t exist last year, but it existed in the previous four 

years. I know that the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association will be using the same committees and the same 

processes that had been used in the previous four years to 

allocate the money for important projects right across the whole 

system. That‟s important. 

 

I know that they can use even more help, and I know that the 

members opposite will be looking at this as they develop the 

budget for this year so that there can be even more secure 

funding for the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had the privilege to attend a number of the 

annual meetings for the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association, and they are times of celebration about what the 

positive things that people right across Saskatchewan have 

done. And I know that they will continue to do a good job as 

they provide these places for our Saskatchewan people but also 

for people from other provinces and other countries. So 

congratulations to the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

NOTICE OF CLOSURE 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, I give notice pursuant to rule 66(1) that at the 

next sitting of the Assembly when the order of the day is called 

for resuming consideration of the government motion for the 

sessional revision of sitting times, I will move that 

consideration of the said motion be not further postponed. 

 

The Speaker: — The notice has been given. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure, on 

behalf of the government, to table answers to questions 451 to 

548. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 451 to 548 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Dewdney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased once again to stand and participate in the debate on this 

very, very important motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a motion about the fundamental principles 

of our parliamentary democracy. It‟s about the rights of us as 

members of the legislature to ensure that the rights to the 

citizens of this province are adhered to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start by quoting an outstanding 

Canadian, an individual who devoted his life to ensuring that 

parliamentary democracy worked in Canada. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

going to read this quote: 

 

I am a Canadian, [a free Canadian] 

free to speak without fear, 

free to worship [God] in my own way, 

free to stand for what I think is right, 

free to oppose what I . . . [think] is wrong, 

or free to choose . . . 

who shall govern my country. 

This heritage of freedom 

I pledge to uphold 

for myself and for all mankind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the words of the only Prime Minister 

that ever came from this province, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. John 

G. Diefenbaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Diefenbaker was a man who very much loved 

the right of Canadians to have a free society. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he felt every bit as strong about parliamentary traditions, 

parliamentary democracy, and the balance of parliamentary 

rights between the majority and the minority, which is 

fundamentally upheld to the rules of an Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rules of the Assembly of any assembly or 

parliament, Mr. Speaker, are the balance between the majority 

and minority interests. It provides the minority the ability to 

exercise their responsibility in opposition, Mr. Speaker. And 

what we see today, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly and in this 

motion, Mr. Speaker, is a government who has chosen — who 

has chosen to unilaterally, without consultation, without 

working with the opposition — to change the rules. Mr. 

Speaker, that is fundamentally against the principles of our 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to speak largely this afternoon about . . . 

There have been many, many papers written on this subject and 

published throughout Canada, most of them nationally, but Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m going to speak at length about this very issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to start by talking about once again the 

subject and the principle of parliamentary law. Mr. Speaker, the 

principles of Canadian parliamentary law are, and this is as 

published, Mr. Speaker, to protect a minority, to protect the 

minority and restrain the improvidence of tyranny of a majority. 

That is the fundamental overruling principle of parliamentary 

law. It‟s to ensure that the minority is not abused by the 

majority. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when a government or a majority — in this 

case and always it‟s the majority; it‟s the government, Mr. 

Speaker — uses that power to take away the rights of the 

minority or to unilaterally change the rules which are, as I will 



670 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

come to very shortly, Mr. Speaker, are done by unanimous 

consent, Mr. Speaker, the rules which were agreed to by all 

members of this Assembly — that is abuse of their majority, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s an abuse of parliamentary 

privilege and it‟s an abuse of the parliamentary system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to say that the vast legacy and 

tradition implanted in Canada by the preamble to our own 

Constitution Act says very clearly, one section above all affects 

procedure. Section 18 permits the adaption in Canada of all the 

privileges of parliament current in the British House of 

Commons. That‟s the foundation for which our parliamentary 

laws were made. 

 

Few of these are of greater importance than the right to regulate 

the internal proceedings of the House or, more specifically, to 

establish binding rules of procedure. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

exactly what we did. We did unanimously as a group. Both 

sides, both the opposition and government agreed to a set of 

rules in which this House would run by, which we would 

govern ourselves, Mr. Speaker, which we agreed we‟d all 

adhere to, and, Mr. Speaker, that we would all be bound by, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Then going back to the number one rule of parliamentary law 

that exists in Canada, Mr. Speaker, that the majority would not 

abuse the minority, Mr. Speaker, we now have a majority 

government prepared to abuse the minority by unilaterally 

changing those binding rules which you all agreed to, Mr. 

Speaker, and take away the rights, take away the rights of the 

minority to speak on behalf of people of this province to 

improve legislation, to make changes, to recommend alterations 

to legislation coming before the House, Mr. Speaker, because 

they‟re going to change our ability to speak on behalf of people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, parliamentary law is based on centuries of 

tradition and precedents which have marked the evolution of 

our parliamentary systems, our freedoms from the times that the 

first parliamentarians were governed by the divine right of 

kings, where the kings had the divine right to do whatever they 

wanted, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, they gave that away. In 

stages, parliamentary sovereignty was given, was given to 

parliaments across the Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker. And 

today, today we operate our parliaments and our legislatures on 

a set of rules that are agreed to by all members of the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to talk about how rule changes should 

occur, Mr. Speaker. I want to talk about the principle of 

unanimous consent, which is well enshrined, well enshrined in 

our parliamentary tradition, our parliamentary law, and our 

proceedings, Mr. Speaker. Now what does parliamentary 

consent mean, Mr. Speaker? Well I‟m going to, Mr. Speaker, 

speak at length of this throughout this afternoon. 

 

It means within the ambit of its own rules, within the rules 

which have agreed to by all members of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, the House can change its rules. Yes, the House can 

change its rules because we made the rules. The rules are to be 

agreed to by all members so that they‟re fair and balanced, so 

they protect the rights of the minority and protect the interests 

of the majority to always be able to pass their legislation and 

their agenda in the end, Mr. Speaker. 

[14:30] 

 

But it is common practice for the House to ignore its own rules. 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is the most important point. It is common 

for a House to ignore its own rules by unanimous consent, by 

unanimous consent of all the members of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, not by a motion driven by a government that‟s power 

hungry and has their own agenda and has forgotten about the 

first and fundamental — fundamental — principle of 

parliamentary law, and that is that a majority should not abuse 

its power, should not abuse its power over a minority, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In fact the words used in parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker, are 

very clear. It says: “The principles of Canadian parliamentary 

law are: To protect a minority and restrain the improvidence or 

tyranny of a majority . . .” That is the fundamental principle of 

parliamentary law in this country. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we see before us today, what we see 

before us today is a government who is prepared to ignore, 

prepared to ignore parliamentary law, prepared to ignore 

parliamentary tradition because of its own incompetence, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re saying they can‟t get their own agenda 

through by following the rules in this Assembly which they 

agreed to. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, first off, they don‟t even know that. They‟re 

making assumptions all over the place, Mr. Speaker, that they 

can‟t even properly debate their own legislation if they ever got 

it before the House so we‟d get a chance to talk about it. The 

fact that some of the Bills that they‟re talking about have never 

been discussed in this House is because they haven‟t put them 

on the order paper and had them discussed in this House, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s not because the opposition hasn‟t dealt with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with what they‟re doing, they‟re bringing forward 

a motion which would allow Bills to go through without the 

proper consideration, the proper debate, and the proper 

consideration and debate in this House and perhaps in 

committee and in the general public, Mr. Speaker. So you 

shorten the time frame. You decide to sit till the wee small 

hours of the night, and you ram things through so the public 

aren‟t aware of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that enhancing our parliamentary democracy? Is 

that working for the people of this province? And, Mr. Speaker, 

because of their own incompetence, their own inability to get 

their agenda before this Assembly and give the members of the 

opposition the opportunity to debate them, Mr. Speaker, they 

want to change the rules. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just a short few minutes ago, not only did 

they want to change the rules. With one day of debate, with one 

day of debate, Mr. Speaker, they‟re moving closure. So at this 

time tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, the debate on their change to the 

rules ends. Mr. Speaker, the debate on the change to the rules 

will end tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. Is that fair? Is that right? Is 

that democratic? 

 

Mr. Speaker, at least that provision‟s in the rules. At least that 

provision‟s within the rules, and they‟re not changing the rules 

to end the debate. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 671 

But, Mr. Speaker, to unilaterally change the rules, which is 

done by unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker, to unilaterally use 

their majority position to change the rules and then to stifle the 

debate on that very change because people might have, the 

people of the public of Saskatchewan, the citizens of 

Saskatchewan might have concerns about a government who 

would change the rules unilaterally, without consideration of 

the citizens of this province and the rights of the opposition to 

oppose, and the rights to bring forward amendments and 

potential changes to pieces of legislation, to question that 

legislation, Mr. Speaker . . . And the end of the day the 

government has the ability to pass their legislation. There‟s 

nothing in our rules . . . And they‟re balanced very carefully to 

ensure that the majority, the government, always gets to pass 

their agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But to take away the ability to consult others, to have public 

consultations, to have meaningful debate on an issue. Because 

they‟re going to change the agenda, Mr. Speaker, and lengthen 

the hours so that the debate‟s going on in the wee small hours of 

the evening, in the early morning. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

irresponsible. 

 

And then to unilaterally close debate on a change to the rules of 

that nature by moving closure after one day of debate, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s unconscionable. That‟s absolutely 

unconscionable, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is a very 

serious, serious violation of parliamentary democracy, the 

principles of freedom of this nation. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

without question, without question in violation of many of the 

long-standing procedures of both the parliaments of Canada, the 

legislatures of this country, and, Mr. Speaker, the long-standing 

practice of this legislature as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an ability for the government today to ask 

their House Leader to meet with the Opposition House Leader 

and make an arrangement, talk about what they see as their 

problem. They don‟t know they have a problem. They‟ve come 

to some assumption that they‟re going to have a huge problem. 

They push a panic button without knowing they got a problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re at this situation, we‟re in this situation 

because of government incompetence, because they can‟t 

manage the hours in which this House is supposed to operate. 

And then they push a panic button without knowing they have a 

problem, Mr. Speaker. They push a panic button without 

realizing or knowing that they have a problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I‟d just like to take a minute or two to recap exactly what 

they‟re proposing to do, Mr. Speaker. They‟re proposing to 

extend the hours, Mr. Speaker. From Monday to Friday they 

would have us sit to midnight every night, Mr. Speaker, from 

early in the morning to midnight. And we don‟t have any 

problem sitting and working, Mr. Speaker. The problem is, Mr. 

Speaker, we don‟t need to extend the hours to do the work if 

they just sit down and do the work. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to add to this, Mr. Speaker, when this 

session was supposed to start on March 3 . . . We‟ve had a 

calendar that was agreed to as early as May 2007, and 

published, that we all knew about, Mr. Speaker. And I‟ve got a 

copy of that calendar here. So if members of the House have 

difficulty understanding what was intended, Mr. Speaker, I 

clearly have a copy of that calendar in my material. 

 

And it said we were returning to start the spring session on 

March 3. And, Mr. Speaker, did we return on March 3? No we 

didn‟t. We returned on March 10, Mr. Speaker, and we returned 

on March 10, we returned on March 10 because the members of 

government unilaterally again chose not to return on March 3. 

 

So what is the impact of that on the operation of the legislature 

and how the legislature would function, Mr. Speaker? What that 

does is deny, deny members of this Assembly 25, approximate 

25 hours of debate time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it takes that 25 hours and they‟re concerned about time to 

get the Bills, their legislation through, Mr. Speaker, because 

there are six specified Bills or six priority Bills that the 

government brought forward that we could if we chose to — I 

say we could and we haven‟t told the government we would do 

this — but we could force them to debate for a total of 20 hours 

for each Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they‟re assuming that they‟re going to be 

forced to debate 20 hours on each Bill. Some of these Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, are so non-important, Mr. Speaker, that they would 

have zero impact. So why would they automatically expect that 

they‟re going to have to debate 20 hours on these Bills? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that‟s their problem. They don‟t understand 

their own agenda. They don‟t bother talking to the opposition 

about what the opposition‟s concerns are, and they want to 

unilaterally change rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have not seen this type of unilateral and 

heavy-handed approach since the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, and there 

are actually books written about heavy-handed approaches by 

the then Grant Devine Conservatives government from the 

period of 1982 through 1991. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if we had had that extra week that we were 

supposed to actually be sitting and working, which we were 

actually scheduled, Mr. Speaker, to be here working — then the 

government decided, no we‟re not going to start on the 3rd; 

we‟re going to start on the 10th — but had we worked that 

week, we‟d have an additional 25 hours, Mr. Speaker, of work 

done in this Assembly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that isn‟t even the greatest crime if in fact 

they‟re concerned about their management of the House. In the 

first two weeks of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, when our sitting 

hours say that we work on Monday and Tuesday from 1:30 till 

5 and 7 to 10:30, Mr. Speaker, and the government plans the 

agenda and they put forward the work for the House, Mr. 

Speaker, we didn‟t sit from 7 to 10:30 because the members of 

the government didn‟t want to sit. They didn‟t put any work on 

the order paper, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well who‟s responsible for that, Mr. Speaker? Are the members 

in the opposition responsible for the government‟s failure to do 

their own job? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to members of the House and 

members opposite, when the members on this side were the 

government — and, Mr. Speaker, we were the government for 



672 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

the entire eight years I have been elected to this House and, Mr. 

Speaker, I among several other members of this House served 

as the government House leader at one point, responsible for 

ensuring the work of this Assembly got done — did we ever 

have to unilaterally extend hours? The answer is no. The answer 

is no. With a one-vote majority, Mr. Speaker, in eight years we 

never once had to extend the hours — with a one-vote majority. 

 

I‟d like to point out to the members opposite in case they 

haven‟t, you know, haven‟t noticed, Mr. Speaker, on November 

7, 2007, Mr. Speaker, they won the election. They won the 

election. And when you win the election, you take over 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. You take over the responsibility 

and you take over the accountability, Mr. Speaker. So then 

managing the House becomes your responsibility. It becomes 

your responsibility to manage the House and, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

not the problem of the members opposite in opposition to 

manage the House. 

 

Quite frankly, yesterday I tried to give them advice several 

times on how they could deal with their problem, Mr. Speaker, 

but they ignored it. So, Mr. Speaker, we lost a total of 39 hours 

of debate because they couldn‟t manage their own affairs. Now 

if, if — and I‟m saying if — the opposition forced each of those 

priority Bills to 20 hours of debate, that‟s two, two of those 

Bills which would‟ve been passed had they only taken the time 

to do their own jobs. Taken the time to understand that they are 

now responsible, to take the time to understand that they won 

the election in November 2007 and they have a responsibility 

both to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. That they now have responsibility; they can‟t blame 

everybody else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re in the driver‟s seat. They‟re driving the car 

now whether they want to or not, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s 

nobody‟s fault but their own they‟re not prepared to do so. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s nobody‟s fault but their own that they‟re not 

prepared to drive the car. Mr. Speaker, if you want to be a 

passenger, you want to hang on, you want to be a cling-on all 

your life, Mr. Speaker, then you cannot — you cannot, Mr. 

Speaker — expect to be driving the car. But they fought hard 

and they wanted to drive the car, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now there‟s no free rides in life, Mr. Speaker. You get what 

you get out of life by hard work. They should‟ve understood 

that prior to wanting to drive the car, prior to wanting the prize 

of being government. Prior, prior to, prior to, Mr. Speaker, 

taking the reins of power, they should‟ve understood what the 

responsibilities the reins of power mean, Mr. Speaker. And with 

a 19-seat majority, they cannot exercise the reins of power, Mr. 

Speaker, because they don‟t understand the importance of it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see that again today. We see that again 

today with this motion because, Mr. Speaker, they‟re prepared 

to usurp the fundamental principles of parliamentary 

democracy. They‟re prepared to take away that fundamental 

principle of parliamentary democracy, Mr. Speaker, to just 

abuse their own power, without knowing they have a problem, 

without having met with the opposition to see if there is a 

resolution to this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re taking a heavy-handed approach and 

willing, willing to set a precedent of abuse, Mr. Speaker, and it 

can be called nothing but abuse. And, Mr. Speaker, if you go 

back once again to the principles of parliamentary democracy, 

Mr. Speaker, the principles of Canadian parliamentary law, it 

says it is to protect the minority and restrain the improvidence 

or tyranny of a majority. Mr. Speaker, that‟s clear. That‟s very, 

very clear. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is shameful, it is shameful that today we‟re 

facing a situation where the members opposite don‟t care. 

They‟re laughing. They‟re making fun of the fact that they‟re 

abusing our parliamentary institution, Mr. Speaker, that they‟re 

abusing the parliamentary institution that I care very deeply for. 

Mr. Speaker, I care deeply for our traditions and I care deeply 

for our parliamentary tradition. 

 

There are many Canadians who lost their lives fighting so that 

we as Canadians today could have the benefits we have, so that 

we today have the opportunity to live in the very best country in 

the world. Mr. Speaker, those are our forefathers. They fought. 

They worked very hard to give us this province and this country 

and to give us the very laws and principles that we all have to 

live by. And, Mr. Speaker, when they choose not to live by 

them, that‟s sad. And, Mr. Speaker, the world will go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they unilaterally change the rules, but forever we 

will be, we will forever be different because the government 

chose to abuse their power, to use the tyranny of the majority to 

change the rules unilaterally when there is a long-standing 

precedent, a long-standing tradition in the law, that says it‟s 

through unanimous consent that the House can change its rules, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Did they even ask for unanimous consent? They didn‟t, Mr. 

Speaker. They didn‟t attempt to work with the opposition in any 

way. They didn‟t attempt to resolve the problem in any other 

way. They said, to heck with you. We won the election; we‟ll 

use our majority and if you don‟t like it, too bad. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s where we are today and it is shameful, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s absolutely shameful that we‟re in this situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to take a moment and talk about this in 

more detail. Mr. Speaker, there have been numerous papers 

written on this subject throughout the Canadian parliament and 

throughout the British Commonwealth, but in this particular 

paper, I am going to be quoting, a Mr. Stanley Howard 

Knowles. He‟s a long-time elected member of the House of 

Commons, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m going to quote only certain 

passages of his long and detailed paper, but I‟m going to talk 

firstly about the doctrine that freedom of discussion in Canada 

is guaranteed by the preamble of the British North America Act 

which was first enunciated in the Supreme Court in 1938, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[14:45] 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 673 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to my 

colleagues and thank you to the member allowing me to 

interrupt his speech. 

 

It‟s my pleasure to introduce to you and to all the members in 

the House here, Shane Osborne, who is sitting in the west 

gallery there. Shane is a good constituent of mine and a newly 

minted friend over the last four or five years. So I want to 

welcome him here to his constituency . . . from our constituency 

to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to, 

Mr. Speaker, once again say that the doctrine of law that 

freedom of discussion in Canada is guaranteed by the preamble 

of the British North America Act was first enunciated in the 

Supreme Court in 1938 by Sir Lyman Duff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 1938 the principles of free debate and the 

ability to discuss issues that occur within the legislatures has 

been guaranteed. Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . free discussion means “criticism, answer and 

counter-criticism”, it means” attack, defence and 

counterattack”, it means “the freest and fullest analysis 

and examination of political proposals” from every point 

of view. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s the interpretation of the Supreme Court of 

Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what‟s guaranteed to every 

member of this Assembly on behalf of their constituents, on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we see today with a unilateral motion made by the 

government using its majority power in tyranny against a 

minority, Mr. Speaker, we see a government that is prepared to 

deny, prepared to deny, Mr. Speaker, the members of this 

Assembly, deny the public, and deny the people of 

Saskatchewan the very things guaranteed by the Supreme Court 

of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

The Parliament of this country, elected by free men and 

women on the basis of free discussions which cannot be 

abrogated, is not just a club of good fellows who ought to 

do the nation‟s business in the shortest possible time . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that it “. . . is not . . . a club of 

good fellows who ought to do the nation‟s business in the 

shortest possible time . . .” Mr. Speaker, keeping in mind this 

was written in 1938, “. . . and with the least possible contention 

. . .” Mr. Speaker. 

 

. . . rather it is the body which should examine every 

proposal that is made to make sure that it is in the 

country‟s best interest; it is a body in which attention 

should be drawn to proposals that ought to be made but 

which are often overlooked . . . 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the job of the opposition to put forward 

proposals to change legislation, to look at things that weren‟t 

looked at, Mr. Speaker; to ensure that there‟s broader 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, prior to putting in place a law that 

may not be a good law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . unless an election is just around the corner; it is a body 

which should scrutinize expenditures and inquire into the 

administration of public affairs and to make sure that 

fairness, [now, Mr. Speaker, this is important — fairness] 

justice and equity are maintained [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the fundamental principles of what our 

role is, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, when members of this 

legislature are denied any of those, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a 

fundamental flaw in our system. It means our system has failed. 

It means that citizens in this province and members of this 

legislature don‟t have a right to properly represent the citizens 

of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is tyranny. Mr. Speaker, that is majority 

using its power to usurp the rights of the minority which, under 

parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker, is defined as tyranny. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s a word none of us like to use and none of us like to 

talk about but, Mr. Speaker, it‟s real. And when a government is 

prepared to use its majority power to abuse the minority, Mr. 

Speaker, then it simply is, it simply is tyranny, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If then free discussion in parliament is to mean anything, 

[so if free discussion within this Assembly, legislature is 

to mean anything] if it is to be real, certain measures of 

strength must be accorded to the opposition. 

 

For the opposition to be able to do its role, Mr. Speaker, the 

Supreme Court of Canada has determined that certain things 

must be given to the opposition, Mr. Speaker. And what is that? 

 

It must be recognized that it is the opposition‟s right, 

indeed it is its [fundamental] duty, [not just its right but its 

fundamental duty] whenever it feels strongly about any 

matter of public policy, whether it be something the 

government is proposing or concern over something the 

government is failing [to do] to propose, to criticize and 

attack the government for all it is worth. 

 

For our parliamentary system to work, Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition has to have the right to attack the government when 

they believe it‟s wrong, Mr. Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

that is what is denied. That is what is denied by an opposition 

when a government uses its majority to unilaterally change the 

rules and oppress the minority, Mr. Speaker. Those are things 



674 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

that my forefathers and your forefathers and many, many 

Canadians fought to ensure for the citizens of this country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “The opposition has only [and I want the members 

to listen to this very carefully — the opposition has only] the 

rules for its protection . . .” So the rules are there to protect the 

opposition, to ensure that the majority government doesn‟t 

abuse the minority, Mr. Speaker. The opposition only has the 

rules for its protection. “. . . hence the authorities on 

parliamentary procedure emphasize the greater importance to 

the opposition of the only protection it has, the protection of the 

rules [Mr. Speaker]”. Mr. Speaker, this is the Supreme Court of 

Canada speaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the protection that members of the opposition 

have are the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And when a 

government uses its majority to unilaterally change the rules, 

Mr. Speaker, that protection is stripped away and, Mr. Speaker, 

democracy in this country, democracy in this country is no 

longer fair and just. It‟s one-sided. Mr. Speaker, it‟s like a bully 

in a schoolyard, Mr. Speaker, deciding his way or the highway, 

Mr. Speaker, using a modern day analogy, Mr. Speaker. It‟s like 

a bully in the schoolyard. It‟s either his way or the highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and it goes on to say: 

 

. . . I suggest that unless we approach equality of strength, 

unless there‟s an ability to approach a quality of strength 

[Mr. Speaker] — there cannot be absolute equality for in 

the end the majority must prevail, hence I say unless we 

approach equality of strength — between those who 

support and those who oppose the government of the day, 

there will not be that cut and thrust, that “attack, defence, 

and counterattack” . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the very fundamental rights of our parliamentary 

democracy, the things that we as Canadians have fought for, the 

things that John G. Diefenbaker‟s talked about in his speech 

about being a great Canadian, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have that today 

because we have a government that‟s used its unilateral power, 

used its unilateral power to decide they‟re going to change the 

rules. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, they did the unspeakable just a few 

minutes ago, Mr. Speaker. They did the unspeakable. They 

won‟t even let us debate. They won‟t even allow us to debate 

the abuse of their powers, Mr. Speaker. They will not allow us 

to debate the abuse of their powers, Mr. Speaker. They did not 

allow us to debate the abuse of their powers. 

 

They‟re moving closure, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow, tomorrow, 

Mr. Speaker, when I would normally stand on my feet to 

continue this debate, Mr. Speaker, we can no longer do that 

because the government once again used its majority power to 

close debate, Mr. Speaker, to stop us from having the 

opportunity to continue to debate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to give them credit for this. 

Mr. Speaker, the rules of closure are at least in the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. They didn‟t change the rules to do so, Mr. Speaker. At 

least they‟re following the rules. And that‟s a step up to them, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s a step up for the government to follow the 

rules. Even though it‟s unconscionable to do so without the 

debate about their changing the rules prior to using the rules to 

close debate, Mr. Speaker, at least they‟re following the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but this decision goes on to say: 

 

But I suggest that you could have universal suffrage, the 

secret ballot, and a government which is the choice of the 

majority of the people, and still not have full political 

democracy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see that today. We can have a majority 

government and still not have full political democracy in our 

country because that majority could use its majority in a 

tyrannous way, Mr. Speaker. They could abuse the fundamental 

and first priority of parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker. They could 

use their majority to create tyranny over the minority. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what‟s occurring today. That 

is exactly what‟s occurring today when the members of the 

government are unilaterally putting forward a motion to change 

the rules — the rules that are said to be, by the Supreme Court 

of Canada, the only protection of the opposition; the only 

balance between right and wrong, Mr. Speaker; the only 

balance between the majority and minority in a parliamentary 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. And they are continuing to abuse that 

fundamental principle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, democracy includes the respect for the rights of 

minorities. It‟s a fundamental principle understood and 

acknowledged by the Supreme Court. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] Democracy includes [the] respect for the 

rights of minorities. Democracy is not real unless the force 

of public opinion is brought to bear not only on the choice 

of a government once every four or five years but on the 

legislative process . . . [month to month, day by day] and 

during the time between elections [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] I submit, therefore, that you do not have 

[the] full political democracy, let alone the economic as 

well as political democracy for which my party stands, 

unless you include along with the ingredients that are 

taken for granted, such as universal suffrage, the secret 

ballot and majority rule, a full and . . . [unquestionable] 

recognition of the rights and functions of the opposition to 

the government of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unless you‟re willing as a government to 

recognize the rights and responsibilities of the opposition of the 

day, Mr. Speaker, and work with that opposition to deal with 

the issues before the legislature, Mr. Speaker, then you don‟t 

have true equality. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for eight years, for eight years when we were 

in government we worked every single year with the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. We worked with them to ensure that 

our parliamentary agenda, our legislative agenda got through, 

Mr. Speaker. We learned to make sure that our budgets got 

through, Mr. Speaker. We worked with the opposition. We 

worked collaboratively, Mr. Speaker, to ensure, we worked 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 675 

collaboratively to ensure that the agenda — which was the 

people‟s agenda, Mr. Speaker, because ultimately it was in fact 

passed, Mr. Speaker, and became law — that the people‟s 

agenda carried on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not prepared to say, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m not prepared to say that the members opposite are 

willing to work with us, because they‟ve shown no signs of a 

willingness to work with this opposition, Mr. Speaker. Instead 

they‟ve chosen to use their power of majority and, Mr. Speaker, 

I dare say in tyranny — as anticipated by parliamentary law in 

this country — to abuse the minority, to take away the rights of 

the opposition to do its job by changing the rules unilaterally, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why‟d they do all this? I think it‟s time to go 

back. It‟s time to go back and look at something very carefully, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟re in this situation because of their own 

incompetence, their own inability to understand that they won 

the election, they‟re now responsible, and they have to manage 

their own affairs, Mr. Speaker — that they have a responsibility 

to manage the agenda in such a way that they can pass the laws 

which they want to pass, Mr. Speaker, so that they can pass the 

budget that they put before the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, why should the rights of the opposition be 

usurped because they can‟t do their own job, Mr. Speaker? 

They started the session late. They denied the opportunity for 

the debate in the evenings because they put nothing on the 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. And all of the sudden that becomes the 

fault of the opposition. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker . . . And then they push a panic button. They 

push a panic button, thinking they can‟t get their agenda 

through, Mr. Speaker. But did they try to work with the 

opposition to see if they could get their agenda through, Mr. 

Speaker? No. The answer‟s no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is 1986 all over again. It‟s exactly how the 

Conservative government in the 1980s acted, Mr. Speaker. The 

first thing that the Devine government did in 1986 after 

re-election, they moved a unilateral motion to change the rules. 

Mr. Speaker, this is identical to the Devine government of 1986. 

And where was the member from Swift Current, the leader of 

the opposition, in 1986, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, he was 

working in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, he may well have 

drafted that very motion. And we see today the exact same 

behaviour. And, Mr. Speaker, we believe this decision was 

made in the Premier‟s office. 

 

We‟ve seen very carefully orchestrated shift in power so that 

the power in the current government lies in the Premier‟s office, 

Mr. Speaker. We see the Premier actually direct in this House 

who‟s answering questions, Mr. Speaker, which is normally the 

function of the House Leader. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

can‟t do his job. 

 

If the Government House Leader can‟t do his job, all of the 

sudden it becomes the fault of the opposition or we‟re going to 

have to unilaterally change the rules because they‟re 

incompetent. Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s against every principle 

of parliamentary democracy. It‟s against every principle of our 

democratic system. And, Mr. Speaker, it clearly is against the 

intent of these decisions by the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

“Only in this way . . .” Mr. Speaker, pardon me. I want to talk 

about: “Only in this way can you protect the rights of 

minorities; only in this way can you make sure that the force of 

public opinion will be brought to bear on the legislative 

process.” 

 

Only if you respect the rights and the role of the opposition, and 

most importantly, Mr. Speaker, only if you respect the rules of 

the Assembly — only if you respect and adhere to the rules 

which you all agreed upon, the rules you agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute and go back and talk about 

how these rules came into place, Mr. Speaker. The current rules 

of the Legislative Assembly, the current rules of the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, were agreed to by all members of this 

Assembly. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But how did we come to the current rules? Mr. Speaker, we put 

a subcommittee together consisting of members of — what? — 

equal number of members of government and opposition that 

went and looked at how the rules in other assemblies were 

working. How could we modernize our Assembly in such a way 

and ensure the continued balance between the rights of the 

minority and the rights of the majority such that the government 

could always continue its agenda and at the same time, Mr. 

Speaker, that we could ensure, we could ensure, we could 

ensure, Mr. Speaker, that that balance that was anticipated by 

our forefathers and by the Supreme Court of Canada and by the 

British North America Act and by hundreds of years of 

tradition, that balance would continue? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we agreed to a set of rules that we all 

thought ensured that balance. In fact we all strongly believed it. 

We endorsed it. Both the current government when they were in 

opposition . . . and they fought for many of the rules which 

they‟re fighting today. They won it. It was an all-party 

committee. We all agreed. And we agreed because we, we as 

people of integrity, Mr. Speaker — I would like to say that — 

we as people of integrity on both sides agreed that these rules 

should and could work to continue that balance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we believed, we believed and we accepted 

their word. When we accepted their solemn oath, Mr. Speaker, 

their solemn belief that these rules were fair and when we gave 

our solemn oath and our solemn pledge that these rules were 

fair and continued that balance, Mr. Speaker, that we would live 

by those rules, we would live by those rules. And we would 

only use the principle of unanimous consent that we were going 

to change the rules or the sitting times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, sadly, sadly the day November 7, 2007, came 

along and the members opposite for the first time found 

themselves in the position where they had the majority power, 

where they were in a position to abuse the minority, Mr. 

Speaker. What did they do, Mr. Speaker? They in fact abused 

the minority, Mr. Speaker, and we see that today very clearly in 

this motion that‟s before the House. 



676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very sad day for democracy in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is a day that some may say 

that true democracy in Saskatchewan dies. It‟s a sad day and 

it‟s unfortunate that this occurs when we‟re sitting in this 

House, Mr. Speaker. But this all occurred as a result of the 

incompetence of the government in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟ve been in power for only four months. We 

can understand, and we very clearly understand the complexity 

of government. We understand the difficulties in operating a 

very complex system. Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

didn‟t understand that, why didn‟t they just come to the 

opposition and try to work out some solution to the problem 

which they‟re facing? But did they choose to do that? No. 

 

Last night, Mr. Speaker, last night and during the day yesterday 

on 13 occasions, I urged the Government House Leader and the 

Premier to either meet with the Leader of the Opposition or to 

meet with the Opposition House Leader, Mr. Speaker, to seek 

resolution to the problem so that we don‟t have to set this awful 

precedent, so that we don‟t have to set this awful precedent, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are going to use the majority to abuse the 

minority in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I‟d like to urge the Premier to either 

meet with the Leader of the Opposition or the Government 

House Leader, to meet with the Opposition House Leader, Mr. 

Speaker, and let‟s try to seek some resolution to this, this 

problem they perceive, Mr. Speaker, that I still have not had to 

find, Mr. Speaker. And as you would know and understand, I 

understand the rules very well, Mr. Speaker, and I don‟t believe 

we have the particular problem that the members opposite are 

talking about. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce some 

guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure today to introduce seven guests who‟ve dropped in to 

witness democracy in action. These seven guests, Mr. Speaker, 

include from SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and General 

Employees‟ Union] Frieda LeVasseur of Local 1101 in Regina. 

We also have a vice-president of the SFL, Shelley Johnson. 

Shelley, give us a wave. Thank you. 

 

We have Sandi Marcotte from Local 1120 in Estevan. 

Welcome. Kurt Whitford from Local 1104 in Weyburn. 

 

We have Garry Ramage with SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] academic. Welcome Garry. 

Tracey Kurtenbach who is the chairperson of the SIAST 

professional services bargaining unit, welcome Tracey. And Jim 

Steele who is the chairperson of the SIAST academic — Jim, 

welcome. And I want to welcome these people to the Assembly 

and thank them for their interest in democracy. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

once again reiterate, we‟re in this problem, this perception of a 

problem which we don‟t even know is reality because the 

Government House Leader pushed the panic button, believing 

he can‟t get his agenda through. 

 

Did he meet with the opposition, seeing if there was some 

arrangement that could be made, Mr. Speaker? Well when we 

asked him to give us a proposal, Mr. Speaker — and I know I 

was part of some of these discussions, Mr. Speaker — what did 

he give us? He gave us the motion that we have before us, 

saying, well we don‟t need your co-operation. We‟re the 

government. We have the power and we can ram it through, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well that‟s an attitude problem, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a 

significant attitude problem, a significant attitude problem that 

we haven‟t seen in Saskatchewan since we elected the last 

Conservative government, the Grant Devine government in the 

1980s. The Grant Devine government in the 1980s was the last 

time we saw unilateral change of the rules in this manner, Mr. 

Speaker — a change that usurped the rights of the legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, which used its tyranny, Mr. Speaker, of the 

majority to abuse the minority Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to talk about this decision by the 

Supreme Court of Canada: “We are indeed fortunate in Canada 

to have inherited from the United Kingdom a parliamentary 

system of government,” Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

we‟re well served by the parliamentary system of government 

we inherited. I think it‟s not perfect, Mr. Speaker, but we as 

Canadians have the opportunity to live a quality of life that few 

in the world have, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker “. . . the genius of 

which is the responsibility of the government to a parliament in 

which the rights of those who support the government and 

likewise the rights of those who oppose it are clearly 

recognized.” Mr. Speaker, it says that the rights of the 

opposition should be clearly recognized. 

 

And how are those rights, Mr. Speaker, protected? Earlier it was 

very clear in this decision by the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, that those rights were protected by the rules of this 

Assembly — by the rules of this Assembly — and the 

adherence to those rules by the majority, by the government, 

Mr. Speaker. That is how an opposition‟s rights are protected, 

how the minority‟s rights are protected in law in this country, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 677 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it‟s a very sad day — a 

very sad day indeed in Saskatchewan — when we have a 

government that cares not about the rights of minority, Mr. 

Speaker; cares nothing about abuse of power, Mr. Speaker; is 

willing to abuse its power. Like the schoolyard bully, Mr. 

Speaker, over a younger, less fortunate individual in the 

schoolyard, Mr. Speaker, the one that doesn‟t have the ability to 

say no, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the type of attitude this 

government‟s displaying — that of a bully, a bully that‟s 

willing to use its majority in a tyrannous way over a minority, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s shameful. It‟s absolutely shameful. And 

members opposite should take the opportunity to think about 

that. 

 

They should think about that because they‟re going to go down 

in history as part of this. And there will be books written about 

them as there were books written about the Devine era that 

speak of just this — that speak of just about this and about the 

abuse of power. And, Mr. Speaker, I can‟t believe that I‟m the 

only . . . I know I‟m not the only person on the opposition side 

that feels very passionately about the rights of parliament, Mr. 

Speaker, our history, our laws, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there has to be some members on the government side that 

feel as passionately about parliamentary law, that feel as 

passionately about the parliamentary rights, Mr. Speaker. There 

has to be somebody. There has to be at least one member 

among their 38 members that really cares about abusing power, 

that doesn‟t think it‟s appropriate to use its majority to abuse 

the minority, Mr. Speaker. There needs to be one caring, 

compassionate individual among the 38. There must be. Mr. 

Speaker, I cannot believe that there is not at least one caring, 

compassionate individual among the 38. There isn‟t one person 

who cares about abusing their power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has to be somebody over there. There has to 

be somebody over that that isn‟t so afraid of the Premier and the 

direction from the Premier‟s office that they can afford to care. 

They can afford to show that they have a little compassion, Mr. 

Speaker, that they don‟t want to be a schoolyard bully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there needs to be at least one member opposite . . . 

and I see a couple of members leaving, Mr. Speaker. Maybe 

those are individuals who aren‟t comfortable, that are 

uncomfortable, Mr. Speaker, in the role that they‟re playing. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that there‟s at least more than at least 

one member over there, Mr. Speaker, that feels bad, that 

understands what they‟re doing is wrong. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they should not be doing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “It might interest you to know,” it goes on to say, 

“that the „term „His (or Her) Majesty‟s Opposition‟ has been in 

use longer than the title „Prime Minister.‟” Mr. Speaker, that 

now parliamentary democracy, the role of Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition has been used more frequently and longer than that 

of the office of Prime Minister, than the title Prime Minister. 

Mr. Speaker, one of the quotes used in this is: 

 

When Sir Charles Tupper wrote his farewell letter to the 

Conservative Party in 1901 he put it this way: “The duty 

of Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition is to exercise vast 

influence in restraining vicious legislation, and in giving a 

loyal support to proposals of the Government which 

commend themselves as in the interests of the country” 

[Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you‟ve heard me many times in this 

Assembly stand and give recognition to the government for the 

things they do well. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what a good 

opposition does. Mr. Speaker, we pointed out to them many 

good things in this budget. But there were things that didn‟t 

meet the test of the needs of the people of this province. And 

we pointed those out too. 

 

But that‟s our job as the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that is why our parliamentary system both has a government 

and an opposition: to create a balance, to create the dialogue 

and discussion that brings forward and forth even better 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, better outcomes in the interests of the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why it‟s been 

anticipated ever since The British North America Act and ever 

since our parliamentary democracy was developed in Canada 

that there would be both a government and an opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker “. . . and in giving a loyal support to proposals of 

the Government which commend themselves as in the interests 

of the country; while initiating itself such measures for the 

commonwealth as are neglected by the Administration.” 

 

So it‟s also the role of the opposition to bring forward things 

that it felt are neglected by the government in power of the day, 

Mr. Speaker. And when we ask for certain Bills to go to public 

hearings so that members of the public have an opportunity to 

have direct input into those Bills, Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t mean 

those Bills aren‟t going to pass because those Bills are still 

going to come back to this legislature and the government 

through its majority will pass them. 

 

But what we‟re asking is, on Bills that are contentious in nature, 

Mr. Speaker — as they asked of us when we were government 

and as we granted them, Mr. Speaker, and as we granted them 

as you would know, Mr. Speaker — the right for some pieces of 

legislation to go to committee so that members of the public can 

directly have input, so members of the public can directly 

contribute to ensuring that we get the best possible legislation, 

we get the very best possible outcomes for the people of our 

province and, Mr. Speaker, so that a piece of legislation that 

may have been drafted in the middle of the night in some 

individual‟s office that has a particular dislike for a group of 

people or a segment of society cannot pass without having the 

type of scrutiny that is ensured and intended in our democratic 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sir Wilfrid Laurier spoke in 1913 in the House of 

Commons and brought forward in a resolution to amend the 

rules of the House of Commons as to provide for closure, Mr. 

Speaker. The Liberals were then scandalized by the opposition 

party as “This was a form of tyranny free men in a free 

parliament could not take,” Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it didn‟t 

pass. Mr. Speaker, it didn‟t pass. “Heaven is my witness,” it 

goes on to say, “that I would rather stand here today defeated 

and in opposition by that appeal to the people [rather] than 

stand over there in office by the power of the gag, [Mr. 

Speaker].” 

 



678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

An Hon. Member: — Read that again. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it says, “Heaven is my witness that 

I would rather stand here today defeated and in opposition by 

that appeal to the people than stand over there in office by the 

power of the gag,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is talking about the government using its ability in 

power to use closure, Mr. Speaker. Something this government 

today is willing not only to do, Mr. Speaker, but to do it after 

only two days of debate, Mr. Speaker. After two days of debate, 

Mr. Speaker, this government is prepared to abuse its power — 

prepared to abuse its power and prepared, prepared to move 

closure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to now just briefly talk about a quote by 

Stanley Knowles, and it says that: 

 

Debate is not a sin, a mistake, an error or something to be 

put up with in parliament. Debate is the essence of [what 

our] parliament [is]. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I now want to say that one more 

time, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Debate is not a sin, [it‟s not] a mistake, [it‟s not] an error 

or something to be put up with in parliament. Debate is 

the essence of [what our] parliament [is, Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you‟re going to stifle that debate, 

when you‟re going to take away the rights of members of this 

legislature to debate something fundamental as changing the 

rules unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, that is tyranny at its best. That‟s 

abuse of power at its very best, Mr. Speaker. And the members 

opposite are prepared to do that after only allowing, after only 

allowing members to debate this issue for two days, Mr. 

Speaker, by taking away the right of individuals to free debate 

on this very serious issue, Mr. Speaker. So it tells you how 

serious they take this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some of the members opposite are laughing and giggling and 

making faces, Mr. Speaker, but they obviously don‟t take this 

issue very seriously, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you don‟t, if 

you‟re passing a closure motion after two days of debate, you 

don‟t take it very seriously at all. Mr. Speaker, they do not take 

it very serious at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sir Wilfrid Laurier goes on to say: 

 

There are occasions . . . when an opposition or a minority 

owes it to itself, on account of the strong views it holds 

upon some public measure, to oppose that measure with 

all the force at its command. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that‟s what we‟re doing today. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re opposing this unilateral rule change, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟re opposing it with every, every ounce of effort that we 

have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reason we‟re opposing this is because, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

not necessary. It‟s not needed. It says the only, the only 

protection an opposition has is the rules, Mr. Speaker. The 

Supreme Court of Canada said that. And when a government is 

prepared to unilaterally change the rules, it takes away the 

protection of that opposition, Mr. Speaker, and it takes away the 

balance of fundamental democracy in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, today, today in Saskatchewan democracy 

dies if this government moves ahead with this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen this once before during the Devine 

years right after the 1986 election, Mr. Speaker, and we see it 

today. Mr. Speaker, it‟s déjà vu. It‟s living the 1980s all over 

again, Mr. Speaker. This is Grant Devine II. This is doing 

exactly what the Devine government did in the 1980s. 

 

On another occasion, Mr. Speaker, on another occasion, and 

this again is a Sir Wilfrid Laurier quote: 

 

On another occasion in 1771, the majority of the house 

. . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, because their history comes from the British 

parliament. 

 

. . . the majority of the house did not want to allow the 

publication of the debates. That strange position was 

opposed by a minority headed by no less . . . than Edmund 

Burke, and Burke by whole days of obstruction succeeded 

in defeating the object of the majority, and, as he himself 

said afterwards, “Posterity will bless the pertinacity of that 

day.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, our whole system is designed so that 

individuals who have very strong held beliefs have the right to 

debate those beliefs in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we see this 

government denying the rights to debate those very strongly 

held views, to have these very strongly held views debated, Mr. 

Speaker, because they‟re prepared to use their majority to 

abuse, Mr. Speaker. They‟re prepared to use their majority to 

abuse, Mr. Speaker. And when you allow a majority to abuse, 

Mr. Speaker, the world is a weaker place, a lesser place as a 

result, Mr. Speaker. And we all have to examine the outcomes 

of such behaviour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they go on to say: 

 

I submit that ours is a great tradition, that we play a vital 

role in the democratic process — a role without which our 

legislative process would not be democratic — and that 

posterity will continue to bless the pertinacity of those to 

Mr. Speaker‟s left who do their job as [the very] best they 

can [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re trying to have the members opposite 

understand that what they‟re doing is not the right thing. Mr. 

Speaker, rather than trying to resolve the issue through some 

form of negotiation, consultation, or consideration, Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re unilaterally changing the rules. They‟re 

changing the democratic process of this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, and they‟re doing so because of their own 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. They‟re doing it because they can‟t 

manage their own affairs, Mr. Speaker, and they cannot manage 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 679 

the government, Mr. Speaker. And that is a shameful, shameful 

situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the opposition we‟re to consult. We must 

check, prod, and in the third place . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 

some guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member 

from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, members. It‟s my pleasure 

to introduce to you, and they‟re seated in the gallery opposite, 

Brent Barre. He‟s a member of the SGEU Local 5485 in 

Regina, and if Brent could give us a wave. Also, Lori Bossaer. 

She‟s from North Battleford, and she‟s a member of the SGEU 

Local 1103, and if Laurie could give us a wave. And also, 

Darwin Delorme. Darwin is also from North Battleford and a 

member of the SGEU Local 1103 and also has a distinction, Mr. 

Speaker, of serving as the vice-president, Aboriginal 

vice-president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. And I 

wonder if all members would join me in extending these people 

a warm welcome to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to continue my remarks 

talking about the role of opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, it goes 

on to say that: 

 

Any opposition worth its salt must check, prod, and in the 

third place [to] do something else to the government . . . 

Checking the government is the most obvious task of the 

opposition. This applies to legislation, spending, taxation 

and administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly he felt that the role of the opposition is to 

question what the government is doing, to question what the 

majority‟s doing, Mr. Speaker. And when you do that, Mr. 

Speaker, when you do that, you have to have the freedom to do 

that. And you have to be able to do it in a way that is balanced 

and fair, Mr. Speaker, and that allows for the influence of the 

opposition to change the opinion of the government at times, 

Mr. Speaker, so that there‟s open and meaningful dialogue, so 

that there‟s public consultation, so there‟s an opportunity for the 

people of this province and the people of Canada to have a say 

in what their legislative body is doing, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, a denial of this process, Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly 

what‟s occurring with this change in rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our second task is equally important if not more so 

as an opposition. It is ours to prod and push and persuade the 

government to take those steps for the common good, for the 

common good, which is sometimes seems awfully slow to be 

done, Mr. Speaker. That‟s our responsibility as an opposition. 

It‟s our responsibility to push the government to do the right 

thing. And what‟s wrong with that, Mr. Speaker? We‟re all 

elected by the people of this province. We all want to have the 

very best province we can have. We all want to have the very 

best place we can for our children and grandchildren to grow 

up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, over the last day or so, I‟ve on a 

couple of occasions said hello to my own grandson who likes to 

stay at home and watch grandpa. He‟s four years old. And when 

I‟m up here talking about the principles of parliamentary 

democracy, he knows that I want what‟s very best, the very best 

for him. 

 

But I also want the very best for the children of the member 

from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote. I want the very best for 

every member of this Assembly and their children because, Mr. 

Speaker, we all live in this province. We all live in this country. 

And of course we want the very best for our children. 

 

But we want, Mr. Speaker, as much as we want what‟s best for 

our children, Mr. Speaker, we need to have, we need to have 

balanced processes that protect the rights of both the majority 

and the minority. We need that for our parliamentary system to 

work. We need it so that our children have the very best future 

to grow up to, Mr. Speaker, and that we don‟t become like other 

countries that no longer consider, no longer consider what‟s 

best for our children, that care only about for those who are in 

power themselves, who seek self-gratitude instead of what‟s 

best for the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for those very reasons we have rules in this Assembly that 

we all agree to adhere to, Mr. Speaker. And we don‟t when we 

don‟t adhere to them, Mr. Speaker. We have slipped a long way 

down the road towards an end, Mr. Speaker, where the might 

makes right, where the power of an individual or the power of a 

few will dominate the will of the majority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can never reach that point. We don‟t want to 

get to a system where people are elected in this Assembly based 

on how much money they have in their pocket or how much 

influence they have prior to getting here. We want to have an 

Assembly that‟s representative of the people, that‟s balanced 

and fair, that believes in the principles of equality and justice, 

Mr. Speaker, and that believes in the fundamental principles of 

balance between the rights of majority and the rights of 

minority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those things are important. They‟re important to our future, 

Mr. Speaker. They‟re important to our ability to continue a 

democratic process in this country that will allow the best 

possible future for our children, Mr. Speaker. And we — all 

members of this Assembly — should consider that very, very 



680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

important. And when we don‟t, Mr. Speaker, we have reached a 

point where our future is uncertain because when we‟re 

prepared to use the rights of the majority to abuse the minority, 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot say, we cannot say what the future 

means to the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for just a minute about the 

democracy must include the rights of the minorities, Mr. 

Speaker. And in this case that‟s well, well documented in our 

parliamentary law that the rights of minority in this legislature 

must be respected, Mr. Speaker. And how are the rights of the 

minority protected in this legislature, Mr. Speaker? The 

Supreme Court of Canada clearly said it‟s protected by the 

rules. It‟s protected by rules that are agreed upon unanimously 

by all parties in the House, Mr. Speaker. And then, Mr. 

Speaker, rules are only to be changed by unanimous consent, 

not by a majority abusing its power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have had relatives who have gone to war, Mr. Speaker, gone 

to war to protect the rights, to protect our democracy, Mr. 

Speaker, to protect our democracy. They fought so that we 

could have the very rules that we have today, Mr. Speaker. 

Let‟s not, let‟s not, Mr. Speaker, just throw that out the door. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got members opposite out there say, 

let‟s not waste time, Mr. Speaker. That shows how little respect 

they have for the democratic and parliamentary process, Mr. 

Speaker. It shows how little respect they have for this 

institution, and it shows how much disrespect they have for 

other people, Mr. Speaker, and that is sad. 

 

If the member from Moose Jaw North wants to continue to say, 

let‟s not waste time about talking about rights and minority 

rights, not talk about the principles of democracy, then the 

member from Moose Jaw North should be prepared to tell his 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, prepared to tell his constituents that 

he does not care about the democratic rights of the people of 

this province. And is he prepared to do that? No, he‟s not. The 

member from Moose Jaw North will chirp from his seat, but 

will he tell his constituents what he‟s willing to say in this 

House? I dare say he is not man enough to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all have a right and responsibility to protect the 

democratic principles of this institution. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Moose Jaw North may not hold those values very 

importantly. He may not value, Mr. Speaker, the rights of 

minorities, the rights of minority and majority rights in law, Mr. 

Speaker. But this institution is based on those rights, Mr. 

Speaker, and the members of this House should respect them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to now talk about . . . There was a paper 

written about the role of the opposition in a parliamentary 

system in Canada, and it was tabled December 1988 in the 

Parliament of Canada. Mr. Speaker, it‟s a detailed research 

paper prepared by the political and social affairs division of the 

House of Commons. Mr. Speaker, in the House of Commons 

this paper was tabled for all members. It can be found in the 

Library of Parliament in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to talk a little bit about the opposition in a 

parliamentary system and what it means. Parliament after all is 

the function about debate — rhetoric in the classical Greek 

sense — and the transacting of the people‟s business in a public 

forum. This, Mr. Speaker, is our public forum to transact the 

people‟s business. It‟s not the business of the government or the 

business of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re all here to represent the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We‟re here to represent the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. We‟re not here to represent our own 

self-interest. We‟re here to represent the interests of the people 

of this province. Mr. Speaker, “Genuine political opposition is a 

necessary attribute of democracy, tolerance, and trust in the 

ability of citizens to resolve differences by peaceful means.” 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what genuine political opposition is about. 

 

If these systems are perceived as not [to be] working well 

[Mr. Speaker] . . . it may be the rights of political 

oppositions which are immediately and most visibly at 

stake, [Mr. Speaker] . . . 

 

If the parliamentary system is not working well, Mr. Speaker, it 

goes on to say that: 

 

. . . it may be the rights of political oppositions which are 

immediately and most . . . [viably] at stake, but ultimately 

the threat is to democratic rights and freedoms generally 

[of the population]. 

 

Because when you have a government which is prepared to take 

away the democratic rights of the opposition in the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, it also indicates they‟re prepared to 

take away the rights, genuine rights of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. What‟s next on their 

agenda, Mr. Speaker? Because when you‟re prepared to abuse 

your power, Mr. Speaker, that abuse of power doesn‟t often 

stop on one occasion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“The division between government and opposition is as old as 

political democracy itself” is, Mr. Speaker. The role of the 

opposition and the role of government is well-defined, and the 

balance between the role of opposition and role of government 

is also well-defined, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

absolutely important, it‟s absolutely important that we all 

respect those roles. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, as was determined in the decision by the 

Supreme Court of Canada in 1938, the protection of an 

opposition is the rules. The rules of the Legislative Assembly 

are there to protect the rights of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

and when those rules are abused, Mr. Speaker, when those rules 

are abused, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 681 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 

my colleagues for giving me this opportunity and my apologies 

to the Speaker for the interruption. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my great pleasure to introduce to you and to 

all the members of the House Mr. and Mrs. Bill Bobyk from 

Yorkton, who are sitting up in your gallery there, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s been many, many years, but I did have the pleasure of 

meeting with Mr. Bobyk many years ago when I represented the 

Pelly constituency. Pelly constituency at that time surrounded 

the city of Yorkton, and I remember during that period of time I 

did have the opportunity to meet with Mr. Bobyk and to discuss 

some of the issues. So I want to once again welcome him and 

his wife to their wonderful Legislative Assembly. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to continue with my discussion about the role 

of opposition in government and why the balance between 

minority and majority rights are so important to our 

parliamentary democracy, Mr. Speaker, and why a violation of 

that, those very basic rights, by the majority — in this case the 

government, the Sask Party government — in this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, by putting forward a unilateral motion to change 

the rules is such an abuse of those very democratic principles, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious issue. This is a 

fundamental violation of the principles of parliamentary 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. And we should all take this very 

seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the members opposite — after 

hearing this information and having the opportunity to think a 

little bit about what this means and what it means to the future 

of this province, to the future of parliamentary democracy and 

to this legislature — would reconsider, Mr. Speaker, and would 

withdraw this abusive motion, Mr. Speaker, and instead decide 

that they could talk to the Opposition House Leader, Mr. 

Speaker, and through dialogue come to some resolution to this 

perceived problem they have. Mr. Speaker, perception is reality 

if that‟s all you have, Mr. Speaker. But they think they have a 

problem without knowing they have a problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s very, very important that the 

government consider what‟s being said, Mr. Speaker; that the 

Government House Leader take the opportunity to meet with 

the Opposition House Leader, Mr. Speaker; and that, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to look for 

some resolution other one that‟s as draconian and one sided and 

abusive as a motion to change the rules, Mr. Speaker, which is 

unparliamentary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fundamentally what‟s being proposed is wrong. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s wrong. The members opposite should 

recognize it‟s wrong And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s wrong for a number 

of reasons, which I‟ve laid out today, and I‟ve laid out over the 

last couple of days, Mr. Speaker and, Mr. Speaker, I will 

continue to discuss for probably some hours yet today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “The division between government and opposition 

is as old as political democracy itself.” We know that. 

 

Government could alternate among different groups of 

citizens, and the minority could seek to persuade a 

majority [That‟s our history, Mr. Speaker] of its point of 

view by peaceful (i.e., political) means, [Mr. Speaker.] 

 

We strive to change the majority opinions through peaceful and 

political means through our legislative processes, Mr. Speaker, 

using the rules of the Assembly to put forward meaningful 

debate, Mr. Speaker, debate that is without threat, without any 

power being held over the head of the opposition. It‟s the 

rightful place of the opposition to debate, to probe, to challenge, 

and to try to change proposals of government to improve the 

well-being of that very proposal, Mr. Speaker, to improve it for 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What has not changed, [over time, Mr. Speaker] however, 

in our . . . [modest] liberal-democratic society is the 

hallowed principle that the government must rest on the 

consent of the governed — which means, inter alia, that 

the minority accept the right of the majority to make 

decisions, [and, Mr. Speaker, we do] provided that there is 

reciprocal respect for the minority‟s right to dissent from 

these decisions and to promote alternative policies [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what protects the right of an opposition to do 

that, Mr. Speaker? The rules. And, Mr. Speaker, when you 

unilaterally change the rules, you take away the rights and 

protections of the opposition to oppose a government‟s position 

and try to make effective change. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the 

role of an opposition. 

 

So why would this government, why would this government? 

Because they perceive a problem because of their own 

mismanagement, their own intolerance, Mr. Speaker. Why — 

because of their own mismanagement, incompetence, and 

intolerance, Mr. Speaker — would they move a motion to 

change the rules and take away that very important democratic 

principle? Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . in all parts of the world, these legislatures are 

confronted with the problem of “executive dominance” 

[Today we‟re seeing more than ever the problem of 

executive dominance, Mr. Speaker] in the face of modern 

demands for more and more government services. The 

complaint is often heard that because of these pressures 

legislative . . . [policies] are inefficient, ineffective, and in 

danger of becoming obsolete [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Because this government is in such a rush to get its legislation 

passed, it‟s not prepared to follow the rules, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s prepared to circumvent the rights of others, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s prepared to use its power of majority to abuse the 



682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

minority, Mr. Speaker. It‟s prepared to be that abusive, Mr. 

Speaker, because it cannot do its own job within the rules and in 

this case, Mr. Speaker, because of their own incompetence and 

their failure to start this House when it should have started on 

March 3, Mr. Speaker, when it should have started March 3, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the incompetence of the government, the incompetence of 

the Premier, the incompetence of the Government House 

Leader to manage their own affairs, Mr. Speaker — because of 

that incompetence, Mr. Speaker, they‟re prepared to do what 

should never be done, Mr. Speaker, without unanimous consent, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is to change the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s shameful. That is absolutely shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the emergence of a set pattern of government and 

opposition is of comparative recent origin, Mr. Speaker. The 

rules that exist today, and the function is of very recent origin, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When opposition to the government‟s handling of affairs of 

state could be considered to smack of treason and hence to be 

dangerous in the 16th and 17th centuries, Mr. Speaker, the 

Member of Parliament who went beyond presenting private, 

local, and special grievances or Bills or to oppose the Crown or 

even to debate such national issues as the right of succession, 

foreign policy, and religion risked imprisonment or worse, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a time in British parliamentary history 

that if you spoke out against the Crown, in fact you faced 

possible imprisonment, Mr. Speaker, or worse. Mr. Speaker, 

and I want to go on to quote, Mr. Speaker and this is a very 

significant quote: 

 

. . . every man who then meddled with public affairs took 

his life in his [own] hand . . . It was, we seriously believe, 

as safe to be a highwayman as to be a distinguished leader 

of the opposition . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a time in British parliamentary history 

that it was as safe to be a highwayman as it was to be a 

distinguished leader of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Fortunately 

we have made improvements, Mr. Speaker, and thankfully, Mr. 

Speaker, today we have a system that has balance between 

minority and majority rights, Mr. Speaker, a balance which is 

supervised and upheld through the rules of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have quoted from the Supreme Court paper 

earlier today, in 1938 said, “The protection of the opposition is 

through the rules,” Mr. Speaker. And to take those rules away 

unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, is to take away that protection, is to 

take away that balance that‟s anticipated in our parliamentary 

system, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, for a government to do 

that, for a government to use its majority to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, in the words of that very paper, is tyranny. It‟s 

tyranny. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I find it hard that there isn‟t at least one or 

two members over on that side of the Assembly that don‟t, that 

don‟t feel as passionately about the rules of parliamentary law 

and about upholding parliamentary law as I do. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope there‟s at least one or two members that‟ll at 

least question the need of their Government House Leader to do 

what they‟re doing. Mr. Speaker, I‟ve asked at least 15 times 

during this debate for the Government House Leader to 

approach the Opposition House Leader to find some resolution 

to this perceived problem that doesn‟t bring forward such an 

unquestionable, unquestionable proposal as to unilaterally 

change the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s like having a tradesperson who has only one 

tool, a sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker, that the only thing he 

knows how to use is a sledgehammer. He doesn‟t know how to 

do anything constructively, only destructively, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, a sledgehammer is used for destructive purposes, 

Mr. Speaker. So why do the members opposite want to use their 

sledgehammer? Why don‟t they want to work with the 

opposition which has been anticipated in our rules, Mr. 

Speaker? Why don‟t they? Why don‟t they want to work with 

us, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When we were in government, Mr. Speaker, we worked with 

them. Mr. Speaker, we worked co-operatively with them. We 

put forward . . . We actually held Bills, Mr. Speaker, didn‟t pass 

Bills and allowed them to go out for further consultation that 

the members opposite wanted when they were in opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. We sent Bills to public consultations that they 

wanted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When this opposition asked the very same things of them, what 

do we hear? No. And we won‟t discuss it; we‟ll use our 

majority to change the rules, so you don‟t have the opportunity 

to even discuss it. So they use a sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟re destructive, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t want to be 

co-operative. They don‟t want to work co-operatively together 

to try to resolve the issue, Mr. Speaker. And as a result we have 

the problem we have today, Mr. Speaker, that we‟re here 

debating a Bill about fundamental democracy. We‟re debating a 

motion, pardon me, about fundamental democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And then to add to the tyranny, to add to the abuse of the 

majority, we have the Government House Leader today, after 

one day of debate — after one day of debate, Mr. Speaker — 

stand on his feet and say, at this time tomorrow, at the start of 

government business tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, closure, Mr. 

Speaker. Closure of debate, Mr. Speaker. At least, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m going to give him credit for, the rules around closure are in 

the rules, so he‟s not changing the rules to apply the rules. That 

I‟m going to give him credit for. But to close debate on 

something as fundamental as this after one day of debate, to 

move closure after one day of debate, Mr. Speaker, is shameful. 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just so I can explain it to the members, Mr. 

Speaker, which they‟re having difficulty understanding — the 

members of government — now I understand why they‟ve 

mismanaged the House so badly. They moved it after one day 

of debate. That‟s what I said. They moved it after one day of 

debate. And yes, that will allow one additional day of debate 

prior to closure, Mr. Speaker, but it was moved after one day of 

debate. 

 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 683 

Just so members understand what I said and what it means. 

There was one day of debate, and before the second day 

commenced, Mr. Speaker, they moved closure. Mr. Speaker, 

they served notice on closure, Mr. Speaker. After one day of 

debate. And that‟s shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

It‟s unheard of, Mr. Speaker. It‟s unheard of unless you‟re a 

schoolyard bully — unless you‟re a bully. Unless you believe 

that you can do whatever you want to do whenever you want to 

do it, Mr. Speaker, when you believe that you‟re not 

accountable to anybody, Mr. Speaker, and you can do exactly 

what you want to do when you want to do it, Mr. Speaker, and 

that‟s a bully. And, Mr. Speaker, people don‟t respect bullies. 

People don‟t like bullies. Most people have ran into a bully or 

two in their life, Mr. Speaker, and they don‟t appreciate them 

very much at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was not until the 18th century, Mr. Speaker, that 

it became constitutionally accepted that an opposition could be 

loyal across the whole spectrum of public policy, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to show the members of the public this 

opposition does want what‟s in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They‟re loyal to the principles of 

having the very best decisions that this legislature can bring 

forward for the people of Saskatchewan. We want the very best 

for our children and our grandchildren, your children and your 

grandchildren, Mr. Speaker. We want this province to be the 

very best that it can be, Mr. Speaker, but we want it to be 

inclusive of all people. We want people to have the opportunity 

to have a say, and we want a government that has to be held 

accountable. They can‟t do things unilaterally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government wants to curtail debate, Mr. Speaker. They‟re 

curtailing debate on this fundamental motion, Mr. Speaker, 

about parliamentary democracy. They‟re curtailing the debate. 

And after one day they decide to curtail debate, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s shameful. That is absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker, that 

they will curtail debate after one day of debate, Mr. Speaker. It 

is absolutely shameful that they will curtail debate after one day 

of debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and members opposite can chirp from their seats 

and smile about how this is all the right thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker, but they will be judged, Mr. Speaker. We are all 

judged at some point, Mr. Speaker, about what we do, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we will all be judged. 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, fundamentally that people believe 

in the concepts of our parliamentary democracy and they 

believe in the right for debate, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what this 

legislature‟s about, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not about curtailing 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the actual term His Majesty‟s Opposition was 

coined during a British debate in 1826, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s 

been in use ever since. So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a long and 

proud tradition in history of the role of the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The governing party is always responsible to the commons 

chiefly in that it can be turned out of office or replaced by 

another party at the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

And I wanted to just bring that up, Mr. Speaker, because I want 

the members opposite to think about that. Mr. Speaker, yes they 

won the election November 7, 2007, Mr. Speaker. They won an 

election, but did the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, elect 

them to take away the democratic rights of members of the 

legislature? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely not. 

 

And the last time we saw that we had the worst government we 

had in this province‟s history, Mr. Speaker, in the 1980s, from 

1982 to 1991. Mr. Speaker, we saw this very action in 1986, 

Mr. Speaker, and that, Mr. Speaker, has gone down in history as 

the worst government in our history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The role of an opposition party Mr. Knowles noted is to check 

and to prod, but ultimately to replace the government party, Mr. 

Speaker. So there is a role for the opposition which ultimately is 

to replace the government when the government isn‟t doing its 

job very well, Mr. Speaker. Usually it takes more than four 

months. Usually it takes more than four months, Mr. Speaker, 

before a government is viewed . . . is doing the types of things 

that this particular government is doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to point out to the people of Saskatchewan 

that it took the Grant Devine government four years to have a 

demonstration of more than 2,000 people against the policies 

and actions of the government, Mr. Speaker. The current 

government took four months, Mr. Speaker. We had a 

demonstration of more than 2,000 people, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatoon at Station 20 in west Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker — 

Station 20 West. We had a demonstration of more than 2,000 

people in less than four months about the unilateral actions of 

this government removing funding for a project that the 

community very much wants, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a project the community designed. It‟s 

a project they want, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s a project that the 

members opposite took away, Mr. Speaker, the funding from 

because why, Mr. Speaker? Well why? They say because the 

people didn‟t want it, Mr. Speaker. Well obviously that‟s 

wrong. The demonstration indicated they did. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what‟s the real reason? What‟s the real 

reason? Because they wanted to punish, Mr. Speaker. They 

wanted to punish the people of the constituency of Riversdale 

for electing the member for Riversdale — the current Leader of 

the Opposition — Mr. Speaker, because they couldn‟t win that 

seat, Mr. Speaker. They wanted to punish the member from 

Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to talk a little bit more about the 

role of opposition in parliamentary democracy, Mr. Speaker, 

and why we need to have that role in order to function properly 

as the parliament or in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“A vigorous opposition in parliament can be the chief bulwark 

against the temptation to force majeure,” Mr. Speaker, which is 

a bureaucratic empire, to create a bureaucratic empire. That‟s 

what an opposition is about; to ensure, to ensure, Mr. Speaker, 

that the government doesn‟t become like a bureaucratic empire, 

Mr. Speaker, and serve only its own self-interest, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are, we are as an opposition going to 

ensure that doesn‟t happen in this legislature. 

 



684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, members of the opposition in the lower House are 

often called upon to act as a brake on the government. And 

that‟s what the role of the opposition is, to be a brake on the 

government, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that all legislation receives 

due process of parliamentary deliberation. That all legislation 

gets due process of deliberation, Mr. Speaker, and to see that 

diverse and opposing points of view have a chance to be aired 

and defended, Mr. Speaker. So today we have a diverse point of 

view with the government who wants to unilaterally change the 

rules. And when we want to debate that issue, Mr. Speaker, 

what do we see? Well, Mr. Speaker, we see a refusal to allow 

that debate to continue. We see a unilateral closure motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they want to shut down the opposition. They want 

to shut down any, any debate, Mr. Speaker, that they don‟t like. 

They talk about democracy, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they 

talk about three days to debate it, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t even 

understand, they don‟t even understand, Mr. Speaker, what 

they‟ve done. Mr. Speaker, that tells me a great deal about the 

abilities and why we have the particular problems we have in 

the government being able to manage its own affairs. 

 

What do the people of this province have to look forward to, 

Mr. Speaker, if they can‟t manage their own affairs? Mr. 

Speaker, they won‟t let the opposition debate something that‟s 

as fundamental as parliamentary democracy. They have to shut 

down, they have to shut down the opposition because, Mr. 

Speaker, they don‟t have the ability to debate this intellectually, 

Mr. Speaker. They don‟t have the ability to manage their own 

affairs and they don‟t have the ability to debate issues like this, 

Mr. Speaker. They don‟t have that ability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Canada the parliamentary opposition has much 

more structure and has a more formal status. In Canada the 

opposition has a very clear role, Mr. Speaker, but it also has to 

contend with a disciplined government party which may control 

the legislature for very long periods of time. And that‟s true, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s very true. We have a parliamentary system 

that you have an opposition that‟s there to perform a role but 

also must face often — often, Mr. Speaker — a very disciplined 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would 

understand that, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite would 

understand that because they faced a very disciplined 

government for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, rules and 

respect for minorities in the Assembly are there to ensure 

confidence and it is why we have the Legislative Assembly and 

not just the government appoint independent officers, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s why the legislature appoints positions like the 

Provincial Auditor, the Chief Electoral Officer, the 

Ombudsman, and many others, Mr. Speaker — the Children‟s 

Advocate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s why the legislature appoints those individuals because, 

Mr. Speaker, we need to have confidence, the entire legislature 

needs to have confidence in those individuals, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not a purview of government to do that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not a purview of government to unilaterally 

change the rules of this Assembly. And the members opposite 

should understand that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they should 

understand that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the role of the Leader of the Opposition and the 

opposition parties is to be as vigilant and diligent as the 

members of the government on the other side of the House. Our 

responsibility is to be every bit as diligent and responsible as 

members on the government side. And we are. 

 

We need to ensure that what legislation is brought forward is in 

the best interests of the people of the province, and not just in 

the best interests of those in government. And when we ask for 

public consultation that‟s what we want to achieve, Mr. 

Speaker. We want to have public hearings so the members of 

the opposition and the members of government can both hear 

submissions from the general public about what is in the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, but no, Mr. Speaker, this government chooses to shut 

down the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a full and unquestioned recognition of the rights 

and functions of the opposition to the government of the day is 

. . . only in this way can you protect the rights of minorities, Mr. 

Speaker. Only through the full recognition of the rights and 

functions of the opposition, and respecting those rights and that 

function, Mr. Speaker, can you protect the minority rights in our 

society. And only in this way can you make sure that the force 

of public opinion will be brought to bear on the legislative 

process, so there is meaningful and open debate about what 

should occur versus the unilateral decision by one side, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we are indeed fortunate in Canada, Mr. Speaker. We are 

indeed fortunate in Canada to have such rules. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the rules only work if you follow the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. The rules can only work if you follow the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In this case, we‟re in a fundamental debate about following the 

rules, Mr. Speaker. Halfway through the game one team decides 

they can‟t win, Mr. Speaker, so we‟re going to change the rules. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, let‟s just put this an analogy. You‟re in a 

hockey game, Mr. Speaker. You‟re in a hockey game. Midway 

through the second period the one team decides, oh we can‟t 

win. Well we have to change the rules so we can win, Mr. 

Speaker. And in this case, in this case, you got one team that‟s 

made up of adults, Mr. Speaker, you know, adults who had the 

responsibility and the power of government. And on the other 

side you have other individuals that don‟t have the power but 

just know how to play the game better— a little more talented, a 

little more ability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what they want to do in order to even up the 

rules, Mr. Speaker, they want to take the goalie away from the 

opposition. They want to take away the goalie from the 

opposition — which is the rules, Mr. Speaker — so they have a 

chance of winning. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they don‟t even understand their own rules 

because, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, at the end of the 

day the opposition can make the game a little more difficult, 

Mr. Speaker. And they can ensure that there‟s scrutiny of the 

legislation, and they can ensure that there is consultation, Mr. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 685 

Speaker, and they can ensure that there‟s debate, Mr. Speaker. 

In our game the rules allow the majority to always win. Our 

rules allow the majority to always win, Mr. Speaker. So they 

don‟t even understand their own rules, Mr. Speaker — because 

they can win, Mr. Speaker. They can fundamentally win. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what do we see today? What do we see? We have 

a government that‟s abusing the fundamental principle of 

parliamentary democracy and unilaterally changing the rules of 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They talk a good game. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, they talk a very good game, but 

they produce very little. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go back for just one second and talk 

again about how the rules should be changed, Mr. Speaker, and 

about the principles of parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to start by talking about, Mr. Speaker, the 

fundamental principle of Canadian parliamentary law. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I have to find the appropriate piece of paper, and I 

have found it, Mr. Speaker. It says, “The principles of Canadian 

parliamentary law are: [and I‟d like to say] To protect a 

minority and restrain the improvidence or tyranny of a majority 

. . .” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — That‟s the fundamental principle of 

parliamentary law in Canada, Mr. Speaker — the majority 

should not abuse their power over the minority. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in this case, how do you protect, Mr. Speaker? We just 

went through a long case and decision by the Supreme Court of 

Canada that said, how is the balance between the rights of a 

minority and the majority protected in our parliamentary 

system, Mr. Speaker? It‟s protected by the very rules of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why rules are put in place 

by unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker, by agreement of both 

political parties, by agreement of all the political parties, Mr. 

Speaker. And in this case the rules which this House are 

governed by, Mr. Speaker, are in fact agreed by all the political 

parties. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, there is a provision, there is a provision 

in our parliamentary system to change the rules, Mr. Speaker, to 

not follow the rules, Mr. Speaker. There is a provision, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s called unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker. 

Section 18, Mr. Speaker. And I want to quote from it, Mr. 

Speaker. It says: 

 

Within the ambit of its own rules, the House itself may 

proceed as it chooses; it is a common practice for the 

House to ignore its own rules by unanimous consent. 

 

[16:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we can set aside the rules. We can change the 

rules. But we do it through unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker — 

not by one side abusing its power, not by the majority abusing 

the minority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by our own parliamentary law in Canada, that‟s 

tyranny, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s shameful. And why are we in this 

situation, Mr. Speaker? We‟re in this situation because halfway 

through the game, the government power rings a panic alarm 

that they can‟t get their own agenda through. Without knowing 

whether they can or they can‟t, without consulting or working 

with the opposition, Mr. Speaker, they decided that they had 

this massive problem. Without knowing if they do or don‟t, Mr. 

Speaker, they decide to unilaterally change the rules and abuse 

minority rights. A knee-jerk reaction, Mr. Speaker. And these 

are rules they agreed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why are we in this situation? Well it‟s 

nothing less than incompetence, Mr. Speaker. This Assembly 

started one week later than it should have because the 

government unilaterally decided to. And, Mr. Speaker, for the 

two weeks we didn‟t meet, work at night because this 

government didn‟t want to work. And then they decide, Mr. 

Speaker, then they decide unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, they decide 

that they‟re going to unilaterally change the rules like a 

schoolyard bully, Mr. Speaker. They decided they were just 

going to unilaterally change the rules like a schoolyard bully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada in 

1938 very clearly said that the rules of the Parliament of Canada 

are there to protect, Mr. Speaker, there to protect the rights of 

the minority. That is how opposition members are protected in 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite may laugh. The members 

opposite may not take this issue very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

But I cannot believe there‟s not a single member on the 

government side that does not feel it passionately, as 

passionately as I do and members on this side of the Assembly 

do, Mr. Speaker, on the rights and the rule of our parliamentary 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it is shameful. Mr. Speaker, it is 

absolutely shameful if members on the government side do not 

feel as passionately about the rules and laws of our 

parliamentary democracy as members do on the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they‟re being muzzled by their leadership, Mr. 

Speaker, then that is even more shameful, Mr. Speaker, because 

they are elected leaders and have a right, Mr. Speaker, to speak 

their mind. And, Mr. Speaker, they have a responsibility to 

speak their mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the members of the government take 

an opportunity to reconsider their position, Mr. Speaker, and 

bring forward a proposal that this opposition can work with to 

ensure that the government is able to get through its agenda, 

that we‟re able to work together to accomplish what should be 

done, Mr. Speaker. Let the people have a chance to have input, 

Mr. Speaker, to take some of these Bills to public consultation, 

Mr. Speaker, to public hearings through our democratic process, 

through our committee hearing process, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

anticipated as part of our rules, Mr. Speaker, as part of how we 

operate this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. This is about 

having good public parliamentary democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say as we talk about 

the roles of the opposition in government, Mr. Speaker, “it is a 

responsibility of the Legislative Assembly to uphold and 

maintain the rights of minorities against majorities,” Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s not only the right of the opposition to ensure 

minority rights, Mr. Speaker; it is in fact a fundamental 

responsibility of the government. It‟s a fundamental 

responsibility of the government. And that‟s why we have the 

rules we have, Mr. Speaker — to ensure the rights of minority. 

And every bit as important, Mr. Speaker, every bit as important, 

Mr. Speaker, as the rights of the minority, Mr. Speaker, is the 

responsibility of the majority to ensure those. 

 

And what are we dealing with today, Mr. Speaker? We‟re 

dealing with a motion that the government‟s put forward that 

abuses those minority rights — a sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker, 

that takes away the rights of the minority. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what is most appalling of all, what‟s most 

appalling of all today? Today the Government House Leader 

stood on his feet after one day of debate, the Government 

House Leader stood on his feet, rather than coming over and 

trying to make a deal with the Opposition House Leader to 

move forward in some form of co-operative manner, Mr. 

Speaker, he decided to use the only tool in his tool box. Just like 

the motion would indicate, Mr. Speaker, he is going to close 

debate tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, after one day of debate, he 

decides he‟s going to use closure to close debate tomorrow. Mr. 

Speaker, that is shameful. Mr. Speaker, that is shameful. Mr. 

Speaker, that is absolutely shameful. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] The opposition has only the rules for its 

protection, Mr. Speaker. It only has the rules for its 

protection, hence the authorities on parliamentary 

procedure emphasize the greater importance to the 

opposition of the only protection it has, [Mr. Speaker] the 

protection of the rules [of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And those protections have been stripped away unilaterally by a 

government that was willing to abuse its power like a 

schoolyard bully rather than work with the opposition to get its 

agenda through, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s shameful. It‟s 

absolutely shameful. 

 

And I hope there are at least a few members opposite that don‟t 

feel good about what they‟re doing, Mr. Speaker, that 

understand what they‟re doing is wrong, Mr. Speaker, and 

understand that doing wrong things, Mr. Speaker, lead to 

greater problems, Mr. Speaker. They result in even greater 

mistakes, Mr. Speaker, and greater problems, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that‟s only been in 

power for four months, that already can‟t manage its own 

agenda, already is having great difficulty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s the responsibility of an opposition to “. . . 

scrutinize every action by the government [Mr. Speaker] and in 

doing so prevents the short-cuts through democratic procedure 

that governments like to make.” Shortcuts that governments like 

to take to get their own way. What are we seeing right now, Mr. 

Speaker? We‟re seeing exactly that. We‟re seeing this 

government trying to take a shortcut to get their own way, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s shameful. That is absolutely shameful, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I have a very difficult time as I know very many, 

many members on this side of the House do with what this 

government‟s proposing. What this government is proposing is 

fundamentally wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the end of the day what happens to the schoolyard bully, Mr. 

Speaker? At some point, Mr. Speaker, the schoolyard bully gets 

his own, gets his own, Mr. Speaker. The schoolyard bully — 

somebody comes along that‟s a little better, a little bigger 

perhaps, maybe a little more intelligent. And then what 

happens, Mr. Speaker? That schoolyard bully, Mr. Speaker, like 

everyone else who tries to abuse power, eventually gets that 

stripped away in some way or in some form, Mr. Speaker. 

When you‟re going to use those types of tactics, Mr. Speaker, 

eventually they catch up with you. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan need to know this government is 

prepared to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to talk a little bit about the right of 

members of the legislature to use this forum to debate those 

things on which they disagree. Mr. Speaker, it‟s one of the 

fundamental rights that‟s afforded to those elected members of 

this legislature. It‟s a responsibility, Mr. Speaker. It‟s more than 

a right; it‟s a responsibility. It‟s something each and every one 

of us should value. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we‟re dealing with something as 

important as a change to the rules done through a unilateral 

motion, Mr. Speaker, we should be afforded the right to debate 

that issue, Mr. Speaker, and we should be afforded the right to 

debate that issue as long as we want to debate it, Mr. Speaker. 

We shouldn‟t be facing a closure motion after just one day of 

debate. Mr. Speaker, we shouldn‟t have a government that 

stands up after a single day of debate and says, at this time 

tomorrow debate ceases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they‟re scared of the facts, Mr. Speaker — 

absolutely. Mr. Speaker, they‟re absolutely scared of the facts, 

Mr. Speaker. And they‟re scared of those facts because they‟re 

incompetent, Mr. Speaker. And they‟re showing that, not just in 

moving this motion, Mr. Speaker, but in how they‟ve operated 

this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, second, it‟s the responsibility of the opposition to 

prod the government to act on behalf of certain interests, Mr. 

Speaker — opinions and needs in society. Whether or not 

there‟s a majority need or interest in society, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

imperative and the responsibility of an opposition to ensure that 

the needs of certain groups in our society that may not be the 

majority, Mr. Speaker — that may not be the interest groups 

that the majority would like to adhere to, Mr. Speaker — that 

their interests get heard, their interests get expressed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re all elected to govern on behalf of all the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, not just those we like, 

Mr. Speaker, or just not those who voted for us, Mr. Speaker, 

but all the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is something that these members 

who are now in government need to learn and need to 

understand. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, clearly any government that would 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 687 

curtail debate after one day on something as fundamental as a 

rule change, Mr. Speaker, doesn‟t understand what abuse of 

power is, Mr. Speaker, or about hearing the interests of those 

they don‟t want to hear, Mr. Speaker, because they‟re curtailing 

that debate, Mr. Speaker. And they‟re not allowing people that 

they don‟t want to hear from to be heard. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] In particular, [Mr. Speaker] when major 

decisions take place without passing through 

parliamentary channels, the opposition is placed at a 

distinct disadvantage in terms of its ability to scrutinize 

and influence government actions [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So when we‟re asking for Bills to go out for public debate, Mr. 

Speaker, to go out to public hearings through one of our 

legislative committees, that‟s because we want to see a greater 

level of scrutinization by the public. We want the public to have 

say on the actions of government, Mr. Speaker. That‟s one of 

our fundamental roles as an opposition. But, Mr. Speaker, more 

importantly it‟s one of the fundamental responsibilities of all 

members of this Assembly to want to have the best possible 

decision and to allow our decisions to be publicly scrutinized by 

the people we represent, Mr. Speaker — the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And when we don‟t want to have our legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

or our policies scrutinized by the public, Mr. Speaker, well why 

is that? What are we afraid of, Mr. Speaker? What are we trying 

to hide when we‟re afraid of the people who elected us, Mr. 

Speaker? What are we afraid of, Mr. Speaker, when we don‟t 

want to take out our policies or our legislation, out for public 

scrutiny, Mr. Speaker? Out before the public, Mr. Speaker, to 

be criticized perhaps, Mr. Speaker, but the endgame is to end up 

with a better piece of legislation and a better public policy, Mr. 

Speaker. So what are we afraid of, Mr. Speaker, when we won‟t 

do that, Mr. Speaker? What are we afraid of? 

 

I don‟t know, Mr. Speaker. We‟re afraid to be criticized, 

perhaps. We‟re afraid that maybe somebody doesn‟t like us. We 

want to be liked by everybody, Mr. Speaker. Most importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it just shows pure and simple 

incompetence when you don‟t want to do something, Mr. 

Speaker, when you‟re not willing, when you‟re not willing to 

face the very people who elected you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to be fully credible, Mr. Speaker, an institution of 

parliament, this institution of parliament, Mr. Speaker, or this 

institution of the legislature of Saskatchewan must be able to 

demonstrate an active presence across the full range of public 

policy concerns of the people of this province. And if we‟re not 

willing to do that and if we‟re not willing to put ourselves 

forward to be discussed, scrutinized, and criticized, Mr. 

Speaker, by the very people elected us, then why are we here. If 

we‟re so insecure that we‟re not willing and, Mr. Speaker, be 

criticized for the very decisions we‟ve made, then why are we 

here? Why are we here, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the members opposite are paying some 

attention, Mr. Speaker, but I want to emphasize again a couple 

of very important things that I think they need to understand. 

Even if a piece of legislation or major public policy issue was to 

go out for public scrutiny through our committee hearing 

process, Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t mean that we as the opposition 

or the public can unilaterally change their position, Mr. 

Speaker. We can‟t outvote them. There‟s six members on the 

committees, Mr. Speaker, four from government, two from the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the only way the rules actually change or the legislation 

would actually change, Mr. Speaker, or the public policy would 

actually change would in fact be if they heard something out 

there that was strong enough to compel the members of the 

government to actually change their position, Mr. Speaker. Are 

they afraid? Are they afraid to hear from the public of 

Saskatchewan on any issue? Are they afraid to change their 

position if in fact they believe it should change, Mr. Speaker? 

Are they that insecure, Mr. Speaker? Are they that insecure that 

they‟re afraid to change their own position, Mr. Speaker, if it 

was the right thing to do? 

 

Mr. Speaker, since they are never going to be able to be 

outvoted, the government, Mr. Speaker, will always get its way 

on any policy or piece of legislation, but, Mr. Speaker, 

opposition parties must — must — exercise their right to try to 

influence the best possible outcomes, Mr. Speaker, and bring 

forward alternatives, Mr. Speaker, and bring forward changes 

that are in the interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Mr. Speaker] The balance between compromise and 

obstruction, co-option [Mr. Speaker] and reflex 

opposition, is often in the eye of the beholder. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we have this problem because we cannot get 

the government to work with the opposition to find resolution to 

the problem, Mr. Speaker. We cannot get them to be willing to 

work to find a resolution, Mr. Speaker. And I want to state 

again, Mr. Speaker, I want to state again and I would like the 

members of the government to hear very clearly; we are 

prepared. We are prepared to listen to proposals from you that 

will get through this perceived crisis you have, Mr. Speaker. 

We don‟t even know that we have a crisis. We only have a 

perception of a crisis, Mr. Speaker. We‟re prepared to listen to 

proposals to get through this perceived crisis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you, you — the majority — must propose. 

You must propose a route, a road map through this perceived 

crisis because it‟s your crisis, Mr. Speaker. It‟s your problem. 

You must take responsibility for that problem and propose a 

solution, put forward a proposal to the opposition in a manner 

in which we can negotiate, we can compromise, and we can 

come to resolution, Mr. Speaker, in the interests of all the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a government that is not willing to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, has only one set of tools, has only the sledgehammer, 

Mr. Speaker. And that‟s what we see the government today 

using, Mr. Speaker. We see the government using its 

sledgehammer to unilaterally change the rules in contravention 

of good parliamentary democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they‟re afraid to go out to their own 

constituents with legislation for public consultation, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re prepared to go to the people of the province 



688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

and have their legislation challenged by both business and 

labour groups, Mr. Speaker. They‟re afraid. But Mr. Speaker, 

they don‟t have to be afraid, Mr. Speaker. They have the 

majority, and in the end they can pass the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s the right of the majority. But it‟s only the 

right of the majority after, after, Mr. Speaker, the rights of the 

minority have been protected, and there‟s been appropriate 

deliberation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we saw a government move closure on a 

very important motion, Mr. Speaker, after only one day of 

debate, Mr. Speaker. At the very least, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last 100 years we‟ve seen steady 

improvements in the parliamentary democracy in our 

legislatures and in the Parliament of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟ve seen steady improvements. We‟ve seen greater 

consultation of the public. But in the last few years, Mr. 

Speaker, we have in some cases seen a drawback of that public 

consultation, about that public participation, Mr. Speaker, as 

governments have drawn power in more centrally. 

 

We see that today in the Parliament of Canada with the current 

federal government, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re seeing it today in 

this legislature, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s not good. It‟s not good 

for parliamentary democracy. It‟s not good for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we need to think 

very carefully before we do that, Mr. Speaker. We have to look 

at these issues very carefully. We have to examine these issues 

in great detail, Mr. Speaker, before we choose to go down that 

road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been a directed attention over the last 

number of years to the factors impinging on the effective 

operation of the checks and balances in our democratic political 

systems and in turn to numerous proposals for legislative 

reform. In parliamentary systems there is a fundamental 

constitutional principle of responsible government, Mr. 

Speaker, of responsible government at stake. Mr. Speaker, we 

have to uphold that fundamental, fundamental parliamentary 

responsibility of responsible government. 

 

And in the Canadian case, the tradition of a one-party 

government combined with the frequent weakness of legislative 

oppositions poses added dangers, Mr. Speaker. And when a 

government uses its power to weaken an opposition, to change 

that balance between majority and minority rights, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s not only an abuse of power; Mr. Speaker, it weakens the 

fundamentals of our parliamentary democracy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members of the government should 

understand that. They should think very hard and very carefully 

before they use the big stick, before they use the sledgehammer 

— the only tool that they‟ve been able to show this opposition 

they have, Mr. Speaker. Have they been able to convince 

anybody to change their position? Have they tried to negotiate? 

Have they tried reasoning? Have they tried any form of 

conciliation, Mr. Speaker, or any form of a negotiation? No, 

they haven‟t. Any form of compromise? Have they shown any 

compromise at all, Mr. Speaker? No, they haven‟t. They‟ve 

shown nothing but a sledgehammer. And if we can‟t get our 

way, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll get our way one way or the other, Mr. 

Speaker — just like the schoolyard bully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments may think that slipping things 

through the House may seem smart in the short run or that 

doing things outside the rules may seem smart in the short run, 

Mr. Speaker. But in the long run it works to discredit both the 

government and the parliamentary institution which we all are 

part of, Mr. Speaker. It discredits the government, and it 

discredits the parliamentary institution that we are all a part of. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so government that wants to try to slip 

something through or do something through manners that are 

untoward, Mr. Speaker, shows a discredit both to the 

government in the long run, Mr. Speaker, and to the very 

institution which we are part of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it‟s very, very important that we can 

take the opportunity to consider what is our role. Our role isn‟t 

simply to pass the legislation that we want to pass. It isn‟t 

simply to pass the budget, Mr. Speaker. It‟s our role to be fair, 

to be impartial in our deliberations, to be willing to listen to the 

opinions of others, to be bigger than any one of us should be 

within ourselves, Mr. Speaker, and to work for the benefit of all 

the people of Saskatchewan, whether we like those people or 

not, whether those people elected us or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all have a much larger responsibility than to a 

political party or to our own constituents, Mr. Speaker. We have 

a responsibility to all the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s bigger than any one of us. This institution is bigger than any 

one of us. And our fundamental responsibility here: it‟s the 

principles of this institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to speak at some length again from a 

slightly different perspective about the issue of majority rule 

and minority rights, Mr. Speaker, because that‟s what this 

whole issue is about, Mr. Speaker. It‟s about the issue of 

majority rule and minority rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the surface the principles of majority rule and 

the protection of individual and/or minority rights would seem 

contradictory. It would seem that they‟re out of sync, Mr. 

Speaker, that they‟re contradictory with one another. But in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, however these principles are, they‟re twin 

pillars holding up the very foundation of what we mean by 

democratic government. They‟re the very pillars that hold up 

the foundation of what we stand for. 

 

And if we‟re not going to stand up, Mr. Speaker, for those 

pillars, if we‟re not going to defend those pillars, and if we‟re 

not going to — with every ounce of strength we have — defend 

the very principles of our democracy, Mr. Speaker, then why 

are we here? Why are we here? Mr. Speaker, we‟re either here 

as principled individuals that are here for a greater good of all 

this province, Mr. Speaker, or we‟re here in our own 

self-interest. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to believe that the members of 

this Assembly are here, not in their own self-interest, but in the 

interest of the greater good of all the people of this province, 

Mr. Speaker, because that is what parliamentary democracy is 

all about. 

 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 689 

And I think the members actually are, but I think that this 

decision they‟ve made, it was not well thought through. I think 

this decision was not well thought through, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t 

think a great deal of time was taken to consider what the 

implications of making this decision were. I don‟t think a great 

deal of time was taken to consider the impact of unilaterally 

changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, about abusing minority rights, 

Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think they considered it in detail, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact I don‟t think they took a great deal of time at all 

to consider what that would mean in this situation, Mr. Speaker, 

and how that eroded the fundamental pillars of our democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, majority rule is a means for organizing 

government and deciding public issues. It is not another road to 

oppression. Majority rule is about organizing and deciding what 

the public issues are, but it‟s not a road to oppression, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when a majority abuses their power, 

that‟s oppression, Mr. Speaker. But that is not what this is 

about. That‟s not what our majority rule in a parliamentary 

democracy is about, Mr. Speaker. Majority rule in a 

parliamentary democracy is about deciding public issues, 

deciding what public issues be taken forward for debate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Just as no self-appointed group has the right to oppress others, 

so no majority even in a democracy should take away the basic 

rights and freedoms of a minority group or an individual, Mr. 

Speaker. Those rights are guaranteed under law. And how are 

they guaranteed in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker? 

They‟re guaranteed by the rules. So taking away the rules from 

the minority, from the opposition, by changing the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, you‟re oppressing the opposition, Mr. Speaker. You‟re 

abusing your majority, Mr. Speaker, and you‟re doing the very 

fundamental thing that parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker, that 

parliamentary law says you should not do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, minorities — whether as a result of an ethnic 

background, religious belief, geographic location, income level, 

or simply as the losers in an election or political debate — 

enjoy guaranteed basic human rights that no government and no 

majority, elected or not, should remove. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s a very profound statement, Mr. Speaker. 

Minorities — regardless if they‟re from a geographic area, an 

ethnic background, or because they lost an election, Mr. 

Speaker — are guaranteed basic rights. They‟re guaranteed the 

rights of protection that the rules of this House afford, and no 

government has the right or no majority has the right to take 

them away. Mr. Speaker, those are long-standing, long-held 

principles and values of our parliamentary democracy and the 

values of our society, Mr. Speaker — the very things we strive 

to accomplish, Mr. Speaker, in a caring, compassionate society 

that cares more about all its citizens and not just a few, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Minorities need to be able to trust that the government will 

protect their rights, Mr. Speaker, and their self-identity. Mr. 

Speaker, minorities need to know and understand that the 

government will protect their rights, Mr. Speaker. The 

prosecution of minorities in our society or in any society, Mr. 

Speaker, is wrong. It‟s fundamentally wrong, Mr. Speaker. And 

minorities need to know that their government will protect their 

rights, Mr. Speaker, and that they believe in the need, Mr. 

Speaker, and more importantly, that they believe in the need, to 

protect those rights, Mr. Speaker. That‟s very, that is very, very 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once this very basic goal is accomplished, such groups can 

participate and contribute to the country‟s democratic 

institutions, Mr. Speaker, and can do so in such a way as to 

meaningfully, meaningfully protect the rights of those 

minorities, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s a responsibility, it‟s a 

fundamental responsibility of all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Among the basic human rights that any democratic government 

must protect are freedom of speech and expression; freedom of 

religion and belief; due process and equal protection under the 

law, Mr. Speaker; and freedom to organize, speak out, dissent, 

and participate fully in a public life for their society, Mr. 

Speaker. Well no more, in no place is this more important than 

in this very Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. That when you 

take away the right to debate something of fundamental 

importance, Mr. Speaker, you‟re taking away a fundamental 

right. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s shameful. That is absolutely 

shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, democracies understand that protecting the rights 

of minorities to uphold their cultural identity, their social 

practices, their individual consciences, and religious activities is 

one of their primary tasks. Mr. Speaker, responsible 

governments understand that protection of minority rights is 

one of their fundamental responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Do we have a government today that appreciates their 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker, the responsibility as a majority to 

protect those minority rights, Mr. Speaker? Obviously we don‟t, 

Mr. Speaker. Obviously we don‟t because they‟re prepared to 

unilaterally change the rules in this Assembly taking away the 

minority rights of the opposition, which, Mr. Speaker, in 

decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada are clearly protected. 

By what, Mr. Speaker? Clearly protected by the rules. And 

when that protection is taken away, Mr. Speaker, so is the 

fundamental protection of our democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the acceptance of ethnic and cultural groups that 

seem strange if not alien to the majority can represent one of the 

greatest challenges that any democratic government can face. 

Mr. Speaker, accepting those things that we do not understand 

and we do not know is the greatest challenge any government 

can face, Mr. Speaker. But democracies recognized that 

diversity can be an enormous asset. They treat these differences 

and identity, culture and values as a challenge that can 

strengthen and enrich them. Can strengthen and enrich, Mr. 

Speaker, our society and not threaten it, Mr. Speaker. It can 

strengthen and enrich a government. It should not be a threat, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no single answer. There is no single 

answer, Mr. Speaker, to how minority group differences or how 

minorities in views or values or results or differences of 

opinions and views and values are resolved, Mr. Speaker. Only 

the sure knowledge that only through the democratic process of 

tolerance, debate, and willingness to compromise — very 



690 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

important, Mr. Speaker, a willingness to compromise — can 

free societies, reach agreements that embrace the twin pillars of 

majority rule and minority rights, Mr. Speaker. Only through a 

desire to compromise and to work together, can you protect the 

twin pillars of majority rule and minority rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I have offered many times over the last day and a half, 

Mr. Speaker, offered that we as the opposition are prepared to 

meet with the government and the Government House Leader 

or whoever they wish, to discuss — could be the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Premier — to talk about a compromise to 

their perceived problem, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

we don‟t have . . . We have a problem that an opposition 

believes exists, Mr. Speaker. We‟re not even sure that a 

problem exists. How do they know that they can‟t get through 

their agenda and their legislation in the time allotted, Mr. 

Speaker? They don‟t, Mr. Speaker. It‟s only their own 

perception that can‟t get through these issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they lack confidence in their own ability. They 

lack competence as well, Mr. Speaker. But they do. They lack 

confidence in their own abilities to get their own mandate 

through, and they lack competence, Mr. Speaker, because they 

can‟t balance the need to accomplish their goals, Mr. Speaker, 

with the priorities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to use a quote from Confucius here to talk 

about the situation we‟re dealing with. It says, “Men of 

principle are sure to be bold,” Mr. Speaker. “Men of principle 

are sure to be bold, but those who are bold may not always be 

men of principle,” Mr. Speaker. So we see a bold move by the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, but we don‟t see the principle 

that should be accompanying such a bold move, Mr. Speaker. 

Confucius says “Men of principle are sure to be bold, but those 

who are bold may not always be men of principle.” And, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s what we‟re seeing today. Mr. Speaker, that is 

what we are seeing today. We‟re seeing the schoolyard bully 

mentality, Mr. Speaker. We‟re seeing absolutely no, no 

understanding of the rights of minority. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what work we have now is a number of 

members yelling from their seats, Mr. Speaker, trying to 

interrupt the debate, Mr. Speaker, showing clearly no respect 

for the importance of the very issue we are debating today, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re showing no respect for the issue before us, 

Mr. Speaker, and they‟re showing no respect for themselves, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue we‟re dealing with 

and when members of the government are not prepared to work 

with members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, they‟re showing 

that they don‟t‟ have the respect that they need to have as the 

majority, to work with the minority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite can say from their chairs many 

things but, Mr. Speaker, they‟re not saying things that are 

intelligent or contributing to the debate. And that‟s why they 

don‟t want to debate this issue, Mr. Speaker, because they 

cannot contribute to this debate in an intelligent way. All they 

can do is chirp from their seats in ways they certainly wouldn‟t 

want their constituents to hear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Wood River says this is a waste of time. Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member from Wood River says this 

is a waste of time and that I‟m wasting my time, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It takes two to make a mess. 

 

The Speaker: — That‟s the trouble. The member from 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this debate is about the role of majority and minority 

rights in our democratic system and the role of the opposition 

and government in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to quote from a book written by . . . it was 

edited by Thomas Courchene and Donald Savoie. It‟s about 

governance and political powers in contemporary western 

governments, Mr. Speaker. And I want to just read from this 

book. It says: 

 

The problem with contemporary democracies, again 

especially in the majoritarian democracies, may be that 

the parties have been perhaps too successful in creating 

majorities and in putting their stamp on government once 

elected. The success of majority parties poses several 

problems for the conduct of democracy. The first 

difficulty is that there is little check on the capacity of the 

majority to rule, [Mr. Speaker] and hence little constraint 

on their capacity to adopt the decisions they want. This 

lack of formal limitations means that the only real 

constraints on a government‟s decision-making is its own 

political judgement, and its common sense [Mr. Speaker]. 

In addition, some of the norms that guided the conduct of 

parliamentary responsibility for parties have been 

weakened, so that governments, which at one time might 

have been expected to resign, continue in office without 

sanctions [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

The governments that are incompetent and should resign in fact 

continue in office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today, Mr. Speaker, today, today, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a government that doesn‟t want to debate issues. They do 

not want to debate a rules change in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. They want to use their majority power to stifle debate, 

Mr. Speaker. They want to ram it through. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s exactly, exactly what is wrong with this government 

today and wrong with parliamentary democracies that want to 

abuse their power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the basic arrogance that we see when 

a government wants to ram things through without debate, Mr. 

Speaker, is one of the fundamental weaknesses of power today 

in parties that don‟t take the time, Mr. Speaker, to think about 

their responsibility to both minority interests in their provinces, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about when parliament is 

independent. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m speaking from the volume 

30 of the spring 2007 Canadian Parliamentary Review. And it 

says, “When a parliament is independent . . . beyond the control 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 691 

of government . . .” Mr. Speaker, when the parliament is 

independent and beyond the control of the government, and that 

means when the parliament, or in this case this legislature, is 

beyond the control of the government, when free and open 

debate is allowed, Mr. Speaker, “it acts for the benefit of the 

electorate to ensure that government delivers focused programs, 

lower taxation and a growing healthy economy,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the parliament acts, Mr. Speaker, beyond the control of 

the government, it acts in the interest of all of the people of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. But when it doesn‟t, Mr. Speaker, it acts 

only in its own self-interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

“While all Parliaments are influenced by government, the 

question is to what degree?” To what degree is the legislature 

influenced by the government, Mr. Speaker? “How 

independent is Parliament? How well is the electorate 

informed by a free and open media . . .” How independent is 

the message that‟s going to the public, Mr. Speaker, to the 

citizens of the province “. . . and are elections fair and honest 

to keep parliamentarians accountable [Mr. Speaker]?” 

 

Are those very fundamental rights of electoral independence, 

are they upheld, Mr. Speaker? Are our elections fair, the 

information people are placing their vote, making their decision 

upon, Mr. Speaker, honest and fair? “In the developed world, 

[parliamentarians] . . . are a reasonable, independent, open, and 

transparent check on government, hence our prosperity [Mr. 

Speaker].” Hence why we have prosperity. When the larger 

group, the parliament or the legislature is the check on 

government, Mr. Speaker, you have prosperity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So why do we have a government today trying to take away that 

check? Why do we have a government today trying to take 

away that check and balance, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, we 

have a government saying they want prosperity, they want 

growth. But they‟re wanting to take away the check and balance 

that this legislature should be able to provide. Mr. Speaker, they 

want to stifle debate. They‟re wanting to use their majority to 

overrule the minority, Mr. Speaker, without having the 

opportunity for debate, without giving us the opportunity to try 

to change their minds through meaningful, intelligent debate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What are they afraid of? Are they afraid of the facts? Are they 

afraid that the public may actually stand out and say what they 

want doing is wrong, Mr. Speaker? Why are they trying to stifle 

the debate? 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the rest of the world, parliaments are 

dominated by their governments, Mr. Speaker. So in some parts 

of the world, Mr. Speaker, parliaments actually are able to 

control their governments. In other parts, parliaments are 

dominated by their governments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well what are we seeing here today, Mr. Speaker? We‟re seeing 

a government dominate the parliament, the legislature. That‟s 

exactly what we‟re seeing here today, Mr. Speaker. It‟s what 

you see in third world countries, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve got a government that‟s dominating the parliament, that‟s 

stopping free debate on the issue, on this very issue of the 

change of the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They‟re using their majority to close debate, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟re using their majority to close debate after one day, Mr. 

Speaker. Is that free and democratic? It‟s the death of 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. It is doing what we fundamentally 

oppose, Mr. Speaker. It‟s taking the fundamental rights away 

from members of this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Parliaments [that] are dominated by their governments — 

one-party states being a common example of a compliant 

Parliament. Bribery and coercion of parliamentarians 

often ensure that Parliament is not a force beyond the 

control of the government. Intimidation of 

parliamentarians, including jail or assassination 

guarantees the lack of accountability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s coming from our own Canadian 

Parliamentary Review, volume no. 30 in spring of 2007, Mr. 

Speaker: “A compliant Parliament may be a wonderful thing for 

those in power . . . ” Mr. Speaker. 

 

A compliant Parliament may be a wonderful thing for 

those in power [Mr. Speaker] but it produces an 

impoverished society. When people in government steal 

their nation‟s taxes . . . [without] impunity, there is no 

accountability . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, when governments don‟t respect the parliaments 

or respect their legislatures of which they are part of, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a situation where you have government 

control that you ram through changes without debate, Mr. 

Speaker, where you take away the fundamental rights of debate 

from members of the Legislative Assembly. You change the 

rules unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, and you shut the public out. Mr. 

Speaker, you shut the public out from the very, very important 

issues of which we want to speak about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes now to talk about 

why the opposition thinks they have a problem. Mr. Speaker, I 

went through Bills 1 through 6 last night in detail. I‟m not going 

to do that again for the members opposite. They know Bills 1 

and 2 could pass. Bills 3 and 4 have no immediate impact. And 

Bills 5 and 6, they could in fact pass. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes to just review and 

talk about the other pieces of legislation that the government 

put forward during this session, Mr. Speaker, much of which 

I‟m going to start by saying was developed and put forward by 

the previous government that are now in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. The majority of these Bills are our work, Mr. Speaker, 

and so why, just out of common sense, Mr. Speaker, why would 

we oppose them? Why would we oppose these Bills, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Now there is one exception. There was one Bill that was put 

forward by the bureaucracy here which we refused to put 

forward which the government is putting forward, and I call that 

the double-dipping Bill, Mr. Speaker — Bill No. 9. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that particular Bill which members opposite want to 

put forward, we wouldn‟t put forward, Mr. Speaker. We 



692 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

wouldn‟t put forward because we don‟t believe that people 

should be paid twice for doing the same job, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite may, but I don‟t think their constituents from 

rural Saskatchewan would believe that, Mr. Speaker, and by the 

way neither did some of the reporters today that I tried to 

explain this provision to. They were quite interested in why the 

government would want to support this. But, Mr. Speaker, if 

they ask the question, you shall get an answer, Mr. Speaker. If 

you ask the question, you shall get an answer. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to take an opportunity to 

review these Bills that the members opposite are concerned 

whether or not they‟ll get passed. The Bill No. 8 is An Act to 

amend The Natural Resources Act, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to assure you that this Bill in fact was brought 

forward by the previous government. In fact the current 

opposition when they were in government, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And this is a very good piece of legislation that would in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, pass. Surprise, surprise, surprise, Mr. Speaker. 

This piece of legislation would pass. We did the work on this 

Bill. We proposed this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and of course we‟ll 

pass this Bill, Mr. Speaker. Surprise, surprise. They‟re worried 

about getting their agenda through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately the majority of their agenda is in fact our agenda, 

Mr. Speaker. So we developed these Bills. We‟re supporting 

these Bills. Why would we talk for 20 hours on these Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, or for any prolonged period of time? But they may 

want to speak for 20 hours on these Bills because, Mr. Speaker, 

they didn‟t develop them. They didn‟t think about them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 9. Bill No. 9 is the double-dipping 

provision Bill, Mr. Speaker. It‟s An Act to amend The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, Mr. Speaker, 

and this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker . . . I have to say this 

particular Bill, the opposition when they were in government 

wouldn‟t put forward, Mr. Speaker. We would not put this Bill 

forward, Mr. Speaker. We didn‟t agree with this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, when this Bill comes forward, Mr. 

Speaker, we may not want to be quite so co-operative with Bill 

No. 9, Mr. Speaker. But I don‟t think the people of 

Saskatchewan really would like to see this Bill go through, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think the members opposite did not spend a great 

deal of time examining this Bill in detail in fact with me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 10, An Act to amend certain Pensions 

Statutes with respect to certain requirements of the Income Tax 

Act. Mr. Speaker, I have to tell you once again, this is our Bill. 

We did the work, Mr. Speaker, and will we support this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, I don‟t have to . . . I have absolutely 

total confidence in where my colleagues are on this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll support this Bill. We‟ll support 

this Bill. We don‟t need 20 hours of debate on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. We did the work on it. We know it‟s a good piece of 

legislation, so why are the members opposite so concerned, Mr. 

Speaker? Why are they so concerned? Did they bother talking 

to us about any of this legislation, Mr. Speaker? The answer is 

no. Their answer is no. Did they try working with us to find out 

what would go through and what wouldn‟t go through easily, 

Mr. Speaker? The answer is no. No. All they did was bring out 

the sledgehammer and say, if we can‟t do it our way and how 

we want to do, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll do it anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 11 is an Act to amend the enforcement 

. . . And I hope the Government House Leader is listening over 

there because I‟m going through, piece by piece, legislation and 

telling him which Bills will pass easily. I hope he has a clue as 

how he could negotiate a settlement to this rather than force this 

through, Mr. Speaker, unilaterally, a rule change, Mr. Speaker. I 

am once again trying to help him out. I‟m once again trying to 

help him out, Mr. Speaker. I hope, I hope, Mr. Speaker, he‟s 

paying attention. I hope that he is paying attention, Mr. 

Speaker, or that he‟ll at least read Hansard after. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re now dealing with Bill No. 11. Bill No. 11 is 

an Act, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 11 is An Act to amend The 

Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 2002. Mr. Speaker, 

this is another piece of legislation that we did the work on, Mr. 

Speaker. We did the work. We were going to pass this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, so, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

members opposite this Bill, Bill No. 11, will pass. It will pass, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we may want to talk for a few minutes about some 

of these Bills because some of our members did a tremendous 

amount of work on these Bills, Mr. Speaker, and they have a 

tremendous buy-in to making these Bills law, Mr. Speaker. We 

care about these Bills, Mr. Speaker. Some of them have a song 

in their heart and would want to speak for a short period of 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next, the next piece of legislation is a piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that and again, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 

12 again, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟m not exactly sure if the member‟s 

able to hear himself as he‟s speaking, so I would like to call the 

members to order. I recognize the member from Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that we have some peace for 

a few minutes in the House so that members opposite can hear 

exactly what we‟re prepared to do with each of these pieces of 

legislation. And I see the Government House Leader, Mr. 

Speaker, he‟s taking some notes right now and I‟m pleased to 

see this. 

 

Bill No. 12, Bill No. 12, Mr. Speaker, another piece of 

legislation that we did a great deal of work on, Mr. Speaker, and 

a Bill that we feel very, very, very, very seriously about passing 

as quickly as we can, Mr. Speaker, because it‟s good legislation 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — And it is legislation that my colleague, the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin, put a tremendous amount 

of work on and he feels very strongly about, Mr. Speaker, so he 

may want to speak for a few minutes about this Bill to tell you 

how good it is, and how important it is to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we could do that, Mr. Speaker. 

Check. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 13, An Act to amend The Teachers‟ Life 

Insurance (Government Contributory) Act, Mr. Speaker, so this 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 693 

Bill, this Bill was what was agreed to in collective bargaining 

when we were the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, they may want to talk 20 hours on 

this but, Mr. Speaker, we agreed to this already, Mr. Speaker, at 

the bargaining table with the teachers. So are we going to pass 

this legislation? Yes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

assure the Government House Leader that we‟re going to pass 

this legislation very quickly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to, Mr. Speaker, deal with Bill No. 14. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very complex Bill, Bill No. 14. It is 

so complex that I think that somebody might be able to debate 

20 minutes on if they . . . at the very most, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we brought this Bill forward as well, Mr. Speaker, 

and I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that if 20 minutes is spent on this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, somebody is talking about nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. Check, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I‟d like to deal with Bill No. 15, Mr. Speaker, An Act to 

amend The Northern Municipalities Act, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, once again a piece of legislation that my 

colleagues worked quite extensively on, Mr. Speaker, a piece of 

legislation, a piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that we had a 

great deal of buy in, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, once again I 

want to assure the Government House Leader that Bill No. 14 

or Bill No. 15, pardon me, will pass very expeditiously, Mr. 

Speaker. Check. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You know you should have just asked. 

You didn‟t have to put forward a closure motion. You should 

have just asked. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well you could have asked that, and we would 

have told you this. I could have done this in the corner, you 

know, more easily than doing it this way. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not going to deal with Bill No. 16, Mr. 

Speaker, and I‟ll tell you why. We already passed it. Okay? I 

don‟t want to waste anybody‟s time talking about what‟s 

already in place, Mr. Speaker. Okay? Been there, done that. 

We‟re not going to talk about 16. It‟s already, it‟s already done. 

Okay? No sense wasting time on what we‟ve already done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The Highways and 

Transportation Act, 1997, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that piece 

of legislation, well it does a couple of things, Mr. Speaker. And 

I have to say the most important thing this Bill does is allow the 

minister to direct the speed on provincial highways, Mr. 

Speaker — to actually have a say. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it used to be that the minister worked 

through the officials and told the officials what was sort of the 

wish of the government, after hearing the information from the 

officials as to the safety issues and that, Mr. Speaker. Well this 

doesn‟t really contemplate any change, Mr. Speaker, in the 

process. It just simply says that where it might have been 

questioned in the past, that the minister actually had the 

authority. Will it make the public announcement? Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s just straightening out that the minister can actually go and 

make the public announcement in a nice way. 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, although they did the work on this 

piece of legislation — we‟re going to acknowledge that they did 

the work on this piece of legislation after, after they were 

government, or the officials did — Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

good piece of legislation. And check. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is An 

Act to amend The Public Service Act, 1998, Mr. Speaker. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is a thoughtful, a very 

appropriate piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And as some of 

the members opposite would know, I‟ve spent a lot of time 

dealing with the issues of labour relations and government over 

the years prior to my being elected and that. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a change to improve the rights of the commissioners, the 

public service commissioners to do the right thing, to actually, 

if a mistake is made, to correct the mistake, Mr. Speaker — for 

the commissioners to exercise their authority and correct a 

mistake, Mr. Speaker, once again a very good piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this was drafted again after, after the new 

government took power, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

happen to be the critic for this particular piece of legislation, 

and I think you can put a check mark down beside this piece of 

legislation as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, next we have An Act to amend the Social Workers 

Act, Mr. Speaker. Well this is a piece of legislation that has 

been worked on for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, in 

consultation with the Association of Social Workers in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It is a very important 

piece of legislation. 

 

We probably only have one question about this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker — one question. We‟d have to ask if the minister‟s 

read it and if the minister understands it. That probably would 

be our only question, Mr. Speaker. And when she sent this 

forward, did she know what she was doing? That would be our 

simple questions, Mr. Speaker. Check. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 20. Mr. Speaker, it‟s a Bill 

to amend The Administration of Estates Act and to make 

consequential amendments to certain other Acts and repeal 

certain other Acts, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of 

legislation that we did work on when we were in government, 

Mr. Speaker. The work was in fact done when we were in the 

government, Mr. Speaker. We understand this piece of 

legislation well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And a couple of my colleagues, in particular the member from 

Regina Lakeview, spent a great deal of time on this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And my colleague, also the member 

from Regina . . . or pardon me, Saskatoon Meewasin, Mr. 

Speaker — I wish he was from Regina Meewasin, Mr. Speaker 

— spent a lot of time on this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And do 

you know what? I hope they‟re listening, Mr. Speaker. This 

piece of legislation, check. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, now at the final Bill that‟s been 

tabled in the Assembly, Bill No. 21, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s An 

Act to amend The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Act, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, look this is absolutely 

radical. Once again this was negotiated during the last round of 



694 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

collective bargaining. 

 

And who was the government in power during the last round of 

teachers‟ collective bargaining? Well, Mr. Speaker, that would 

be the current opposition, Mr. Speaker. So we‟ve already 

agreed to this, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve already agreed to this. So, 

Mr. Speaker, the final Bill, the final Bill that these members 

brought forward, what do we have? We have another check 

mark, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what does this mean? It means that the 

panic, Mr. Speaker, it means that the panic alarm, the absolute 

false alarm, the false alarm that the members opposite pushed 

and the absolute panic that they think they have, the panic 

button that they pushed, Mr. Speaker, and the hysteria in which 

they thought they needed to bring forward such a knee-jerk 

reaction with a unilateral motion to change the rules . . . What‟s 

it mean, Mr. Speaker? It means incompetence. Mr. Speaker, it 

means once again, Mr. Speaker, incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It being the time of the afternoon recess, the 

Assembly is recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 659 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 659 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 659 

  Harper ............................................................................................................................................................................... 673, 681 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 676 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 679 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 660 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 660 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 660 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 660 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women of Strength and Distinction Banquet 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 660 

 Multiple Sclerosis Fundraiser 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 661 

 2008 Oskana Cup Hockey Tournament 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 661 

 Saskatoon Junior Achievement Business Hall of Fame Dinner 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 661 

 Emergency Telecommunicators 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 661 

 Girl Guides of Moose Jaw 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 662 

 Heroism Recognized 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 662 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Infrastructure Agreement with Federal Government 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 662 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 663 

 Jobs for Northerners 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 663 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

 Actions of Public Servant 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

 Diversity in the Public Service 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 664 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 665 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 666 

 Literacy 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 666 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 666 

 Cancellation of Program and Response to Newspaper Article 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 667 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 667 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 667 

 Severance Payments and Response to Newspaper Article 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 668 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 668 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 668 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 668 

NOTICE OF CLOSURE 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 669 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


