




















































Hansard: March 13, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 12A  THURSDAY, MARCH 13, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 289 

 March 13, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I‟d like to introduce to the Assembly a 

large contingent of guests in our gallery today. I‟d like to set the 

stage for this introduction by informing you that the weeks of 

March 7 to 23 have officially been proclaimed Les Rendez-vous 

de la Francophonie 2008 in Saskatchewan. For these two 

weeks, 9 million francophones and others who have learned to 

speak the French language will get together to celebrate the 

francophone culture and heritage throughout our great country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year‟s theme, From Past to Future 

Generations, truly speaks to the strong francophone heritage we 

have here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it is my pleasure to introduce to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly a group of young francophone students 

from École Monseigneur de Laval and also representatives from 

the francophone community that are here today as part of the 

celebration. Would these honoured guests please stand. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — We welcome these guests to their 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Je voudrais dire 

pour l‟opposition officielle une grande bienvenue et bonjour à 

tous les étudiants fransaskois à l‟Assemblée législative 

aujourd‟hui. C‟est avec beaucoup de fiereté, et je suis très 

heureux, pour dire bienvenue en vérité à l‟Assemblée 

législative. Et aussi je voudrais dire une grande félicitation pour 

la semaine de Rendez-vous, et aujourd‟hui c‟est un beau jour. 

Merci bien, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to say on 

behalf of the official opposition a big welcome and hello to all 

the Fransaskois students at the Legislative Assembly today. It is 

with much pride, and I am very glad, to truly say welcome to 

the Legislative Assembly. And also I would like to say a big 

congratulations for the Rendez-vous Week, and today is a 

beautiful day. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I‟d 

like to introduce to the members in the legislature 21 Grade 8 

students from the beautiful town of Porcupine Plain. With them 

today is the teacher, Lawrence Schmidt, and we have the 

chaperones Anna Bolvin, Ashley Messner, and Grant Ziola. I‟m 

looking forward to meeting with you later on. Welcome to your 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 

all the members of this Assembly, I‟d like to introduce a young 

man who is no stranger to this Assembly — I‟ve had the 

pleasure to work with him as a legislative intern — Mr. Patrick 

Button. A little wave there, Patrick. 

 

He‟s a product of Regina, a U of R [University of Regina] 

student, involved in many volunteer and school activities and 

organizations. He‟s received much recognition and many 

honours in his career as a student and what he‟s done in life so 

far. In 2006 — as I say, he‟s no stranger here — he was a Page 

in this Assembly and has participated in youth parliament. I‟ve 

had the privilege and pleasure to work with Patrick over the 

past couple of months. He‟s been in my constituency for a 

week, and I‟m very thankful for his computer expertise and his 

assistance with my duties as Legislative Secretary to Social 

Services. So I‟d ask all the members to welcome Patrick here 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you it is my privilege to introduce to you some friends of mine 

from Harris. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is some 

representatives that are here attending the SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 

from the RM [Rural Municipality] of Harris — Administrator 

Jim Angus, a long-time friend and colleague of mine, and with 

them are Reeve Ted Gross, councillors Dan Mireau and David 

Husband. And I‟d ask you to please welcome them to our 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I‟m on my feet, 

I‟d also like to introduce to the Assembly another intern, 

Dwayne Meisner. I‟ve had the privilege of working with 

Dwayne over the past few weeks. He‟s a fine young man with a 

tremendous work ethic. He also is in the intern program. And as 

luck would have it, he‟s also originally from Eston, which is 

home to one of our fine young MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. So 

anyway, Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask the Assembly to please welcome 

Dwayne as well. 



290 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery 

today is Ruth Robinson of Saskatoon. Ruth, if you would wave. 

Ruth is no stranger to the legislature. She has been here before. 

She is the past president of the Consumers‟ Association of 

Canada, Saskatchewan Branch. 

 

For more than 60 years, the Consumers‟ Association of Canada 

has worked to ensure that consumers are treated fairly. They do 

an outstanding job of working with government and business to 

ensure fairness in educating the public as to their rights. Ruth is 

here today to see the introduction of amendments to The 

Consumer Protection Act. Please join me in welcoming Ruth 

Robinson to her legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I‟d 

like to introduce a young man that is very special in my life. 

Seated in the west gallery is my grandson, Beau Duckarmie. 

Beau, if you could give us a wave or stand up. 

 

Beau has just turned 13 in January. He‟s in grade 7 at Macoun 

School, and he is very, very interested in history and politics. 

And he‟s just hoping he gets a chance to visit with the member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy a little later on. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Beau has also stated that one day he may seek a seat in this very 

Chamber, but he‟s also stated which side he would be seated on. 

And he‟s made that very clear. So I ask all members to join me 

in welcoming my grandson. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with the Minister of Justice in welcoming Ruth 

Robinson to our Legislative Assembly. I have known Ruth and 

Sam for a number of years, and Ruth does wonderful work in 

the whole area of consumer protection, but she also is well 

known in our city for being an advocate for those people who 

need an advocate when it comes to mental health issues. 

 

And I know that Ruth is so pleased that we finally in the city of 

Saskatoon are about to have a facility for people who require 

hospitalization for the mental health issues available to them. 

It‟s been a long time, and I know Ruth has been a significant 

advocate to making sure that that facility is built. So welcome, 

Ruth. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s with a great deal of pleasure that I present a 

petition in these very substantial financial times in the province 

of Saskatchewan that would . . . with prayers from the citizens 

of Moose Jaw for an increase to, or improvements done to our 

Moose Jaw Union Hospital, providing delivery and reducing 

our wait times but providing better services. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I proudly present this petition on behalf of Moose 

Jaw residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents of Saskatchewan. It is well 

known that inadequate access to quality and affordable child 

care is a major roadblock for parents who want to access the 

labour market and that our Premier has called the labour 

shortage a crisis and that today many Saskatchewan families 

struggle or are unable to find child care for their children. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The member is aware of the fact 

that the petitions are presented by reading the prayer. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present several pages 

of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by people from Saskatoon and 

Regina. Thank you. 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I‟d like to present a petition today calling for 

immediate reduction in education portion of property taxes for 

Saskatchewan families. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately implement its promise to reduce the 

education portion of property taxes for Saskatchewan 

families by doubling property tax rebates over four years. 

 

As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the centres of 

Prince Albert, Spruce Home, Melfort, Birch Hills, and 

Arborfield. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Celebrate Success Awards in Yorkton 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yorkton, third 

largest trading area in the province where good things happen 

— well, Mr. Speaker, last night in Yorkton we had the chamber 

of commerce, the seventh Celebrate Success Awards. The 

chamber‟s celebrating 110 years this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the honour of bringing greetings on behalf of the 

province. We were treated by a great supper at the St. Mary‟s 

Cultural Centre, and then we were treated by the start your 

business package that the chamber of commerce in Yorkton has 

put together to attract businesses to Yorkton. 

 

Some of the key winners last night, Mr. Speaker: community 

merit, Haunts of Yorkton, boys and girls club, Kinsmen club. 

Property restoration winners sponsored by the City of Yorkton 

was the Yorke Inn. Community involvement, Cornerstone 

Credit Union sponsored this to L.R. Future Investments; 

business expansion sponsored by Bank of Montreal, EMW 

Industrial; new business venture sponsored by Key Chevrolet 

Cadillac, Yorkton Toyota; young entrepreneurs sponsored by 

Haas Nissan, Gardon Securities — which I was very warmed by 

his reaction, Mr. Speaker, when he thanked the Saskatchewan 

Party government for winning the last election. So I was really 

honoured with his speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Customer service, RBC Royal Bank 

sponsored that one, St. Mary‟s Cultural Centre a very, a very 

well deserved reward; wall of success winners sponsored by 

Parker Quine, Yorkton This Week and Independent Agencies, 

Morris Industries; and business of the year sponsored by 

SaskPower — I was honoured to present this award, Mr. 

Speaker, very deserving — Maple Farm Equipment of Yorkton. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Z99 Radiothon 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, my friends, our friends CC, Lorie, 

and Buzz are at it again. For 36 straight hours from 6:00 a.m. 

today to 6:00 p.m. Friday from the Cornwall Centre in Regina, 

the 21st annual Z99 radiothon is happening. Z99 and its great 

audience are continuing the tradition — the tradition of 

supporting and caring, the tradition of sharing and preparing for 

tomorrow. Three of Regina‟s nicest leading citizens — our 

friends CC, Lorie, and Buzz — are again focussing their 

considerable talents and their time on saving babies‟ lives and 

making futures better. 

 

This Z99 radiothon is all about giving Regina and southern 

Saskatchewan the opportunity to give of ourselves by donating 

our money to help buy baby heart, lung, and more monitors. 

Medical technology is getting better. Health professionals are 

getting better. Together we can and we are making all the 

difference for babies and their families. Rawlco Radio for 21 

years has supported the Z99 radiothon, raising more than $1.8 

million for the Regina General neonatal intensive care unit. 

 

Please listen to Z99 for details. Then let‟s help CC, Lorie, and 

Buzz raise money to support babies of Regina. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Council of Women Honours Resident 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Saturday afternoon the Prince Albert Council of Women‟s Hall 

of Fame honoured the life and contributions of Mrs. Melba 

Jenkins. Mrs. Jenkins is well deserving of this honour as her 

community involvement in Prince Albert has touched many 

lives. 

 

After taking a look at the vast amount of her accomplishments, 

it‟s difficult for me to know where to begin. Mr. Speaker, 

Prince Albert is known for its volunteerism and community 

involvement. Many would agree that Melba has become a 

leader in Prince Albert when it comes to her fundraising efforts. 

As part of the board of directors of the Victoria Hospital 

Foundation, she was involved in the life support campaign, bed 

campaign, and maternity campaign among other things. 

 

In 2005 Melba and her husband, Malcolm, were honoured with 

the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. So while this is not 

Melba‟s first time being honoured for her achievements, you 

can bet this will not be her last. Recently Melba has had to scale 

back her activities due to ill health, but she‟s still doing what 

she‟s able to do. 



292 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

So today, Mr. Speaker, as MLA for Prince Albert Carlton, I ask 

all members to join in with me in personally recognizing and 

thanking Mrs. Melba Jenkins for the hard work, time, and effort 

she has dedicated to making the city of Prince Albert a better 

place to live. Congratulations, Melba, on being the newest 

inductee into the Prince Albert Women‟s Hall of Fame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I also attended the event on Saturday, Mr. 

Speaker, and would like to join with the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton in congratulating Ms. Jenkins. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the P.A. [Prince Albert] Women‟s Council Hall of 

Fame inductee, Ms. Melba Jenkins, 2008, she lives in Prince 

Albert Northcote and was honoured at a ceremony, fitting that it 

was March 8 as it was International Women‟s Day. 

 

I was extremely pleased to be in attendance as Ms. Jenkins is an 

active member of our community and is most deserving of this 

recognition. She assisted in fundraising to establish the E.A. 

Rawlinson Centre, is a member of the international orders of 

daughters of the empire, serves on many committees, and 

assists the Coats for Kids committee. 

 

Ms. Jenkins joined the board of directors of the Victoria 

Hospital Foundation in 2001, and since that time she‟s assisted 

in organizing many fundraising activities including the life 

support campaign, the bed campaign, the Give a Little Life 

radiothon. She‟s been active with the festival of trees, the 

snowflake gala, and the O.K. Hejertass annual golf tournament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what makes her accomplishments even more 

amazing is she‟s done all of this while overcoming personal 

adversity, celebrating her fourth year of remission from cancer 

in 2007. Mr. Speaker, Ms. Jenkins lives by a philosophy — and 

it‟s a philosophy that we could all employ — that is, life is 10 

per cent what happens to you and 90 per cent what you choose 

to do with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

acknowledging the contributions of Melba Jenkins to her 

community and congratulating her on being the 2008 inductee 

into the Prince Albert Council of Women‟s Hall of Fame. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

SARM Convention 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The annual SARM 

convention‟s been in town this week, and it wraps this 

afternoon. This is the 103rd annual convention for SARM, and 

as of this morning, I believe, they had about 1,800 delegates 

registered which I also think makes it, I believe, it makes it the 

largest annual convention in the province. 

 

The convention includes a large trade show and has a huge 

economic impact on the Regina area. It alternates between 

Saskatoon and Regina; it‟ll be in Saskatoon next year. It‟s a 

chance for delegates to network with other municipal people 

from around the province, and also to network with government 

people. 

 

We had a number of ministers give speeches to the convention. 

Minister Hutchinson, Minister Bjornerud had speeches that 

were very well received, and also Premier Wall had a speech on 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Just a reminder we‟re not to refer to 

members by their first names, but by their constituency. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — The bear pit was also a huge success the other 

day, Mr. Speaker, as was a banquet, the annual social event that 

goes with the convention last night. Our delegates are looking 

forward to working with this new government. They have a 

sense of optimism and confidence in rural Saskatchewan. That‟s 

where our resources are. That‟s where our future is, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We commend our rural leaders who are guiding the 

development of Saskatchewan‟s new rural economy. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Five Days for the Homeless 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week five brave 

University of Saskatchewan students are taking part in a bold 

new Canadian student movement called Five Days for the 

Homeless. Marc D‟Eon, Mark Lepage, Shannon Heincke, Reem 

Matlak, and Carlene Deutscher — all students of the Edwards 

business student society — began their challenge at 5:00 p.m. 

Sunday, March 9 and will end it tomorrow. 

 

This is quite a test with some very strict rules, including having 

no disposable income, no access to food or drink. They can 

consume only donated food and they cannot shower. And most 

importantly they must sleep outside. The only exception is if the 

temperatures are so low that the health is at risk. They must 

attend all their classes and complete all of their academic 

responsibilities including mid-terms. 

 

The charity these students are supporting is Egadz, the 

Saskatoon community-based organization that provides 

resources and services that empower youth at risk to help 

themselves to reach their full potential. Egadz provides safe, 

acceptable place for youth with links to their families, and 

support of the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these business students, both in the challenge and 

in support roles, want to raise awareness about youth 

homelessness, promote social responsibility, and to create a 

positive image for their school, university, and community. 

They‟re doing a fantastic job with a great idea. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask all members to join in me to congratulating the five days for 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

the homelessness, Saskatoon, and wish them the very best. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Recruiting Nurses from the Philippines 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another day, another 

flip-flop for the NDP [New Democratic Party] on their position 

on the value of recruiting nurses from the Philippines. 

 

Yesterday in the legislature, the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview responded to a ministerial statement announcing the 

Saskatchewan Party‟s recruitment of 297 Filipino nurses to help 

with the serious deficiency of nurses in Saskatchewan left by 

the former NDP government. Her quote, “Today we are seeing 

the results of work undertaken by the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana and our government and health care stakeholders . . .” 

 

Now that‟s odd because a week ago the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview was quoted in the Lloydminster Meridian 

Booster saying just the opposite. She criticized the government 

for recruiting nurses from another country. Her quote, „“I also 

want to caution people that we shouldn‟t move our system 

forward at the expense of some other country‟ . . . ” 

 

Mr. Speaker, did you know that the families of these Filipino 

nurses are depending on them to help pay the bills? 

Approximately 75 per cent of their net pay they send back to 

the Philippines. So, Mr. Speaker, this is not happening at quote, 

“the expense of another country.” Not only is the NDP talking 

out of both sides of their mouth on the nursing recruitment 

issue; they don‟t seem to understand that this helps not hurts the 

Philippines. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Labour Relations Board 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

very simple question to the member from Greystone: will there 

be an open competition for the position of Vice-Chair of the 

Labour Relations Board, yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, in stark contrast to the 

optimism that runs across Saskatchewan, we find a pessimism 

in the official opposition. I think it‟s reflective of the election 

results. 

 

What I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that a member opposite the 

other day said there wouldn‟t be amendments to essential 

services. I then announced that there in fact would be. What I 

can say today is, yesterday we heard from the member opposite. 

She was concerned that there wouldn‟t be an open competition, 

and I‟m happy to report that there will be one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we‟ve got our first 

victory on the opposition side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well we‟ll see. We‟ll see. Mr. Speaker, as 

the public will know, we have a minister that summarily fired 

three members of the Labour Relations Board — three members 

that were in the midst of either completing the hearing of cases 

or hearing cases or in the process of writing up decisions 

regarding cases they had heard. We have heard the minister 

indicate to the public that these people will be allowed to 

continue to hear the case or write up the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that the minister speaks fondly of the 

Justice department. I‟d like him to share the Justice 

department‟s legal opinion as to whether or not — given that 

their OCs [order in council] were terminated — whether or not 

they have the authority to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the minister responsible for 

Employment, Immigration, and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the focus on 

this. It would be nice to be able to talk about the 15,000 people 

that have moved back to Saskatchewan in the last year, the 

13,300 new full-time jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is going to be negotiated by the new Chair. 

And I‟m not going to comment on what‟s going on within the 

LRB [Labour Relations Board] because it‟s a quasi-judicial 

branch that is taking care of itself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think the new Chair has 

the legal ability to determine whether or not these folks can 

continue. What I‟m interested in knowing, whether or not the 

minister of, that we‟re referring to, has an opinion from the 

Department of Justice or the Ministry of Justice that, given that 

the order in council for these three individuals was terminated, 

whether or not he has to reimplement an OC in order for these 

people to continue their work so that both unions and employers 

don‟t have to spend thousands of dollars and either having the 

cases reheard or opinions rendered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I just want the minister to be clear with the public. What is 



294 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

the legal opinion? Do these people have the legal authority to 

continue or don‟t they? If they don‟t, what does the government 

have to do in order to allow these people to continue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to answer this 

question. The Department of Justice was consulted extensively 

regarding these particular employees, and I want to be able to 

assure the members opposite and the members of the province 

of Saskatchewan, our citizens, that these particular applications 

that are before the Labour Relations Board will continue in the 

ordinary and usual manner. That was communicated to the 

board Chair and the Vice-Chairs prior to anything taking place 

with them. 

 

And it is our full expectation that those, the board Chair and the 

Vice-Chairs, will continue with the hearings that they have 

started to undertake in accordance with The Trade Union Act. 

We have no intention of making any change with that. The 

Minister of Labour has indicated that earlier, and I want to be 

able to reassure people that that is the plan and that will carry 

on. And those people have been assured of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, The Trade Union Act is clear 

that if a member of the board‟s order in council is expiring, that 

they can continue. In this case, these three members did not 

have their order in council expire. They weren‟t able to go to 

the end of their term. Their order in council was terminated. 

 

So I‟d ask the government to clearly indicate to us what legal 

authority is there in The Trade Union Act that once a member 

of the Labour Relations Board has had their order in council 

terminated, what authority is there for them to continue to hear 

cases or render decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say — I‟ll 

reiterate — it was made clear that there would be continuity, 

Mr. Speaker. Once again we‟re finding a focus on issues that 

we‟ve already addressed. Mr. Speaker, out of all the great news 

going on in Saskatchewan, we go back to this. We see that 

13,300 new jobs, Mr. Speaker, full-time jobs in Saskatchewan. 

We find 15,000 people moving back to the province. We find 

success on the post-secondary side in training. Another 

announcement coming tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the answer is the continuity has already been built 

in. They understood that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I must say to the House 

and to the public that the minister has not answered the very 

specific question. The Trade Union Act is clear that if the 

member of the Labour Relations Board‟s OC is expiring, has 

come to its end, that they can continue. But in this case, these 

three members did not have their OCs expire. They were 

terminated. 

 

I ask the minister to point out in detail — and if he can‟t do it in 

the House, perhaps he‟ll do it outside for the journalists — 

where in The Trade Union Act is their authority for these three 

members, who have had their OC terminated before it expires, 

to continue either hearing or rendering decisions on cases. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there is a number of cases 

before these particular individuals. The applicants in those cases 

spent a significant amount of time, money, and resources to 

come before the Labour Relations Board with their particular 

applications. It is the intention of this government to ensure that 

there is continuity and that those individuals have every 

opportunity to complete those particular matters. 

 

It is our understanding from opinions we‟ve received from the 

Department of Justice — and we don‟t share written opinion on 

personnel matters — but it is our opinion and our expectation 

that we have the legal authority to do that, and that is what will 

take place, Mr. Speaker, is those individuals, provided that they 

are willing to, those individuals will complete hearing those 

applications; they will render those decisions. We will expect 

them to do it in a timely manner and, Mr. Speaker, that is how 

this government will do business. We will continue on and we 

will do things as we were elected to on November 7 of last year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s quite clear that the 

member has had a conversion on the road to Damascus. He now 

doesn‟t share legal opinions when it comes to personnel 

matters. Now, Mr. Speaker, in The Trade Union Act, in The 

Trade Union Act it‟s very clear that there are two Vice-Chairs 

to be appointed. That‟s very specific to the legislation. The 

members opposite have indicated, because they‟ve increased the 

pay dramatically for the Vice-Chair by some 60,000 — or the 

Chair — by some $60,000, that they‟re going to reduce the 

numbers of Chairs and Vice-Chairs to two. Can the members 

tell us whether or not they‟re going to introduce amendments to 

The Trade Union Act, or are they simply going to ignore The 

Trade Union Act and only have a Chair and Vice-Chair? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

We‟ll be working to align the legislation to ensure that there 

will be room to go up to two Vice-Chairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Process for Negotiating Nurses’ Contract 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses has posted a letter on their website dated 

March 10 of this year. The letter is addressed to the Minister of 

Health and relates to the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 

negotiations. In the letter, SUN claims SAHO [Saskatchewan 

Association of Health Organizations] is refusing to negotiate on 

recruitment and retention pieces outlined in the memorandum 

of understanding signed by the minister and SUN just recently. 

In comments to the media, SAHO claims legislation precludes 

them from negotiating on these matters. 

 

To the Minister of Health, the simple question: does SAHO 

have the legislative authority to negotiate on the pieces included 

within the MOU [memorandum of understanding]? If not, why 

did the minister provide false hope to SUN by signing the 

agreement while they were starting negotiations with SAHO? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I really find 

it interesting that that critic and the former head, president of 

the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses would class a partnership 

with SUN, a historic partnership with SUN, as false hope. I 

guess the only false hope that SUN ever had is that they could 

ever find agreement with that former government. That was 

false hope, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the collective bargaining system, the collective 

bargaining arrangements or process will work as the collective 

bargaining process has always worked. There‟ll be differences 

in opinions between SUN and SAHO, and those differences of 

opinions will be worked out at the bargaining table, not with 

interference from the minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well too late, Mr. Minister. Mr. Speaker, the 

letter from SUN urges the Minister of Health to, and I quote: 

 

. . . communicate immediately and publicly with Regional 

Health Authorities to advise them that they must comply 

with government policy and strategic direction as 

articulated in the SUN/Government Partnership . . . 

 

To the minister: will you be instructing the employers and 

SAHO how to negotiate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker. Is 

that what that member would do? Would she inject herself into 

the negotiations? Would she inject herself into the negotiations 

and tell SAHO, the employer, the representative of the 

employers, the RHAs [regional health authority], on how they 

should negotiate? Is that what she‟s implying? Is she implying 

that the government should inject itself into the negotiations and 

dictate to the employer, the health authorities, through SAHO 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to allow the 

minister to respond to the question. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — To direct SAHO, the organization for 

the employers, the health authorities, on how they should 

negotiate. Is that what she‟s implying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The letter from SUN 

does not ask me what I will do. The minister is asked what he 

will do. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to allow the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview to place her question. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The letter is addressed 

to the minister, not to me, so he has to answer what he will be 

doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it seems in signing the MOU during the 

bargaining process, that the minister has created quite a mess. It 

would appear that the minister failed to communicate clearly to 

either the health regions or SUN. On one hand it seems the 

health regions were not part of the process of developing and 

signing the MOU, and on the other hand the minister has 

apparently failed to clearly define to SUN what elements of the 

plan can be addressed to negotiations and which cannot. 

 

To the Minister of Health: what is going on? Why has the 

minister acted in a way that appears to be hindering the ability 

of employees and employers to negotiate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I heard the 

member from Nutana, the former Health minister, talk about a 

little mess. I‟ll tell you about a big mess. A big mess is the 

health system after 16 years of that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — There is a mess not only in rural 



296 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

Saskatchewan but in urban Saskatchewan. We have a huge 

nursing shortage. We have a huge doctor shortage. And I will 

tell, through you, Mr. Speaker, to that opposition that in three 

months work this Saskatchewan Party has done more to fix that 

system than 16 years . . . [inaudible] . . . that government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I answered the first 

question that the bargaining process will work the way the 

bargaining process will work. There‟s going to be 

disagreements between employees and employers, and they‟re 

going to work through that in a proper, bargained, negotiated 

contract, Mr. Speaker. And I will not interject myself in that 

process. I don‟t know if they expect the government or minister 

to do that, but certainly that isn‟t the way this government will 

be working. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m eagerly awaiting 

to see the results of this mess. Mr. Speaker, the SUN letter 

states, and I quote: 

 

SUN entered into the SUN/Government Partnership in 

good faith, expecting that government commitments 

would be honoured by the . . . [minister] and the Regional 

Health Authorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the frustration is evident in SUN‟s letter. From 

comments made by SAHO, it would seem that process is 

increasingly frustrating for them as well. My question is for the 

Minister of Health: how does the Minister of Health explain the 

frustration if he adequately communicated with SAHO, the 

employers, and SUN prior to the signing of the MOU? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, over the last three to four months we have done an 

awful lot to rectify some of the disasters left by that previous 

government in opposition now. And part of it was signing a 

partnership agreement with SUN — historic — which that 

opposition tried to do when it was government, but failed to do 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would be very interested to hear from that member — the 

critic, who is a former president of SUN — what she disagrees 

about. What is it that she doesn‟t like about a partnership with 

SUN and government moving forward to address the 

recruitment and retention problems that we face in our 

province? What is it that she dislikes? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would be very interested because what she 

says today may not be what she believes tomorrow. Because 

what she said yesterday didn‟t follow with what she said two 

weeks ago in Lloydminster through the Meridian Booster. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday she supported Philippine nurses coming. 

Two weeks ago she said it was terrible, Mr. Speaker. You can‟t 

believe a word they say. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Building Canada Framework Agreement 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Regina and the province are very 

concerned about the Sask Party‟s dithering and delaying when it 

comes to signing an agreement with the federal government 

which could be worth millions of dollars for Saskatchewan. The 

Building Canada framework is worth $33 billion over seven 

years for municipal infrastructure. 

 

The mayor of Regina, Mr. Pat Fiacco, has recently expressed 

his concern over how long it‟s taking to sign on to this 

agreement. The foot-dragging by this Sask Party government 

may put these Regina projects that have already been 

announced in jeopardy. 

 

Now the infrastructure was one of the key platforms in the Sask 

Party election plan. To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: why 

have you not signed on to the Building Canada framework? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Speaker is having 

difficulty hearing the question. Would the member please place 

the question. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

Why have you not signed on to the Building Canada 

framework? What‟s the holdup? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly welcome 

the question from the member opposite. We‟re not going to be 

taking 16 years to sign a new agreement with the federal 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — The member opposite and her 

colleagues are fully aware of the discussions started a long time 

ago. And they‟re continuing . . . doing the very best that we can 

to pull all of the pieces of a good deal together. We want to 

make sure that we have not just a deal; we want to make sure 

that we have the best deal for the people of Saskatchewan. And 

that‟s exactly what we‟ll do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m a little concerned that 

this deal might go the way of the government‟s concern on 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

equalization. And we‟d hate to see that happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — So, Mr. Speaker, we do know that 

Newfoundland and Labrador have signed the agreement, and 

they have $640 million for infrastructure. They take 

infrastructure seriously. And do you know who else has signed 

on to the agreement? Nova Scotia. They care about 

infrastructure to the tune of $540 million. And do you know 

who else? BC [British Columbia] has already signed on to the 

agreement to the tune of $2.2 billion for infrastructure in their 

province. 

 

These provinces have all signed and the money is flowing to all 

of them. Why not Saskatchewan? When will this minister do 

some work in his portfolio and live up to the Sask Party‟s 

infrastructure promises? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the minister responsible for 

municipal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was a little 

hard to hear the question due to the NDP members heckling 

their own member, but if I understood it, it goes something like 

this: are you going to be doing any better than we did with the 

equalization when we were in power, I think was the question. 

And the answer is, how could anybody possibly do any worse? 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, cute answers are that — they‟re 

cute. And I have to say they wear thin fast. Mr. Speaker, this 

deal is of critical importance to the province, and it is of critical 

importance to the people who the minister represents here in 

Regina. This deal could be worth $27 million for the intermodal 

facility. Why does the minister not care about that deal? This 

deal could be worth $20 million for the new multipurpose 

facility at IPSCO Place. Why does the minister not care about 

that project? 

 

The minister‟s photo ops are fast and furious and there‟s plenty 

of them, but when is he going to get down to some work, sign 

this agreement, and see some money flowing? So can he now 

please stand and explain why there‟s been no action on this file 

to the people of his constituency, Regina, and the province, and 

please tell us when this agreement will be signed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the minister responsible for 

municipal government. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the 

hon. member opposite isn‟t aware of all the efforts that are 

being concentrated on getting the right deal for Saskatchewan is 

disappointing, but I understand it. But she has, with respect, 

said one thing that I think we can all agree with. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask members to give the minister the 

opportunity to respond. I recognize the minister. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 

respect, the hon. member opposite has indeed said one thing 

that I think we can all agree with. We all, in fact, are extremely 

concerned. We recognize the importance of this agreement, not 

only to the good people of Regina but to the good people of 

Saskatchewan everywhere. And that‟s why we‟ll keep working 

until we get the right deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Relationship with Federal Government 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has raised in the 

House this morning the question of this government‟s 

relationship with the national government, with the federal 

Conservative government, and he‟s raised the issue of 

equalization. 

 

That provokes me, Mr. Speaker, to ask this government today 

— I expect the question will go to the Deputy Premier — this 

week, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Newfoundland tabled 

their Throne Speech. It was in the body of that Throne Speech, 

the Government of Newfoundland said as follows: 

 

My Government has been deeply frustrated by the current 

Federal Government‟s refusal to honour — among other 

promises — their explicit written commitment to remove 

nonrenewable resource revenues from the calculation of 

equalization . . . 

 

That is the position of the Government of Newfoundland. That 

is the frustration of the government, the people of 

Newfoundland. Does this government share that same 

frustration that the federal government of Canada has broken its 

promise to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we saw before the election 

an NDP government whose actions, the way they treated the 

federal government, was one of hostility, and one that they 

wanted to approach everything with the idea that they would 

litigate their way out of problems rather than sit down and 

attempt to negotiate a deal. 

 

Unlike the previous NDP government who believed a negative, 

destructive, and pessimistic approach was the only way to deal 

with the federal government, it is the position of this 

government that we believe in rolling up our sleeves and want 



298 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

to work with the federal government to help build our province. 

We are once again a have province and we are working very 

hard, Mr. Speaker, to lay the groundwork, particularly in terms 

of infrastructure, to ensure that we maintain Saskatchewan‟s 

rightful place as a have province in Confederation for the 

future. We want the federal government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I call members to order. 

I call members to order. Order. During question period we‟ve 

had certain members interfering more often than other members 

of the Assembly. I‟m going to call members to order in that 

regard, and respect the right of individuals to not only ask the 

question but to respond to the question. 

 

The Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the humour and mirth that we hear from the other side is 

unfortunately representative of how that government treated 

things when they were dealing with the federal government. 

 

An example of how the new approach is working with the 

government is the federal government contributing $240 million 

to develop clean coal technology in Saskatchewan, a technology 

that was abandoned by that government over there. We will 

continue to work with the federal government to try and do 

everything we can for our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. Final 

question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — For one, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the minister 

getting up and reading from the prepared answer to the 

question. He asks, how is this relationship working? We ask, 

where‟s the infrastructure deal for the people of Regina? 

Where‟s the infrastructure deal for the people of Saskatchewan? 

Why haven‟t you signed it? Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Newfoundland, in their Throne Speech this past week, said as 

follows: 

 

A Prime Minister who makes such a promise saying “there 

is no greater fraud than a promise not kept” stands 

condemned by his own words for refusing to keep it . . . 

Their actions are not only disingenuous but also dishonest. 

They have proved they cannot be trusted. 

 

That‟s the Government of Newfoundland, in reference to Prime 

Minister Stephen Harper and the federal Conservative cousins 

of yours who sit in the national benches. Mr. Speaker, my 

question to this government today is: do they, today, suggest 

that the federal Conservative government have kept their 

promise to the people of Saskatchewan, or do they agree with 

the people and the Government of Newfoundland that they have 

not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, that premier, and the 

Premier of Newfoundland, have done the most destructive 

things insofar as dealing with the federal government. They 

have chosen to litigate. They have chosen a path of 

confrontation. This government will work to do the best that we 

can to ensure that we are most productive for the people of this 

province. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve already negotiated $240 million. 

We‟ve already negotiated $240 million for clean coal 

technology. We have ongoing negotiations. And our issue is not 

what happened with the equalization formula. We leave that to 

that premier — or that former premier — and his counterpart in 

Newfoundland. We will work to develop a positive working 

relationship with the federal government and we will deliver 

dollars to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Initiative for Children and Families Living With 

Autism Spectrum Disorder 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to inform the House 

about an important, new initiative for Saskatchewan children 

with autism spectrum disorder and, of course, along with their 

families. 

 

Today my colleague, the Minister of Health, the member from 

Indian Head-Milestone, and I announced over $320,000 for 

supports for autism spectrum disorder or ASD. This is funding 

that will make a real, tangible difference in the lives of children 

with ASD and their families. It will help ensure that children 

with ASD reach their best potential. This investment will 

provide up to 21 children and their families with intensive 

home-based supports, supports that will help both family and 

child meet goals such as increasing communication skills and 

improving cognitive, fine, and gross motor skills. 

 

To accomplish this, our government is providing $50,000 each 

to the North Battleford, Regina, and Saskatoon region early 

childhood intervention programs or ECIPs. Mr. Speaker, this 

will allow five to seven families in each ECIP region to benefit 

from the help of an autism early childhood consultant. The 

consultant will work with children from birth to age five who 

have already been diagnosed or who are waiting to be 

diagnosed with ASD. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, there will be $150,000 provided 

annually to the three ECIPs. We are contributing $170,000 in 

one-time funding for two learning development conferences. 

These conferences will be organized by the Saskatoon region 

ECIP for professionals in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 

and early learning and child care sectors. They will go a long 

way toward helping professionals who work with children 

recognize the signs of autism because, Mr. Speaker, as we all 

know, an early diagnosis can make all the difference to a child‟s 

success in the long term. 

 

The funding announced today is in addition to $64 million 

provided by the Ministry of Education through intensive 

supports funding recognition. This $64 million helps boards of 

education provide programs and services to meet the needs of 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 299 

all students identified as requiring additional supports, 

including those with ASD. As well the inter-ministry cognitive 

disability strategy supports individuals with unmet needs who 

have significant behavioural and developmental disabilities. 

Parents can apply for funds in this funding pool to meet the 

unmet needs of their children with ASD. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this announcement today is an investment in the 

well-being of children, in the well-being of families, and in the 

future of Saskatchewan. It‟s an example of how Saskatchewan‟s 

residents benefit when our province is experiencing economic 

growth. And it‟s an example of the kind of initiatives that this 

government will continue to pursue to ensure that we secure the 

future of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the 

minister for sending the statements over to me in advance; I do 

appreciate that. Thank you very much. 

 

Families of children, individuals with autism spectrum disorder, 

face many challenges. Funding attached to assist and provide a 

wholesome life, a life which reduces barriers, is welcomed. 

Absolutely. I‟m glad to see the government as well appears to 

be taking it seriously. It is important when the provincial 

government invests in these types of supports and as well taking 

advantage of the delivery mechanisms that exist within our 

communities. 

 

I‟m also glad to see that the government is providing funding 

for learning development conferences where people on the front 

line can receive training. That is of particular importance in the 

fields of education and health care, and this issue addresses 

both. 

 

As I said autism is an important issue, one which the previous 

government also took seriously as evidenced in our last budget, 

which had particular emphasis on this issue. I‟m glad to see that 

the new government is building on the successes of the previous 

government. I encourage them to make progress on this issue, 

and I‟m encouraged by their words today. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 2002 

sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, 

The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 

2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 11, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 12, 

The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 12, The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m instructed 

by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and to present its second report. 

Therefore I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on the Economy: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



300 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

third report. I move: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of 

House Services: 

 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Benefiting from the Province’s Economic Growth 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to be taking part in the 75-minute debate and to have 

been asked by my colleagues . . . Or I guess I nominated 

myself. I volunteered myself. But I thank them for allowing me 

to do this. And I‟m looking forward to other members of the 

Assembly taking part in this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that I‟m putting forward is one that 

reads: 

 

That this Assembly commends the government for 

ensuring that Saskatchewan families continue to benefit 

from the province‟s economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to start out by saying that, how 

honoured and how proud I am to be a member of this 

government and to be supportive of the initiatives that we‟ve 

seen out of this government in only a short three or four 

months, little more than a hundred days. The initiatives that 

we‟re seeing put forward by this government, it‟s initiatives that 

I can go back to my constituency and be very eager to sell those 

plans that this government is putting forward. 

 

And I first want to talk, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks I want to 

talk a bit about what is happening in the Weyburn-Big Muddy 

constituency. A lot of my remarks will be about the province as 

a whole, but a lot I will speak about my constituency. And, Mr. 

Speaker, Weyburn-Big Muddy — I think more than anyplace, 

or it could be argued that more than anywhere, the Southeast 

and Weyburn-Big Muddy as a large part of that — is really 

seeing much of the boom in this province right now. A lot of it 

has been seen in our constituency. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And it really, Mr. Speaker, no matter where you go in the 

Weyburn area and Weyburn-Big Muddy, you speak to people 

that have been in Weyburn their entire lives, they‟ve never seen 

things the way they are right now, Mr. Speaker. I live in the city 

of Weyburn, and when you drive through Weyburn right now, 

there‟s three brand new condominiums that are being built. 

There‟s a new Ramada Hotel that looks like it‟s going to be a 

very nice hotel for the city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the city is seeing record numbers of lots being 

sold, tripling what they did a year ago, and a year ago, 2007, 

was pretty good for the city. And yet in the early parts of 2008, 

they‟re tripling what they‟re doing for lot sales. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and it‟s not just the city of Weyburn. It‟s places 

like Ogema, Radville, which is in the Estevan constituency, but 

I have some connection with people in Radville. Things are 

happening in those communities and all down the line. I know 

Yellow Grass, I don‟t think you could find a vacant house in 

Yellow Grass right now, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone asked about McTaggart. In fact I believe . . . 

which is a very small community. They‟re looking at actually 

bringing more lots on for the first time in probably, you know, 

generations that they need more lots to service all the people 

that are coming back to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And going back to the motion and how this all relates, and 

people would probably ask well, you know, how is the 

government ensuring that families are benefiting from this 

boom? And there‟s several issues that I want to talk about, and I 

think first and foremost the main one that I want to discuss right 

now is to answer that question of how families are benefiting, 

Mr. Speaker. They‟re benefiting from the promises that we are 

keeping as a new government, Mr. Speaker. We made 

commitments in the campaign that would benefit all the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And you know there‟s a number of them. I think it‟s probably 

close to two dozen, and I think, I believe that in the upcoming 

budget we‟ll see many, many more promises being kept by this 

government, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to talk about a few of 

those, how the good financial times of the province has given 

latitude to the government to ensure that everybody benefits 

from that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are fully funding the cancer drug Avastin which was . . . I 

know that members on this side of the House, this was an issue 

that we talked a lot about, and I thank the Minister of Health. I 

have a constituent that I‟ve become very close to that is now 

hopefully going to benefit again from this drug after he ran out 

of money and he couldn‟t afford it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I find it interesting that the Leader of the Opposition, in his 

report card that he put out on our government a couple of weeks 

ago, he gave us an A for funding Avastin. And it‟s too bad that 

he wouldn‟t have done it when he was government, when he 

had the opportunity. And that‟s becoming sort of a theme, Mr. 

Speaker, with things that the opposition are now saying, that the 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

idea of funding these nurses‟ positions, things that they were 

going to do, they were going to get to, Mr. Speaker, but they, 

you know, ran out of time. Or, you know, the new tracking 

system that the Social Services minister announced yesterday, I 

heard a member of the opposition on the radio saying, well it 

was in the budget for this spring, but we just didn‟t get there; 

we weren‟t elected, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you know, close, 

you know, doesn‟t count in this business, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m 

pleased that this government is coming through on this. 

 

I‟m very pleased to see that the government, with the work of 

the Health minister and the Legislative Secretary, we‟re going 

to see sizeable numbers of new nurses in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, something that, you know, will benefit all the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now you hear, Mr. Speaker, well who started it? Who 

started? You know what, Mr. Speaker? They might have started 

it, but they never delivered. They never delivered on it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — They had the chance and they never delivered, 

Mr. Speaker. So it really doesn‟t matter who started it because 

this government did it. We set goals when their Health minister 

couldn‟t set goals because he didn‟t know if he could meet 

them. We set some goals, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going to meet 

those goals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s some of the things that we‟ve done as 

government to ensure that people are benefiting. 

 

But I want to talk about something that happened right off the 

start, Mr. Speaker. It happened almost, you know, immediately 

after, and it was a benefit to my constituency, but I think the 

province as a whole, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s when the Premier, 

he made a very important trip. He went to Calgary. He went to 

where the investment capital is for the oil industry, and he made 

some pretty clear statements about what our government is 

going to do that will be a benefit. And this is going to benefit all 

the people of the Saskatchewan, and we see it with the record 

land sales. We see it with the Crown lease sales, Mr. Speaker, 

what they‟re bringing into the provincial coffers. He talked 

about and he‟s talking about in wherever he can go, about the 

vast potential of our resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From way too long, for way too long, Mr. Speaker, we heard 

from the NDP that well we can‟t compete with Alberta because 

we don‟t have the resources, Mr. Speaker. We can‟t, we can‟t, 

we can‟t compete on taxes. Mr. Speaker, the Premier was very 

clear that we will compete with Alberta. We will compete with 

other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, and that is already seeing 

benefits, Mr. Speaker. There are companies, Mr. Speaker, that 

are headquartered in Calgary, but they‟re investing almost all of 

their money for 2008 in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s 

going to be a benefit. That‟s going to be a benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier‟s also been in Washington. He‟s been 

in New York. He‟s having some very good meetings, I 

understand, and trying to bring investment capital to this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And how is all this news being 

received? Well, Mr. Speaker, I follow the trade magazines 

pretty closely. Powering the Patch has some very good articles 

on what the Premier has been doing and the positive results of 

what‟s happening not only in terms of dollars but what is that 

signalling to the future for the citizens of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from FirstEnergy CEO 

Jim W. Davidson who said that the Premier‟s investment, and 

this is a quote, “. . . investment-friendly approach and its 

government‟s growth agenda will allow Saskatchewan to play 

an increasing role in meeting the energy needs.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so this is all very positive news coming out of this 

government. So we‟re taking a step forward, Mr. Speaker. Our 

government is looking forward into the future, untapping the 

unlimited potential of our resources. 

 

Where‟s the other side? Well of course they‟ve got one foot 

firmly planted in the past, Mr. Speaker. In fact one of the first 

things that this government introduced in the fall was the act to 

repeal The Potash Development Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — And I think this is very important, even 

though admittedly it was never used throughout the 1970s, the 

1990s, by that government. It sent a chill. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

what was the reaction to this government introducing the Bill? 

Well your reaction from the industry was this. The industry 

said, well you know even though admittedly it had never been 

used — that quote, “Investors have long, long memories,” Mr. 

Speaker — it put a chill over investment. 

 

Well what was the reaction from the members opposite? Mr. 

Speaker, the critic for Energy he said, you know he wasn‟t sure 

why the government was putting a priority on repealing this. 

Mr. Speaker, anybody in industry would know why we put a 

priority on it. Members opposite know why it was a priority, but 

of course they didn‟t really realize it. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

critic opposite wasn‟t even sure if the NDP would be in favour 

of repealing this, and he wants to see what was in the Bill. 

 

Well I certainly hope that that party is in favour of repealing 

this legislation because, Mr. Speaker, we‟re seeing on one hand 

a new government that wants to be competitive, that is 

forward-thinking, that wants to build this province going 

forward in the future. And, you know, Mr. Speaker, on the other 

side we‟re seeing . . . In fact my understanding is that there‟s a 

resolution at their convention this weekend about raising 

royalty rates in the province of Saskatchewan, going back to the 

1970s. And it‟s going to be very interesting to see how 

members opposite vote this weekend at that convention, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move on. So that‟s what we‟re doing. 

We want to ensure momentum continues in our economy. But, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re also signalling to the people of this 

province, to their benefit, that we are ready for growth in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has stated 

repeatedly — and members opposite firmly believe this — that 

it‟s not merely growth for the sake of growth but so that we can 

ensure that we can continue to pay for the services that people 

of this province want and deserve and that we can continue to 

attract people back to this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House I can tell you it‟s not 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

about, you know, whether or not we can grow at the national 

average or, you know, if it‟s a good thing if people actually 

leave the province. We‟re a government that wants to see 

people return to this province, which will be a benefit to all the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how are we doing that, and how does that compare, Mr. 

Speaker? Well we have some ideas on that. I think, you know, 

we‟ve made a commitment, Mr. Speaker, to assist with 

municipalities to . . . because right now there‟s a challenge. 

Whether you‟re talking about Weyburn or in any other place in 

this province, there‟s a challenge. Even if we have to talk about 

Estevan, Mr. Speaker, we will. But, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a 

challenge on right now for municipalities to actually be able to 

have the lots available for people to move in to. 

 

I know that the city of Weyburn, I talk to the mayor of 

Weyburn quite frequently, and there‟s a concern that they will 

not be able to keep up with the demand. And certainly we want 

to work with them, and that‟s why our Minister for Municipal 

Affairs and this government is going to working with 

municipalities on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what do we get, Mr. Speaker, from the other side? So let‟s 

compare and contrast, Mr. Speaker. Well again, Mr. Speaker, 

we want to see more people come to this province. We want 

people to be able to build homes and increase their commercial 

assets, Mr. Speaker. Apparently though this weekend there‟s 

resolutions at the NDP convention calling for, quote, “severe” 

restrictions on property owners, Mr. Speaker. There‟s plans for 

government to purchase homes, Mr. Speaker, and quote — this 

is from The Leader Post — quote, “the overall agenda of an 

NDP government‟s housing strategy would be to lead to the end 

of private landlordship,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on one hand, we have a government that wants to 

see, you know, help with municipalities to bring on new home 

ownership, Mr. Speaker. On the other hand, we see policies that 

will take us, you know, Mr. Speaker, straight back several 

decades ago, Mr. Speaker. You know, from a party that brought 

us the Regina Manifesto, depending on how members and party 

members vote this weekend, we may have a housing manifesto 

come Monday, Mr. Speaker. And I don‟t think that‟s a signal 

that we want to send. 

 

We‟re thinking forward into the future. We‟re going to move 

this province forward, Mr. Speaker. The NDP are firmly stuck 

in the past. These are just a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker, of 

what this government is doing to ensure continued economic 

growth in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in stark 

contrast to what we see opposite. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see my time is winding down here, and I 

know members on this side have a lot more to say on this topic. 

I certainly have a lot more too, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve had to cut a 

few things out. But I do want to close with one thing, Mr. 

Speaker, before I get to the motion. 

 

You know, in my mind there‟s two perceptions when you look 

at the two different parties. On one hand, you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m sure the NDP are happy that we have a time of 

growth. But they‟re kind of . . . they seem — and this was the 

same when they were in government — they kind of seem like 

they‟re holding their breath. They‟re not sure if it‟ll last. But, 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk to people on this side of the House, 

when you talk to our constituents, you know that, Mr. Speaker, 

that people on this side of the House, people across the 

province, our constituents know that we‟re just scratching the 

surface of what this province can achieve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I will move the motion: 

 

That this Assembly commends the government for 

ensuring that Saskatchewan families continue to benefit 

from the province‟s economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I will move that motion at this time. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Weyburn has moved: 

 

That this Assembly commends the government for 

ensuring that Saskatchewan families continue to benefit 

from the province‟s economic growth. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s my 

pleasure to enter the 75-minute debate in order to provide a 

more accurate portrayal of how Saskatchewan‟s prosperity is 

being shared with its citizens. Since being elected, the 

Saskatchewan Party government claims that its primary goal is 

to grow the province‟s prosperity and secure its future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[11:15] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Oddly enough, Mr. Speaker, they‟re the only 

ones in the province that seem to be clapping for themselves. 

What they failed to mention is that it is only their friends who 

are sharing in that prosperity. From forestry to child care, from 

housing to labour, from the equalization . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members allow the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres to make her comments in 

the debate. Member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. From forestry to child 

care, from housing to labour, from the equalization file to the 

cost of prescription medications, this Sask Party government, 

after only 100 days in government, is already picking winners 

and losers and choosing which families will benefit from the 

province‟s economic growth. Why would a government 

claiming to secure the future so coldly turn its back on the 700 

people out of work in Prince Albert? How are they now sharing 

in the prosperity of this government has promised? 

 

During the election, an ad was run by the member for Prince 

Albert Carlton saying, and I quote . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There will be ample opportunity for 

other members to enter the debate. Please allow the member 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

from Regina Walsh Acres to proceed. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. During the 

election, an ad was run by the member for Prince Albert Carlton 

saying, and I quote, “a vote for Darryl is a vote for the mill 

open and people working.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how did that turn out? After voting for him, 

these 700 people are still not working and are not benefiting 

from the economic growth of our province. The decision by this 

government to irresponsibly cancel the memorandum of 

understanding with Domtar without first carefully examining 

the agreement was a decision based solely on the mantra of a 

zero government investment and an unwillingness to use the 

tools of government to assist working people in this province. 

 

As Ron Rucks, president of Local 1120 of the Communications, 

Energy and Paperworkers Union confirmed, quote, “It was a 

political decision, it was a decision made with no foresight, 

nothing other than disproving the former government.” 

 

Is it too much to ask that the government assume responsibility 

of securing prosperity for its citizens, Mr. Speaker? The 

workers of the Prince Albert mill and their families are not the 

only ones who are being left behind by the Sask Party 

government. Indeed the Sask Party has never hidden its agenda 

to attack the working men and women of the province. The 

actions of this government surrounding the P.A. mill is part of 

an obvious pattern to reward the business lobby at the expense 

of working people. 

 

The proposed amendments to labour legislation represented by 

Bills 5 and 6 embodies systemic attack on workers‟ 

constitutional and human rights. Under the guise of introducing 

more democracy and balance in the labour climate of the 

province, Bills 5 and 6 unmistakably represent an effort to 

destabilize the organized union environment, not to mention 

disadvantage those who seek respectful and fair treatment and 

organized representation. 

 

And the members are, you know, crowing from the other side. 

And now I think they should listen very carefully because there 

are experts who agree with us on this, Mr. Speaker. This point 

is further elaborated by Dr. S. Muthu, professor emeritus, 

Faculty of Business Administration, University of Regina. 

Quote: 

 

Both mandatory voting and increasing the ability of 

employers to communicate with workers during 

organizing drives is based upon the assumption of an 

imbalance of power between unions and employers. The 

Trade Union Act is assumed to have given too much 

power to unions and hence it should be rebalanced by 

strengthening the hands of employers. 

 

However he goes on to say that, quote: 

 

. . . the stated purpose for the amendments, namely, power 

balancing and democratizing the workplace, seems to be 

dubious and unsubstantiated. The unstated implications of 

Bill 6 is unmistakably de-unionization of Saskatchewan. 

The premise that “some other jurisdictions in Canada have 

such laws, [so] why not in this province” may be 

seemingly logical but lacks necessary and sufficient 

justification. 

 

Consequently the actions of this Sask Party government 

towards working people in this province is creating a toxic 

labour environment. Planet S magazine, dated January 7, 2008, 

makes the political analogy of the Sask Party‟s actions being 

tantamount to that of a high school bully, stating that proposed 

Bills 5 and 6 are, quote: 

 

. . . badly written . . . [pieces] of legislation that . . . 

[appear] to have been drafted with all the sensitivity and 

foresight of a high school bully sending a threatening note 

to classmates. 

 

This analogy. while invoking humour, obviously, accurately 

captures the legitimate concerns and asymmetrical power 

relationships surrounding these Bills. 

 

These concerns are further substantiated by Dan Cameron, 

lecturer at the Hill school of business and chief spokesperson 

for the employer in public service negotiations in that, quote: 

 

It is unfortunate that the act has been introduced in 

acrimony, described in some circles as a settling of old 

scores and of favouring one collective bargaining party 

over another. The creation of a toxic relationship between 

government and labour is not a proper foundation for 

protecting the people of Saskatchewan from threats to 

their health, safety and security. 

 

Premier Wall and the Sask Party‟s drug plan is another in the 

long line of issues where they have decided to pick winners and 

losers in this province. Saskatchewan family members between 

the ages of 15 and 64 who require expensive medications 

certainly aren‟t benefiting from our province‟s economic 

growth. How can the Sask Party simply leave these people 

behind while they pick and choose who gets the benefits and 

who doesn‟t? 

 

The Sask Party government has disrespected seniors by forcing 

them to apply and qualify in order to receive the necessary 

prescriptions. One senior described the plan, in the Leader-Post, 

as, and quote, “repugnant to a senior.” 

 

Statistics Canada reports that approximately 21 per cent of the 

Saskatchewan population is self-employed. This means that 21 

per cent of farm owners and small-business operators are left to 

purchase their own drug coverage or pay for the expensive 

medications out of their own pockets. They don‟t seem to like 

to hear that because, heaven forbid, their supporters might 

actually realize that. It certainly doesn‟t seem like their growing 

economy is benefiting from the Saskatchewan families who are 

self-employed when it comes to paying for affordable 

medications. 

 

The Sask Party drug plan includes the majority of families in 

this province . . . excludes the majority of families in this 

province. Let me try that again, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

drug plan excludes the majority of families in this province. 

Why does the Sask Party continue to pick winners and losers in 

our economy when it comes to the issues that are so important 

to Saskatchewan families? 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

The Sask Party is on the wrong side of the equalization issue as 

well. They supported the NDP‟s position of a strong stance and 

standing up to the federal government when the Liberals were 

in power. Premier Brad Wall, in his press release congratulating 

the federal Conservative government on January 24, 2006, 

stated, quote: 

 

The importance of a fair equalization deal for 

Saskatchewan transcends provincial and federal politics 

and it needs to get done quickly. And I am committed to 

doing what ever it takes to make sure that happens. 

 

Apparently even Premier Wall was duped into believing that the 

Harper Conservatives would keep their equalization promise, 

providing Saskatchewan with an extra $800 million per year, as 

per the Harper Conservatives‟ calculation during election. Since 

their Conservative friends have taken power, the Sask Party is 

unwilling to stand up for Saskatchewan families and is more 

interested in defending Conservative ideology and concurrently 

doing the bidding for Stephen Harper, as we‟ve witnessed 

today. Not only have they given up the fight to make the new 

formula retroactive, they have given up the fight altogether to 

give themselves time to be better apologists and cater to their 

federal cousins. 

 

Premier Wall and the Sask Party are not ensuring that all 

Saskatchewan families are benefiting from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members need to realize while you‟re 

using a name in a quote, that is acceptable. However you cannot 

continue the use of a personal name following the quote. You 

need to refer to the members by their seat or their responsibility. 

 

I recognize the member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The Premier and the Sask Party are not ensuring 

that all Saskatchewan families are benefiting from economic 

growth. They are not interested in equalization. For once the 

Sask Party isn‟t picking winners and losers. In this case there 

are no winners — every Saskatchewan family loses out. 

 

Why, in a time of record prosperity in our province, does the 

Sask Party see fit to start a war with working people? Why do 

they seek to poison a relationship that we should be 

strengthening in order to address our mutual prosperity? 

Moreover how will the Premier‟s war with labour help to attract 

the workers that we should be encouraging to join in 

Saskatchewan‟s momentum? 

 

Unfortunately all that working people have witnessed thus far 

from this government is a blatant unwillingness to use the 

capacity of government to assist its citizens. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased to 

take part in today‟s 75-minute debate, and I‟m very pleased 

with the motion that the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy 

made. This motion really speaks to why we on this side of the 

House went into politics, to ensure that Saskatchewan families 

continue the benefits from the province‟s economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we‟ve seen in the past, the NDP over the last 16 

years they played with the system. They played one part of 

society off against another. They played labour against 

employers. They had the Crown corporations doing all sorts of 

odd things that didn‟t benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are certainly going to . . . As you see, 

we‟re going to make changes for the benefit of everyone in 

Saskatchewan, not just for the good of urban over rural or 

pitting other groups against each other. Mr. Speaker, we 

certainly will, as you see, make the changes to ensure that 

families benefit. 

 

One only needs to look at our campaign promise, Securing the 

Future. Mr. Speaker, time and time again people have asked, 

what are we going to do as government? Well, Mr. Speaker, 

what are we going to do as government is fulfill the promises in 

our campaign platform, Securing the Future, Mr. Speaker. 

Promises — there‟s a number of promises made and promises 

kept. We have outlined them again and again. But just starting 

off with a smaller cabinet, Mr. Speaker; we have two less 

cabinet ministers than the previous government had. 

 

One of the first things we did, eliminate the PST [provincial 

sales tax] on used cars. Mr. Speaker, this is a tax that was just 

unbelievable. People in Saskatchewan would rail against this 

tax year after year after year, and the former NDP government 

would never listen to the people. We‟re going to tax these 

vehicles once. That‟s all they need to be taxed and will not be 

taxed again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have talked about the 

Domtar, the pulp and paper in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, this 

government during the campaign or just previous to the 

campaign, election, just really were prepared to throw away 

$100 million on a scheme, really, just to get re-elected. And we 

know, Mr. Speaker, that that MOU was not something in the 

best interest of families in this province or the province as a 

whole. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the government, I am 

sure, will have a deal with Domtar that will benefit all of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

More and more promises made — getting tough on repeat 

drunk drivers, Mr. Speaker; more accountable government. 

 

One of the first things we did was introduce the Saskatchewan 

growth and financial security Act, Mr. Speaker. And the 

creation of Enterprise Saskatchewan is really a unique creation 

that will drive the economy of this province in the future. This, 

Mr. Speaker, is where . . . that the government of the day will 

not be picking winners and losers. The representatives right 

across the economy will be there at the table, making those 

types of decisions for the benefit of everyone in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just a few words about my own constituency. In the past 16 

years, all I‟ve seen in Biggar constituency is young men and 

women going to university or post-secondary education and 

then going outside the province to get a job. They couldn‟t get a 

job in Saskatchewan, let alone in the constituency of Biggar. 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

That was very hard on families, to see that the young people 

would leave the province and in many cases went to Alberta, 

but right across the country or around the world, to get jobs. 

And with them, you know, they went there, they paid their taxes 

in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, in many cases started 

families and set down roots in other provinces. That was a real 

terrible tragedy to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As we see now with the growing economy in Saskatchewan, 

many of those young people are coming back, and many of 

those young people that have been away for 20, 25 years are 

now coming back. And the province is going to reap the benefit 

of those people coming back to Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it only speaks to the policies of the former NDP 

government that they were on the wrong track. They drove 

people out of this province and did nothing for families because 

families were broke up, Mr. Speaker, when the young people 

left. In many cases their parents, when they retired, they went 

elsewhere to be closer to the families. And that was and is a 

tragedy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see now that the Saskatchewan economy is on 

a roll — 7,300 more people working in February compared to 

February 2007. That‟s an all-time record for the month of 

February. Unemployment rate, 4.1 per cent, second lowest in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province is really taking advantage of the 

resource boom that is taking place, and we in the Saskatchewan 

Party are going to secure that future for generations of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

What we are doing, Mr. Speaker? Well the first thing we do is 

our Premier is travelling to not only to Alberta, to the oil 

resource centres there, but he‟s also travelling to Washington, 

DC [District of Columbia]. He‟s in New York now with the 

member from Kindersley. He‟s selling Saskatchewan and the 

potential of Saskatchewan in the world global economy. 

 

That‟s something that the NDP, Mr. Speaker, never did. They 

seemed to be ashamed of Saskatchewan. They were hiding the 

benefits of Saskatchewan. You only have to look at the uranium 

industry where that party was ashamed of the resource that we 

had in this province. They never could get their act together on 

what to do with the uranium industry. They pretended that well, 

we‟ll sell the natural resource, but we won‟t refine it. We won‟t 

do anything else with it. We won‟t create jobs in the province 

that were so necessary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan are waiting for the budget 

to come out on March 19. And that will set the course of this 

province to a more secure future for the benefit of all people in 

Saskatchewan. That, you will see, the members will see that 

families in Saskatchewan will benefit from that budget. How? 

Well the outline of what that budget‟s already pretty well clear. 

Infrastructure is such a major priority. 

 

What we are going to do on this side of the House is set out the 

strategy to make sure that our development doesn‟t get ahead of 

the infrastructure that is needed to sustain that development. It‟s 

going to be very clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟ve heard comments from members from the other side, you 

know, oh big bad government, big bad private enterprise. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to have private enterprise, private 

businesses — multinational, Canadian owned, Saskatchewan 

owned — working with our Crown corporations to grow this 

province in a sustainable way, Mr. Speaker. Why, Mr. Speaker? 

Well, we are going to tax those businesses. They‟re going to 

make money. We are going to tax them. Why, Mr. Speaker? To 

benefit the families of the Saskatchewan. 

 

We‟re going to put money into health care. Our minister‟s 

already announced nurses coming from the Philippines to this 

province. That‟s what‟s important to this province — the 

families, adequate health care, Mr. Speaker. They want 

adequate, timely health care. 

 

We on this side of the House will do that, Mr. Speaker. We are 

going to improve health care and reduce the waiting lists in all 

areas of the health care system, not only doctors and nurses but 

other areas as well, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the type of thing that 

we on this side of the House are going to do, with our growing 

economy and our resource wealth, to benefit everyone in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we see, it‟s incredible to see that the NDP actually have a 

resolution coming up in their convention that speaks to 

stopping, really, private ownership of houses. It harks back to 

the days in the Regina Manifesto about land, farmers and land. 

It‟s actually within the NDP manifesto that farmers shouldn‟t 

own their own land. It‟s unbelievable they still have that type of 

thing on their books. Why are they afraid? Why are they afraid 

of getting rid of such an archaic thinking from their party 

constitution is unreal. 

 

Talk about land bank. Well, Mr. Speaker, that was certainly a 

total disaster, Mr. Speaker. And the NDP still haven‟t learned 

from their past. Well the NDP have been in power for 16 years. 

They have certainly have a lot to learn. They still obviously 

haven‟t learned anything from the people of Saskatchewan and 

on November 7, when they were soundly defeated at the polls, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‟s time that they look at the Saskatchewan Party. We are 

on the right track. And we‟re going to do the right things for the 

people of Saskatchewan and the families of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in response to 

the Sask Party government‟s self-directed motion. It causes 

great concern for me that our new Sask Party government needs 

to stroke its own ego in an attempt to manipulate public 

opinion. This self-congratulatory, self-righteous motion 

dismisses real concern, real needs of Saskatchewan families. I 

stand here today to offer that so very many residents of Regina 

Rosemont and across this fine province see through this 

self-congratulatory, unsubstantiated motion. The motion is 

simply not true. 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

This motion makes it clear, crystal clear the Sask Party 

government would rather waste the time of this Assembly to 

engage in mockery and political games. Mr. Speaker, as the 

members opposite laugh it up, families in this province are 

facing real issues such as young mothers stuck at home who are 

trying to enter education but cannot find an open child care 

placement. As the members opposite laugh it up, families in the 

province are facing rents increasing beyond what families can 

afford. As the members opposite laugh it up, families in this 

province are facing school closures. As the members opposite 

laugh it up, families in this province are facing Sask 

Party-imposed loss of collective bargaining rights. 

 

The motion put forward by the Sask Party government could 

not be more inaccurate. The government is not ensuring that all 

Saskatchewan families are benefiting from this incredibly 

robust economy set forth by the New Democrats. The change to 

a Sask Party government, a conservative government, at this 

time of growth is disconcerting for Saskatchewan families. 

Their very ideology and application will cause much hardship 

on these families. The change to a Sask Party government has 

caused some grief, some concern for residents of our province. 

The New Democrat government managed this province from 

destitution and receivership, caused by the last group of Tories, 

into a sustainable economic leader. 

 

The fruits of New Democrats‟ economic policies and our 

position as a diverse, resource-driven economy are continuing 

to emerge. Economic growth has been bullish for some time, 

and it will continue to be. I can assure you something — the 

Sask Party are riding New Democrat coattails. They‟re even 

trying to claim recent economic and nursing recruitment 

achievements as their own. The Sask Party dismisses the 

intelligence of our voters by doing so. 

 

The distinct difference is what families can expect from their 

new government. It has not taken the Sask Party very long to 

begin introducing its regressive policies for families. Resulting 

negative impacts and sharp edges are beginning to be realized, 

and they will only compound as we move forward and the Sask 

Party moves their conservative agenda. The Sask Party policies 

will ensure that only a select few benefit. This is not fair to 

Saskatchewan families and is damaging to our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll highlight a recent example of these sharp 

edges within a recent article titled, “Big jump in new faces at 

Saskatoon Food Bank,” by Benson McCulloch, February 22. 

Everyone has faced, and I quote the article: 

 

Everyone is forced to make sacrifices in life. However, 

many in Saskatoon are being forced to choose between 

rent and groceries. 

 

Saskatoon Food Bank C-E-O Paul Merriman says 

skyrocketing rents translates into a 30 percent increase in 

first time users to the food bank. 

 

He says Saskatoon is beginning to experience what 

Calgary did a few years back. 

 

Merriman says rents have almost doubled for many in 

Saskatoon . . . [wages dragging behind.] 

 

Affordable and available housing was not even included in the 

Sask Party platform. It wasn‟t included in the government‟s 

first Throne Speech, and it‟s not included in the mandate to the 

Minister of Social Services by the Premier. This is a shame. It is 

hard evidence of the challenges for families that the Sask Party 

government has no plan to respond to. Stressed and hurting 

families deserve far more than silence and inaction. 

 

The Sask Party government has also failed Saskatchewan 

seniors and taxpayers with their drug plan. Many seniors are 

losing prescription drug coverage that had been extended by the 

New Democrats. The Sask Party has taken away the support 

from seniors who, may I note, have paid taxes their entire life 

and have developed our province. They deserve to reap equal 

benefit. 

 

In removing these prescriptions from our province‟s seniors, the 

Sask Party government displays its ideological bent and is 

unnecessarily creating a massive, expensive bureaucracy to 

administer tests of wealth, creating paperwork and hoop 

jumping for our seniors. The Sask Party has disrespected 

seniors by forcing them to prove poverty in order to receive 

prescriptions that will ensure their health and well-being. This 

is not the kind of Saskatchewan that I stand for . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Member from Wood River, it‟s not the kind of 

Saskatchewan I stand for. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party claims to be working for families. 

They will not ensure affordable access to education. Families 

and students are distressed across our province with this Sask 

Party failure. It is essential that post-secondary education is 

accessible and affordable. It ensures that we can meet the 

demands of our knowledge-based economy and provide a rich 

education to all who desire, offering a whole society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is not committed to holding the 

cost of tuition and upfront costs. At this time of such provincial 

wealth and bounty, it would rather create barriers, again hung 

up on ideology to the detriment of the real issues facing our 

families. The Sask Party plan will only allow the wealthy to 

access education with a kickback rebate at the end. Students and 

student leaders are outspoken with their disappointment. 

University of Regina Student Union president Mike Burton is 

quoted in a February 29 Leader-Post as noting students‟ 

concern, and I quote: 

 

We are supposedly a boom[ing] province right now. If we 

can‟t afford to say to our students [right] now, „Here is a 

break . . . [he continues] I don‟t know when we‟ll be able 

to do that. 

 

The Sask Party . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member 

from Wood River has a question. He can maybe frame that 

afterwards. And the answer would be, doesn‟t have one. The 

Sask Party government has an absolute pile of money in the 

bank and an incredibly robust economy handed to them by the 

New Democrats. Yet they will not take action to address 

education. The Sask Party approach to real issues facing 

families within our society are not well thought out. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It‟s getting difficult to hear the 

member who is in debate at this time, and I ask members to 

allow the member from Regina Rosemont to proceed. Thank 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

you. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know 

families think it‟s important that this is heard. 

 

The Sask Party speaks of a labour shortage crisis. Yet they gut 

labour legislation, reducing the future comfort and security of 

workplaces and jobs. When we need strong, skilled labourers 

the most, the Sask Party government is introducing legislation 

that has been assessed by the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour the worst in Canada. The Sask Party speaks of a labour 

shortage crisis, yet they are creating barriers to education and to 

enter the economy. The Sask Party speaks of a labour shortage 

crisis but has committed no provincial investment into child 

care, limiting parents from entering work or education alike. 

 

This simple-minded approach to real issues is a shame. The lack 

of support does not address the real labour needs of employers 

and business and does not allow us all to go forward in this 

economy. Specifically with regard to the new Sask Party labour 

legislation, it is not balanced as equalizing, as members 

opposite might propose. It threatens to disrupt a relatively stable 

labour environment, and it‟s not good for Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Saskatchewan families deserve fair treatment from Ottawa. 

They deserve a government and a Premier who will advocate 

and fight for this issue — fight if needed, be cordial if needed. 

Saskatchewan families deserve more than political leaders 

willing to flip-flop on promises that directly affect their 

well-being. 

 

In 2005 our current Premier was adamant of the need for a 

strong voice in Ottawa with regard to equalization. In a letter to 

the current premier on February 4, 2005, our current Premier 

states, and I quote: 

 

We are able to achieve success because of their relentless 

and direct involvement in negotiations. No less than your 

complete commitment will assure our success on this file. 

 

Well upon election, our Sask Party Premier and the Sask Party 

has offered no evidence of this commitment of pressing the 

federal government. We hear nothing but silence on that side of 

the House on the issue of equalization fairness. The Sask 

Party‟s lapdog relations with the federal government are not 

serving families‟ needs. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party government is not ensuring that all 

families are benefiting from the strong economic growth set 

forth by New Democrats. This government is creating a divide 

in Saskatchewan that will offer only a select few to go forward. 

 

I understand my time is ending. I will not be supporting the 

motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m certainly 

pleased to be able to enter into this debate on this motion, a 

motion which my colleague, the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, moved, stating: 

 

That this Assembly commends this Sask Party government 

for ensuring that the people and the families of this 

province benefit from the province‟s prosperity. 

 

And this certainly . . . I listened to the members speak on the 

other side, and with their phony I think . . . [inaudible] . . . to the 

motion. Because it seems to me that they too realize that it‟s a 

good thing that families and working families and students and 

business people and people all across the spectrum in this 

province are benefiting from this economic growth and 

prosperity that we are seeing in this province at this time. They 

know that it‟s good for all people of this province. All they need 

to do is look at some of the headlines in the newspapers, and 

they soon realize. But they are opposition, and they feel that 

they must oppose, even though we have good things happening 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in last fall‟s election, after November 7, it seemed 

like there was a cloud was lifted from this province, Mr. 

Speaker. There was a number of things that were simmering 

below the surface, and all we needed was a change in attitude, a 

change in direction in this province. And the people, the voters 

of this province certainly realized that we needed that. And they 

came to the polls, and they demonstrated their wishes very 

strongly on November 7 with over 50 per cent of the popular 

vote going to the Saskatchewan Party. And they realized that 

we needed to have a new leadership in this province. And they 

went ahead. The voters of this province went ahead on 

November 7 and did that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And since that time, this cloud that has been over this province 

for far too long has lifted and what we are seeing is, we‟re 

seeing new enthusiasm, new optimism, and a lot of new things 

happening that are benefiting all the people of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are seeing record job numbers. We‟re seeing record wage 

rates, salary for all working people in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We are seeing increases in health care, Mr. Speaker — 

all those sorts of things that the average person benefits from, 

Mr. Speaker. And that is a good thing, and it‟s something that I 

think these people opposite are having a hard time accepting 

because they, for far too long, just couldn‟t handle success as 

my colleague says, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s a new thing. 

 

And rather than being so pessimistic and trying to see the dark 

side of everything and the negative side of everything, I would 

invite them to get on the bandwagon and become part of 

promoting Saskatchewan and telling the rest of the country the 

great things that are happening here in this province. Unlike 

what they did in the past when they were in government and 

launched the various publicity campaigns so as they had said to 

tell the message of Saskatchewan, but they were directing their 

message inward to the people of the province instead of 

outwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we look at some of the things that has happened since last the 

fall‟s election, we readily see the evidence of this new renewed 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

enthusiasm and optimism. Shortly after last fall‟s election, we 

had a potash company in eastern Saskatchewan announce a $1.8 

billion expansion. You know, would have that announcement 

taken place if the results of November 7 election had of been 

different? I don‟t know, but I‟m guessing that they would‟ve 

had some real, serious reservations, Mr. Speaker, about these 

additional investments. 

 

Another major announcement that happened here a few months 

ago was a $1.9 billion expansion at the Regina refinery and 

upgrader which will result in 1,200 construction jobs, 90 

full-time career quality jobs, Mr. Speaker, that I‟m guessing 

will be those individuals who will be filling those positions, will 

be well paid for the services — as they should be, Mr. Speaker. 

They‟re not McJobs that these people used to boast about and 

those kind of jobs. They will be career quality jobs. And that is 

what our graduates of our universities and SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

and other post-secondary training institutions and young people 

that were apprenticing, they said, we want career quality jobs to 

stay here in Saskatchewan. And that is what is happening now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s no wonder that more of our graduates will be staying 

here in Saskatchewan because the economy is generating those 

career positions, Mr. Speaker, which will allow our young 

people to plan a future here and raise their families and 

contribute to our tax base so that we have a growing tax base, 

so that we will have the resources to address the shortcomings 

that was left by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday I was at a career fair in Fort Qu‟Appelle that was 

sponsored and organized by the Prairie Valley School Division. 

Some 7 or 800 grade 11 students there. And, Mr. Speaker, 

walking through the hallways and listening to the students talk 

and visiting with some of them, it was absolutely refreshing and 

uplifting, Mr. Speaker, to be around those young people, to see 

their enthusiasm, to hear their optimism. 

 

And as I told those young people when I was visiting with 

them, I said they have unprecedented opportunities for their 

generation here in Saskatchewan and in other places, but it‟s 

their choice. They will have the choice to stay here and benefit 

from the prosperity that is happening in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. But if they choose to, as many young people do, they 

choose to travel and live and work in other places in our 

country and around the world, that‟ll be their choice. They 

won‟t be forced to leave, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it‟s a new era in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I invite the 

members opposite to take their heads out of the sand, leave that 

doom and gloom behind them, and get on board with the train 

and all the good things that are happening in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And if they‟re not, if they are unaware of what‟s 

happening, all they need to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all they 

need to do is pick up today‟s paper and look at some of the 

headlines. 

 

I have in my hand some news clippings of the positive 

headlines that are in today‟s papers. One is “Filipino nurses a 

big win for Sask.” And then yet we hear members opposite 

saying, well we don‟t know if this is such a great thing. Well we 

have a nursing shortage in this province. It only took this Sask 

Party government a few short months to roll up their sleeves 

and get to work, through the Minister of Health‟s leadership, 

recruit 300 new nurses that will be coming to Saskatchewan to 

alleviate the wait times. Is this not a great example of the people 

of this province benefiting from the prosperity and the 

leadership that‟s in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker? 

 

A second headline is, “Gov‟t to modernize tracking of children 

in Social Services‟ care.” Those people were in power for 16 

years, Mr. Speaker, and they talk about that they are defenders 

of human rights and of the less fortunate in our society. Yet 

they didn‟t even have the ambition or the ability or the desire to 

put a tracking system in place so that we can track those 

children that are in care. They had no idea of what children 

were in care, how many were in care, where they were, who 

was looking after them. It‟s not magic, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

desire to get the job done. 

 

Here we have another announcement in today‟s paper. Agrium 

hopes to expand Vanscoy facility by as much as 800 tonnes a 

day, another major expansion which will result in hundreds of 

construction jobs and a number of career jobs, career quality 

jobs for our young people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the good news continues. Again in today‟s paper, 

“Saskatoon poised to become mining capital of Canada.” I 

mean, the good new is ongoing, and it‟s endless, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All you have to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is open up the 

newspaper, open up your eyes and realize what‟s happening in 

this great province of ours, Mr. Speaker. And with the 

leadership of our Premier and our new Sask Party government, 

this growth will be sustained, Mr. Speaker. And next week‟s 

budget, the citizens of this province will realize how they will 

continue to benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The premise 

of this motion is the basic premise of any government in 

Canada, but especially a government in Saskatchewan, that is 

that the people of Saskatchewan should benefit from the good 

work of the government no matter what the stripe is. 

 

I think what‟s so difficult about the tone of what I‟ve heard this 

morning, about the tone that we‟ve heard over that last 100 days 

is that there appears to be a lack of recognition of the hard work 

of all of the people of Saskatchewan whether it was the former 

opposition or the former government. 

 

And I think the failing of a number of the people who have been 

given the great honour of being ministers in this new 

government is that they have retained that chippiness that they 

had as members of the opposition as they‟ve moved into 

responsible roles in the government. And I say to you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan don‟t like this 

either. What needs to happen in any government, in any society 

is that there is a recognition that we always build on the work of 

those that have come before us. 

 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

Now I know it‟s quite a challenge to be a government when 

you‟ve followed a government that has solved a lot of 

problems, moved through and come forward with an economy 

and a society that has resources to deal with issues that have 

been longstanding. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to continue to 

remind those members that they have a new role now. It‟s not 

their role to be continually being chippy around other people or 

sort of making comments that are of no assistance to the public. 

 

So let‟s go back to what it is that government is all about. 

Government is about serving the people. That‟s what this 

motion talks about and that‟s important. So let‟s do that but do 

it with a sense of statesmanship, with a recognition of who has 

done what and when. 

 

Now it‟s especially interesting as it relates to a number of the 

initiatives that were part of last year‟s budget which have now 

been rolled out over the last 100 days. And I think it would be 

quite simple for a minister to say, well this is work that‟s been 

done over many years, and we are now pleased to be able to 

announce this as the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

But every time that happens, there appears to be some kind of 

innate or inherent quality that comes out from being sort of an 

opposition-type person that everybody says, well why did they 

say that? Just go forward and say, look we now have the 

responsibility of leading this government to provide this work. 

 

After five years of work, we‟ve now been able to move forward 

with a computer plan that deals with children. Okay that‟s 

something that‟s very clearly been worked on for a long time, 

and it‟s something where when you have the resources, you go 

ahead and do it. Same thing with the midwifery plan, I think it‟s 

clear that that work took a long time, with many, many different 

groups of people working together. I had number of years of 

making sure that that moved forward. I know my predecessors 

did. I know my successors did. I know the present Minister of 

Health will work to make sure that that works. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that a number of the items that have been 

crowed about, and one that kind of surprised me was this whole 

issue of well we got $240 million from the federal government. 

Well guess what? As the former minister of SaskPower, I 

remember quite distinctly talking with members of the federal 

government at the ministerial level, at a local MP‟s [Member of 

Parliament] level, and all of these things were as part of the 

overall discussion. 

 

Now we‟re waiting anxiously to see what happens with the 

Public Works program. And we‟re very hopeful for the people 

of Saskatchewan that this is done in a positive way. But I warn 

the minister responsible or the Premier, whoever else is 

working on this, that, unless they get past this chippiness that 

they have as former members of the opposition, the people of 

Saskatchewan are not going to respect them as a government. 

 

And I know that oftentimes people will not listen to advice from 

former ministers from another government. I think that‟s a 

failing of what happens in our system. I also know that many of 

the members on that side of the House are careful and look at 

and have worked together to develop their new positions based 

on the work that‟s been done before. I commend them for doing 

that. But I also warn the overall teams, especially the new 

members, that you‟re here for the long term. And the long term 

means that you need to be people who are leaders for all of the 

people in the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of times when 

the rhetoric from some of the ministers ends up causing them 

great deal of difficulty. And I know that they are learning this 

new role. But it‟s important that they recognize who they‟re 

serving and why they‟re serving. And in this particular time, it‟s 

quite simple to think — if you‟re not really looking at what 

you‟re doing — that a switch was turned on or off in 

November. That‟s not true at all, and I think everybody 

recognizes that. We will all be better served as members of this 

legislature, as members of the government caucus, as ministers, 

if we build on the work that we‟ve done together. 

 

Our job in opposition is to be here and to ask questions about 

things that you may or may not know about because you 

haven‟t been in government before, but also to identify the 

things that we hear from our constituents that just don‟t ring 

true. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do that as a loyal 

opposition. 

 

But I think the important point that the members opposite — 

especially the ministers — should recognize is that the kind of 

thing that they‟re going forward with is based on much hard 

work by many of the members on this side of the House, but 

more importantly, on the hard work of people who work in the 

civil service or who have brought ideas forward as members of 

the public. 

 

We can all do things for the benefit of all the families of 

Saskatchewan if we do it together. And I ask you to respect the 

role and acknowledge the role that we served as 16 years in 

government. But go forward with your vision. We will 

challenge that vision. And we think the people will choose 

soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Debate has elapsed. Now there‟s time 

for question and comment. I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before 

I get to my question, I do just want to mention, the member for 

Lakeview mentioned that, you know, this government needs to 

be statesmen. And I want to quote from The Financial Post. 

They say that the Premier of Saskatchewan has taken over the 

energy statesman job. So we‟re well on our way to fulfilling 

that mandate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — My question is to my friend, the member from 

Regina Rosemont. And just a little bit of a preamble here. In the 

past in this province, at one point in the 1940s this was actually 

the place where energy was, the energy industry was. However 

that party‟s predecessors, the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation], passed a series of resolutions at 

their party‟s conventions through 1946 through to 1948 calling 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

for the nationalization of the oil industry. And we know what 

happened. They went to Alberta. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question to the member is: if a policy 

comes up for discussion, a resolution comes up at their 

convention this weekend that calls for increasing royalties on 

the oil industry or any other resource industry, how will that 

member vote? Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a response to 

get a question from that member on a topic for which we have 

such strength. If we look at our economy right now, this is the 

strongest economy this province has ever had. It‟s on the tails 

of 16 years of New Democratic, NDP government. A 

government through time and through history changes to evolve 

to meet the needs of society. We are bullish on our position here 

in Saskatchewan right now. The difference is we truly, truly, 

truly believe that the booming economy needs to be placed back 

into the hands, the benefits need to be placed back in the hands 

of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — . . . Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is simple: why will the 

members opposite refuse to acknowledge the work that the 

previous government did in building the foundation of our 

economy that allows us to move forward today? Why did they 

refuse to admit that it was the members of the NDP government 

at the time that initiated the hiring of nurses in the Philippines, 

and in fact that the first nurses were actually hired prior to the 

election? Mr. Deputy Speaker, why will the members opposite 

not acknowledge what really happened? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think the 

people of the province acknowledged the work that the 

members opposite did on November 7, and they actually gave 

them a failing grade, Mr. Speaker. However having said that, 

Mr. Speaker, I think fair-minded people will acknowledge that 

there was some good work done to lay some of the groundwork. 

 

But it had to be this optimism also stems on a change of 

direction and a change of attitude. And that is what is most 

important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the people spoke very 

clearly on November 7 that the attitude and the direction that 

members opposite were giving, the leadership they were giving 

out to this province, wasn‟t where they wanted them to go. And 

they sought new leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Wood River. 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 

we know that for the last 16 years we‟ve had a socialist 

government that was very inward-looking and not preparing for 

growth for this province, and where we are now preparing for 

growth and looking at growth in this province. And with the 

resource riches that we have, we wish to move forward and not 

do such things as they did in the past like SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] and 

nationalizing potash and all of those good things. So right now 

we‟re on the cusp of actually really developing some great 

industry in this province, and specifically the oil sands. 

 

And my question is for the member from Regina Rosemont: the 

NDP leader, federal, Jack Layton, he has declared or wants a 

moratorium on oil sands exploration and production. That 

would have a huge, huge impact on Saskatchewan. My question 

to the member is, does he agree with the federal NDP leader? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again it‟s a pleasure to have a question 

from the member from Wood River. It‟s nice to also hear him in 

this Assembly. 

 

I tell you our NDP government has created the wealth, the 

industry that‟s here today, because we‟re . . . co-operatively 

with the oil industry, has great relations across the board, has 

invested dollars into the North, including a road that‟s going to 

be all about prosperity. Thank you for your question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question is for 

the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. So there is 

evidence that the Sask Party‟s committed to their promise of 

pressuring the federal government on the equalization file. And 

one might say that‟s already been broken. The Sask Party is too 

busy praising the Harper Conservatives and apologizing for 

them, as we saw again today in question period, than defend the 

rights of Saskatchewan families and what is owed to them. 

 

Brad Wall stated that other premiers, quote: 

 

. . . were able to achieve success because of their relentless 

and direct involvement in the negotiations. No less than 

your complete commitment will assure success on this file. 

 

So I ask the question, does the Premier‟s silence and kowtowing 

to the Prime Minister qualify as, quote, “relentless and direct 

involvement in the negotiations”? Does he believe that his 

silence is benefiting the families of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the member asks the question as to around the whole 

area of provincial-federal negotiations and transfers of certain 

sums of money for special projects and so on. And I guess the 

question that I would have for that member is, how well did the 

former premier and his cabinet do on this issue and how many 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

dollars did they, new dollars did they actually bring to this 

province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they walked away from the clean coal initiative 

because they realized that it was too large an issue to deal with 

on a provincial basis. Yet what do we hear from, what was the 

announcement, Mr. Deputy Speaker? $240 million coming . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I‟m having trouble listening to the 

member‟s answer. I would ask that all members, quiet. There 

will be time to take part in it. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Two hundred 

and forty million dollars coming to this province for this very 

important project, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Municipal 

Affairs said that there is a great deal that‟s being worked on 

currently. And stay tuned because there‟s more good news 

coming. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Meadow 

Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

wanted to pick up on the last answer from the member from 

Regina Rosemont, and pick up on my colleague‟s point about 

the oil sands. 

 

The federal leader of the NDP, the member from 

Toronto-Danforth, has made very clear that if it were up to him 

he would shut down the oil sands. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, 

that member from Toronto-Danforth would confiscate every 

firearm in the country. They‟re clearly, completely out of touch, 

completely out of touch with the reality of Saskatchewan, I‟m 

wondering if that member is going to disavow those positions 

of his federal leader. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again a pleasure to take a question here, 

particularly from that member there. The biggest issue that 

faces provincial-federal relations — right here, right now — is 

the lack of dollars, the lack of results that the members opposite 

are bringing to the table. I‟ll also remind the member opposite 

of who the leader of our party is. He sits just right down there. 

And I‟ll also remind him that this is a provincial Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I‟d like to, if I could, ask a question to the 

member from Biggar, and it‟s regarding the pulp mill in Prince 

Albert. You know, they purvey themselves as being big 

proponents of business and driving business to the province. I 

want to read if I can from a letter from the editor in the Prince 

Albert Herald, December 3, and it says: 

 

Hence, the government — and Hickie in particular — 

must prove in relatively concrete terms and in fairly short 

order that they are intent on finding alternative solutions 

with Domtar. 

And I want to ask the question that‟s asked in the headline in 

this article because it deserves an answer. The headline reads, 

and I quote: “Was it just lies, Brad Wall?” 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I gladly 

answer that question. What we‟ve seen from the previous NDP 

government was that they were willing to throw away $100 

million on just an election scheme just to get elected up in that 

area. And we have seen that that MOU or the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

elapsed. 

 

[12:15] 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Motion No. 1 — Non-Partisan Civil Service 

and Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

very pleased today and at the conclusions of my remarks will 

move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to refrain 

from the political destruction of the civil service and 

Crown corporations and, in doing so, keep the civil service 

and Crown corporations professional and non-partisan. 

 

But before I make the motion formally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I‟d like to talk or speak to the subject. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there‟s a definition that‟s well accepted — accepted throughout 

governments in Canada, the United States — of the definition 

of a public servant or a civil servant. And it is, I quote: 

 

The body of civilian employees of any level of 

government, not subject to political appointment and 

removal, normally hired and promoted largely on the basis 

of competitive examination. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a definition that‟s largely accepted 

by all governments across North America. A professional civil 

service is something that we as citizens in Canada strive to 

have. Saskatchewan has been known historically as a national 

leader, if not an international leader, in the quality of its civil 

service, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But what does that definition mean today in Saskatchewan? It 

means that these people are hired on the basis of merit and not 

political affiliation. It also means that these people should not 

be removed from their positions for any other reason than lack 

of competency. They should not be removed because of their 

political affiliation. They should not be denied the opportunity 

to be employed in the civil service because of political 

affiliation. They should not be denied the right to be members 

of our civil service. Patronage should not come into play. 

People should be hired on their merit, and they should be able 

to maintain their employment based on their merit. 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to quote from the 

Leader-Post, on this very issue, just a few weeks ago: “. . . a 

provincial civil service is designed to provide efficient, 

effective government services for the best interests and benefit 

of the . . . [entire] population.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know and understand that we need 

to have a professional civil service in Saskatchewan. And we 

need to understand and move forward with the intent of having 

a professional, qualified civil service. It‟s a tragedy, an absolute 

tragedy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we see professional civil 

servants removed or fired from their positions when a 

government changes. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ll freely acknowledge, freely 

acknowledge that there are those who are political in nature. 

Those employees employed in ministers‟ offices in the 

legislature, those are political appointments. And it‟s fully 

expected when there‟s a change in government, those people 

will in fact change. People work in Executive Council and other 

branches directly related to the political operations of the 

government. It‟s fully expected that those people will lose their 

jobs with a change in government. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s not expected that civil servants — 

career, lifelong civil servants — that have spent more than 30 

years in government of parties of every political stripe would 

lose their jobs with a change in government. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, those are career, professional civil servants. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in an August 30, 2007 letter to the 

Leader-Post, the Premier described what he called the 

Saskatchewan Party‟s vision for the public service. He stressed 

the need to, and I will quote, maintain “. . . a professional and 

nonpartisan public service [which] is in the best interest of all 

Saskatchewan people.” 

 

I agree. I agree 100 per cent with the Premier‟s, the Premier‟s 

vision of a civil service. Unfortunately that vision was not 

maintained with the change in government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw career, professional civil servants 

lose their jobs. We‟ve seen individuals who‟ve spent 30 or more 

years working for the people of this province lose their jobs. 

And we see Saskatchewan taxpayers now having to pay tens of 

thousands, hundreds of thousands, and in some cases perhaps 

more than $100,000 in severances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this province, which is a relatively 

small province, it is very difficult for individuals not to have 

friends or be related or connected in some way to someone that 

has some political affiliation. My children or your children or 

the children of the members opposite should not be affected by 

what their family members do, what their parents do, or what in 

fact their friends do. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you have a true professional civil 

service, the children of any member of this House should be 

able to apply for a job in the civil service and get the job on 

their own merit. Mr. Deputy Speaker, merit should be the basis 

on which people are hired, not partisanship. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw in this last round of terminations 

individuals who once worked in this building, some 16 years 

ago though, who had moved into the civil service by 

competition and had competed for three or four subsequent jobs 

— each one being a promotion — being removed from office, 

being terminated last fall. The new government terminated 

individuals who had competed for three or four subsequent jobs 

after being employed in this building. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

won each of those jobs on merit. They competed in a regular 

competition run by the Public Service Commission and won 

those competitions. Mr. Deputy Speaker, for them to lose their 

jobs is a shame. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier stated that under a 

Saskatchewan Party government any changes to the civil 

service, and I quote, “. . . should be based on merit, not 

patronage or partisan politics.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

agree with that. Unfortunately that hasn‟t been the case. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need in this province to have a very 

professional, non-partisan civil service. We will all agree that 

there are those positions that are in fact political or partisan. 

And if those people are removed, that‟s fair game. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, those who are in the civil service that have got their 

jobs through the normal hiring process, through a merit-based 

hiring process, should not lose their jobs with the change in 

government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw civil servants, career civil servants 

be removed from their positions, and what were they told? That 

the new minister of the department had no confidence in them. 

They didn‟t have the support or confidence of the new minister. 

That was the reason for being terminated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I would question how that fits in with the quote that all service 

“. . . should be based on merit, not patronage or partisan 

politics.” How does that fit with that particular quote from the 

Premier? It doesn‟t fit. It‟s totally contrary to what he said to 

the public of Saskatchewan in the Regina Leader-Post. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the civil service should be above, 

the professional civil service should be above being interfered 

with by any government of any stripe. Those who are hired in 

political positions, those who are key individuals that set 

direction for departments, I will accept the argument that there 

may need to be changes. But in the civil service itself, in the 

lower levels, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that argument just holds no 

weight. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier assured the people of 

Saskatchewan, and I quote, “. . . in the case of a Saskatchewan 

Party government, there will be no „wholesale purge‟ [of the 

civil service].” 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have already seen, we have 

already seen a significant number of people removed from the 

civil service. And in next week‟s budget, can the people of 

Saskatchewan, can the members of the civil service expect that 

there will be many, many more job cuts? We don‟t know. But, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have seen a purge of the civil service 

for political reasons that does none of us, does none of us 

proud. 

 

It leaves the civil servants in this province wondering whether 

or not they‟re going to have a job next month. It leaves their 

children and their wives or husbands wondering whether or not 

their spouse will have a job next month or whether their parents 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

will have a job next month. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it leaves 

the children of those who have been affected or children of 

those who may have a political membership of one party or 

another wondering if they can ever seek a job in the civil 

service of Saskatchewan if their parents perhaps have affiliation 

with one political party or another. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s not fair. It‟s not fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It‟s not what they wanted. And it‟s not fair to 

those children or those individuals, those young people growing 

up in our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party election platform 

reaffirms these promises that the Premier made publicly. And I 

quote: 

 

A Saskatchewan Party government will support the 

development of a professional . . . [civil] service by: 

 

Ensuring that promotion in the public service is based on 

merit, not patronage. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are good words. And we on this side 

of the House agree with them, that people should be promoted 

on their merit and on their abilities and their skills that they 

bring to the workplace, that they should not — and I stress, Mr. 

Speaker, should not — be promoted or denied employment or 

fired based on any political affiliation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we saw within just short days, if not 

weeks, after the election the Saskatchewan Party did an 

about-face. Their pre-election promises were forgotten. And the 

axe was quick to fall within the civil service as eight deputy 

ministers were fired. 

 

Among those deputy ministers fired were some of the most 

senior civil servants of government who had worked under the 

previous Devine administration. Many had worked under the 

Blakeney administration, then worked under this 

administration. We are talking about career civil servants that 

brought a great deal of experience and knowledge about this 

province and how government works to the table. They were 

released. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were released at a cost 

of literally millions of dollars to the taxpayers. These eight 

individuals will cost more than $2 million in severance when 

it‟s finally completed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As many as 70 civil servants were dismissed by the 

government, causing the Leader-Post to note — and this is in 

the opinion of the Leader-Post who examined these issues — 

“. . . at least half of these dismissals appear to be life-long 

[career] civil servants with no political connections.” Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, these are the very people that should be 

protected by a professional civil service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if any of these individuals were not in fact 

performing their duties, were not doing their jobs, they should 

have been dealt with in the appropriate manners. They should 

have been dismissed for cause for not doing their jobs, and we 

as taxpayers shouldn‟t be paying if that were the case. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that isn‟t the case. The new government didn‟t 

make that case with any of these individuals. They simply fired 

them for not having the confidence of the new minister. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, not having the confidence of the new minister 

suggests to me that these people were fired for partisan reasons. 

 

Now how do you not have the confidence of the new minister? 

What criteria was used not to have the confidence of the new 

minister in the department? Could it be as much if it was one of 

my children that they had the same last name as me? Could that 

be enough that they should simply be fired? Or should my 

children never have the opportunity to seek employment in the 

civil service of Saskatchewan because they have the same last 

name as myself? Is that a professional career civil service, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we never behaved that way when we were 

in government. We would expect that the new government 

would behave in a similar manner. 

 

In fact there are children and relatives of members opposite that 

are now in the government that were hired and remain in 

employment of the Government of Saskatchewan when we 

were the government, and as they should have been because 

they got their jobs because they were qualified. They got their 

jobs because they deserved to have those jobs. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they also deserve to continue to have their jobs. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those same individuals that were hired as 

professional civil servants, if the government were to change 

four years from now, would still have their jobs because we 

believe in a career, professional civil service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Leader-Post acknowledges or 

recognizes that many of the people that were terminated were 

career civil servants and goes on to indicate that they were 

terminated simply because they no longer had the confidence of 

the minister, I think we all have to be concerned. And the civil 

service today, the civil service today is very, very concerned 

that these types of firings will continue. How long will the 

purge continue? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope today that the members opposite 

will stand and say that this purge ends — it‟s done; it‟s final — 

and that next week in the budget we won‟t see hundreds of civil 

servants‟ jobs cut. But we don‟t know that. We‟ll have to wait 

till budget day, and we‟ll have to watch the operations of the 

government over the next three years to see just how they‟re 

going to deal with the civil service. 

 

[12:30] 

 

When questioned on the firings, the Leader-Post reported the 

government transition team, the Deputy Premier as saying, and 

I quote, “. . . all those dismissed — even those without 

identifiable political connections — did not fit with the 

direction and philosophy of the new government.” 

 

Well how did they know that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? In a very 

short period of time did they review people‟s files? Did they 

talk to people? How do they know these things, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? These were career civil servants. They should have 

been given the opportunity to do their jobs and then, if they 

don‟t do their jobs, be removed from their jobs. For then, Mr. 

Speaker, for reason, for cause, and then we as taxpayers 

wouldn‟t have to pay a significant amount of severance to 

individuals who in fact weren‟t doing their jobs. But instead, 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

because some minister didn‟t like them, some minister believed 

they didn‟t have the confidence of that particular minister, they 

were terminated, and we the taxpayers of Saskatchewan all have 

to pay for this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the quote, “fit with the direction and 

philosophy of the new government,” what does that mean? 

What direction and what philosophy? What does this entail? 

And how does that correspond with the creation of a 

professional, non-partisan civil service whose first purpose is to 

serve the people of Saskatchewan? Individuals in the civil 

service are employed to bring options to government, to 

challenge the politicians to examine and explore all the options 

open to them, to make sure that we as politicians make the very 

best decisions for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, how could the new government know if 

these people fit their philosophy and direction? They just took 

over the reigns and in many cases, we‟re told, didn‟t even talk 

to the individuals, didn‟t even take the time to find out, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They were dismissed without the opportunity, 

without the opportunity to answer to those things that were 

being said about them. They were simply dismissed. 

 

In the Leader-Post article, Ken Rasmussen, Mr. Rasmussen 

states, and I quote: 

 

This government hasn‟t done anything yet. How would 

you know what kind of advice they‟re getting from the 

public service? 

 

It‟s destructive for the professional civil service. Public servants 

are not supposed to fit in with anybody‟s philosophy. They‟re 

there to provide the best possible advice to any government. 

Civil servants aren‟t there to fit into any philosophy; they‟re 

there to provide the best possible advice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Ken Rasmussen, as you may well all know, is 

the director of the Johnson-Shoyama graduate school of public 

policy at the University of Regina and has questioned both the 

sense and necessity of these firings, as are many of the people 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in this province have strived to build 

and have been known across both Canada and the United States, 

throughout all of North America, as having one of the best, 

most competent civil service. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

pride ourselves and to those who are employed through the 

normal hiring practices have been done so without interference 

— political interference — and have not been removed. 

 

Considering the fact the government haven‟t worked with the 

fired civil servants at all in many cases, how could they get a 

sense that these people couldn‟t or wouldn‟t work within their 

philosophy, couldn‟t or wouldn‟t be able to fit in with the new 

government? 

 

And as I indicated earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of these 

people were not even given the opportunity or the chance to 

have a discussion. And of course the minister did the 

terminations and the minister didn‟t meet with any of these 

people. And they were simply said they didn‟t meet the political 

philosophy or didn‟t have the confidence of the minister. 

 

Were these hirings — or firings; pardon me, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — preconceived? It raises the question about whether 

the Sask Party really had a hit list — a list of civil servants and 

Crown employees in which they simply wanted to get rid of. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the terminations would 

indicate just that, that in fact there was a list. 

 

And if that is the fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all need to be 

concerned because that means that people are being let go 

because of who they know, who they‟re related to, or what they 

may have done as long as 16 years ago in working for one 

political party or another during an election. Is that fair? No it‟s 

not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

A preconceived plan to fire certain civil servants, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that sounds very similar to the 2003 hit list that the 

Leader-Post printed and talked about. Preconceived firings, a 

hit list, civil servants being fired because they do not fit the 

Premier‟s direction and philosophy — that sends a very cold 

chill through the civil service and to literally 12,000 men and 

women of the civil service who are professionals, who provide 

those services day in and day out to the people of this province, 

and who today don‟t know whether or not they‟re secure in 

their futures. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have a right to know, a right to feel 

secure in their futures. They have a right to know that we are 

going to continue to administer the civil service in a 

professional, non-partisan manner. And we need to have the 

Premier . . . The Premier needs to stand up and tell the people of 

this province and the career, professional civil service that that 

in fact is the case. 

 

The Leader-Post reported the Deputy Premier as also saying 

that those civil servants who were fired will likely be replaced 

with people with ties to the Sask Party. This is contrary to what 

the Premier said prior to the election and contrary to what the 

Premier says a career professional civil service should be about. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the Deputy Premier of this province 

being quoted in the Leader-Post. This isn‟t fictional; these are 

his own words in the Leader-Post, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier supported the Deputy 

Premier‟s view when he said, and I quote: 

 

“We ran on certain commitments and on a platform,” . . . 

“We want to implement . . . So changes are made in that 

light.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this creating a professional, 

non-partisan public service, a public service which provides the 

government with the best advice possible? No, it‟s not, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. What it is creating is a public service fearful of 

losing their jobs, a public service decimated and beaten to the 

point of being nothing more than yes-men to a government. Not 

willing to bring forward ideas that they think the government 

may not agree with. Not afraid to challenge a government to 

think beyond its own parameters. A civil service afraid to bring 

forward all the options because some of them the Premier and 

the cabinet may not like. 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s a civil service that cannot do its job. 

A professional, non-partisan civil service has to put all the 

information before the government and before the cabinet so the 

best possible decisions can be made without fear of reprisal, 

without fear of losing their jobs, and without fear of not having 

the confidence of the minister. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party may only want to 

implement certain options. That is acceptable; they are the 

government. But to have a civil service that‟s afraid to bring all 

the options forward for fear of being fired means that you don‟t 

have the opportunity to even look at the full spectrum and to 

debate the full issue prior to a decision being made. 

 

The Premier, the new government, has talked about a career, 

professional, non-partisan civil service. They need now to 

deliver on that. They need to encourage the civil service to 

bring forward the full diversity of ideas, options, so that the 

cabinet and government can make the best decisions. They need 

to be encouraged to continue to operate on a merit-based hiring 

system. They need to be encouraged to continue the 

development of the career public service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very firings that we looked at don‟t 

concur with the Premier‟s statements on the Sask Party‟s vision 

of a civil service. What happened to promotions, hirings, and 

dismissals being based on merit? What happened to that? We 

need to revisit that. And we need to ensure that that is the way 

the civil service will continue to operate. 

 

The firings in the civil service raise a number of questions for 

members on this side of the House, for the people of 

Saskatchewan, but most importantly, within the civil service. 

Do employees have the confidence of the government to 

continue to do their jobs without fear of reprisal? That question 

needs to be answered. And it needs to be answered for all the 

employees of civil service. 

 

It seemed that the only criteria being used by the government in 

this whole process of transition is whether or not the person has 

the same philosophy as the Premier and the Saskatchewan 

Party. Competency and ability don‟t matter. Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, not only is that contrary to every, every conceivable 

notion of a career, non-partisan, non-political civil service. But 

it is very much about partisanship, if that‟s how you‟re going to 

move forward. 

 

Is this a recipe for creating a professional, non-partisan public 

service? Definitely not. Is this in the best interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan? I don‟t think so. Not only are we removing 

highly qualified, professional civil servants from their jobs; it‟s 

costing the taxpayers a great deal of money. And as the Deputy 

Premier has confirmed, all are being let go without cause. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government believe that these 

individuals could not work within their philosophy, would not 

do their jobs, then they should have allowed them to show that 

and remove them for cause, saving the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan a considerable amount of money. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it isn‟t their money. The money the 

government has belongs to all the people of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that money should not be spent 

without due consideration for what it‟s worth. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the next question that needs to be asked is, 

how is this in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan, 

terminating senior civil servants without cause? But since 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying, they have to foot the bill, is 

that in the interest of the people? I say no. 

 

The StarPhoenix article states, and I quote: 

 

The public interest can only be served by competent 

professional bureaucrats whose sole . . . [purpose] is to do 

what‟s best for citizens [of the province] . . . 

 

Nothing to do with partisanship. Nothing to do with the 

ideology of a particular political party. 

 

Under a Saskatchewan Party government, the notion of doing 

what‟s best for the citizens has taken a back seat requirement to 

what‟s best for the friends of the Saskatchewan Party. We have 

seen a large number of Saskatchewan Party supporters, our 

constituency presidents and others, move into key roles within 

the government. How does that help maintain a professional, 

non-partisan public service? Does this build the confidence of 

the people of Saskatchewan? Does it in fact build the 

confidence of the civil service to know that they can in fact act 

in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan? I say no. 

 

What we have is a civil service that‟s at this moment afraid, 

defeated, and worried about their futures. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

in that environment it‟s very difficult to get the best that any 

employee can offer to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What it has created is a public service that concentrate on 

providing advice that follows the direction and philosophy of 

the government, and not putting forward all the options, and not 

necessarily advice that is in the best interests and the benefit of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a career, professional, non-partisan 

civil service is what the people of this province want. It‟s what 

we‟ve been known for throughout our history. It‟s what we 

have in fact been able to achieve through much of our political 

history in this country. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to 

continue that tradition, and civil servants need to understand 

that they have the support of their government and the support 

of the people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I‟d like to move the motion, 

seconded by the member from Regina Coronation Park: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to refrain 

from the political destruction of both the civil service and 

Crown corporations and, in doing so, keep the civil service 

and Crown corporations professional and non-partisan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has moved the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to refrain from 

political destruction of both the civil service and Crown 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

corporations and, in doing so, keep the civil service and 

Crown corporations professional and non-partisan. 

 

There‟s no seconder for this, so. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great pleasure 

to follow the member, the hon. member for Regina Dewdney, in 

seconding this motion. I‟m always pleased to stand up for 

Saskatchewan civil servants. And I‟m very pleased to stand up 

on behalf of Saskatchewan Crown corporation employees 

today. 

 

The hon. member for Regina Dewdney has very eloquently 

spoken about the Americanization of Saskatchewan politics. In 

the United States of America, they elect a new administration, 

and the administration changes wholesale. Many of the civil 

service change — what we call civil service — change when 

the administration changes. 

 

In Canada and in Saskatchewan, we have a long history, Mr. 

Speaker, of we elect governments. The civil service and the 

Crown corporations are professional entities that do not just 

simply get swept out with the old and replaced by people who 

have passed somehow some blood test of the incoming 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a blessing in Saskatchewan. I want to 

speak primarily about the Crown corporations. We are blessed 

with Crown corporations. But in Saskatchewan, we‟re also 

blessed with huge geography. And this is part of where our 

Crown corporations come in so very, very valuably. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got geography. That means we need many, 

many, many kilometres of power lines, distribution lines to 

reach our sparse and scattered population. SaskPower does a 

terrific job of doing just that. 

 

What we have not been blessed with is an overabundance of 

hydroelectric opportunities, if I can describe it that way. We‟ve 

utilized most of what is available so far, SaskPower has, and 

that‟s serving us very well. But we then bump to the slightly 

higher-cost coal to generate electricity, and that‟s serving us 

well. But we‟re not blessed with Manitoba‟s hydro resource, 

Manitoba Hydro where they generate huge electricity, volumes, 

quantities with their hydrology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move to natural gas, SaskEnergy. We 

share the same huge geography. And SaskEnergy is a company 

that‟s noted throughout the world as a company that has the 

most miles, most kilometres of pipeline per employee. Pound 

for pound, if I can describe it that way, employee for employee 

— there‟s absolutely no corporation in the world that can match 

the job that SaskEnergy is doing. And that‟s a credit to the 

people that set it up, the people that run it, that day-to-day make 

the management decisions of how do you run that Crown 

corporation. But it‟s a huge, huge credit to the men and women 

that day in, day out, they get up, they go to work, and they 

make sure that that natural gas is delivered safely, efficiently, 

and at an incredibly low cost, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Telephone is something that‟s near and dear to many of our 

hearts. SaskTel is just the sweetest little telco in the universe. 

SaskTel is responsible for many innovations, technological 

innovations that far exceed the size of a relatively small telco, 

relatively small in the world scheme of things, but a 

powerhouse, a powerful little telco. And why is it, Mr. Speaker? 

It‟s a credit to the employees, the management and the staff. 

The men and women that day in, day out, they get up and they 

try and figure out how can they make telephony services better 

for all Saskatchewan people. How can they add value? How can 

they make it better for us all? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people I‟m describing in the major Crowns 

. . . I just realized I‟ve neglected to speak of SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance], so I‟ll do that and then I‟ll come back 

to the total thing. 

 

SGI was a Crown corporation set up because the private 

insurance companies wouldn‟t provide basic fire insurance on 

the farms of Saskatchewan. That‟s why Sask Government 

Insurance was first set up. The privates wouldn‟t do it, wouldn‟t 

provide the service at all. That‟s a part of history. SGI continues 

to be an absolutely major player in the insurance industry. They 

provide competition and in many places, many ways, the 

privates have competition with SGI, and this is fine. It‟s the 

evolution of that Crown over time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these men and women of particularly the four 

major utility Crowns — and I‟ll describe it as utility Crowns — 

day in and day out, they get up and they add value. These 

employees and these Crown corporations have provided for 

Saskatchewan people for many years now the lowest cost utility 

bundle in all of Canada, the lowest cost for years in all of 

Canada. 

 

What‟s the first thing, one of the very first things that that Sask 

Party government did when they got elected, Mr. Speaker? One 

of the very, very early things they did, is they said, we‟re no 

longer going to honour the lowest cost utility bundle promised, 

that New Democrats had implemented, and we were committed 

to. We said we‟re committed to it on an ongoing basis. The 

Premier said, no more, no more. 

 

Well what a difference a day will make, Mr. Speaker. What a 

difference a day will make, especially when that day is election 

day, especially when that day is election day for a Sask Party, 

and it‟s the incoming government because, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

not what they were saying before the election. It was different 

then. 

 

And a day after the election, things started to turn around, not 

just on the lowest cost bundle. But you look at, Mr. Speaker, 

what they were saying about the civil service, what they were 

saying about Crown corporation employees, what the leader and 

the deputy leader were saying in the media about our need to 

have a professional civil service, the need to have continuity, 

the need to have capable women and men running this province, 

running the government, and running the Crown corporations. 

That‟s what they were saying before the election. They needed 

professionals. 

 

After one day, one single day, Mr. Speaker, imagine what a 

difference a day makes when it‟s an election day for the Sask 



March 13, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

Party government. One day — complete flip. Now what do they 

do? They fired more than 70 professional civil servants and 

Crown corporations, more than 70. Some had direct ties with 

the former government. 

 

But what your leader said, what your leader said was that . . . 

boy oh boy, he said that civil servants — this is in both the 

Leader-Post and in The StarPhoenix — civil servants should be 

given the opportunity to perform. Civil servants . . . It is widely 

agreed that if a civil servant or a Crown corporation employee 

blocks the will of the new government, then you‟ve got to deal 

with that. And that may lead to termination. 

 

But there is 70 people that didn‟t have, didn‟t have time to look 

at their watch, much less to disagree with the incoming 

government. They didn‟t have time to even have their first 

coffee break, and they‟re gone. How does that work? What‟s 

the message? What‟s the chilling message that that sends 

throughout civil service and Crown corporations throughout the 

province? I don‟t think it‟s a message that is conducive to a 

province growing. It‟s a message that sends a chill down the 

spines of the women and men throughout the province. And 

civil servants and Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, are saying, 

who‟s next? Am I next? 

 

Where does it stop? Where does the carnage stop? Where does 

the building start? When can they count . . . when can these 

civil servants and these Crown corporation employees start 

believing their government? When can they start believing the 

leader and the deputy leader of this government? When . . . 

who, as I point out . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . November 7, 

the member for Wood River says. Well isn‟t that interesting 

though because I‟ve already pointed out before the election . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟m having 

trouble hearing the speaker that has the floor. I would ask that 

the members quiet it down. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to refer to the 

Premier on August 30 Leader-Post, where he says and: 

 

It is my belief that the current NDP government has too 

often manipulated the civil service for short-term political 

gain, stifled innovation, and overly politicized both 

department and Crown personnel decisions. 

 

That was his words quoted in the Leader-Post, August 30, 2007 

— August 30. Well that‟s before the election. 

 

After the election he said something completely different. And 

his actions certainly speak something completely different than 

what he said before. He has said, amongst other things: “A 

Saskatchewan Party government will ensure we take full 

advantage of the talents of our professional public service to 

fulfil Saskatchewan‟s tremendous potential.” Well these are 

words that in August were displaying huge confidence in the 

civil service, huge confidence in the Crown corporation 

employees, Mr. Speaker. But that‟s not what their actions have 

said. That‟s not it at all. 

 

And what did the election platform say? I refer you to page 42 

of the Sask Party‟s own election platform, page 42. And I‟m 

going to read all three bullets, all three bullets that deal with 

supporting a professional public service, is how you titled it, 

and it says: 

 

A Saskatchewan Party government will support the 

development of a professional public service by: 

 

[one] Ensuring that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Yes, well don‟t break your arms patting yourself 

on the back because the first thing you said is you‟re going to 

ensure “. . . that promotion in the public service is based on 

merit, not patronage.” 

 

Merit, not patronage — oh so how is it, how is it that the 

Premier‟s university buddy winds up working in Ottawa, comes 

back, becomes personal assistant to the Premier, now becomes 

personal assistant to the person in charge of the Crowns. Oh it‟s 

all merit based of course, no blood test there, no blood test 

there. It‟s all merit based they would have us believe, Mr. 

Speaker. The hypocrisy in their own words, in their own words, 

they‟re not even following their own election platform, Mr. 

Speaker. What a shame. What a . . . That is unbelievable. 

 

Point two, point two, they‟re going to provide: 

 

$1-million over four years for the Johnson-Shoyama 

Graduate School of Public Policy to assist in professional 

development opportunities for public servants and help 

educate the next generation of public service leaders in our 

province; and 

 

[three] Strengthening protection for public servants and 

whistle-blowers in the workplace by establishing a Public 

Integrity Commissioner. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how can you, how can you ever blow the 

whistle when you can be fired for no reason at all just simply 

because you don‟t pass their blood test. How can that, how can 

anyone think that they‟re going to come forward and blow the 

whistle on somebody when you‟re fired simply for not passing 

the blood test. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new government is doing everything it can to 

decimate the civil service as outlined by the honourable 

member for Regina Dewdney. I submit they‟re decimating the 

Crown corporations. I urge them to just let the good women, let 

the good men of our civil service and our Crown corporations 

do what they do best. Let them provide advice. Let them deliver 

the services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, today as my time winds down I want to 

say, when everybody is thinking exactly the same, when 

everybody always agrees, that means that someone‟s not 

thinking. I urge the government to at least, if you‟re not going 

to do some thinking on your own, at least allow others, allow 

the civil service and Crown corporation employees to do what 

they do best — allow them to do the thinking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It being 1 p.m., pursuant to rule . . . 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2008 

subamendment 6, this Assembly stands adjourned until Monday 

17th at 1:30 p.m. I wish all members a good weekend. Thank 

you. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 289 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 289 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 289 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 289 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 289 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

  Eagles ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 290 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 290 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 291 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Celebrate Success Awards in Yorkton 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 291 

 Z99 Radiothon 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 291 

 Prince Albert Council of Women Honours Resident 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 291 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 292 

 SARM Convention 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 292 

 Five Days for the Homeless 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 292 

 Recruiting Nurses from the Philippines 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 293 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Labour Relations Board 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 293 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 294 

 Process for Negotiating Nurses’ Contract 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 295 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 295 

 Building Canada Framework Agreement 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 296 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 296 

 Relationship with Federal Government 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 297 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 297 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Initiative for Children and Families Living with Autism Spectrum Disorder 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 298 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 299 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 11 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 

 Bill No. 12 — The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 299 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 299 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 300 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Benefiting from the Province’s Economic Growth 

  Duncan ............................................................................................................................................................................... 300, 309 

  Morin ................................................................................................................................................................................. 302, 310 

  Weekes ............................................................................................................................................................................... 304, 311 



 

  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................... 305, 310 

  Hart .................................................................................................................................................................................... 307, 310 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 308 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 310 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 310 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 311 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 311 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Non-Partisan Civil Service and Crown Corporations 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 311 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 316 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


