




















































Hansard: March 11, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 10A  TUESDAY, MARCH 11, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 257 

 March 11, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to you and 

through you to all the members of the Legislative Assembly, in 

your west gallery, Mr. Speaker, are my in-laws, Lorne and 

Noreen Knibbs. Could you stand up there please and just . . . 

Noreen, yes, I know. Noreen was a teacher in our province for 

just over 30 years, and Lorne was a business person and owned 

five fertilizer companies actually for a number of years. 

 

I married their lovely daughter, and I hear from the family tree 

that I’m the favourite son-in-law. They only had one daughter 

so I guess I’m lucky with that one but . . . To everyone in the 

Legislative Assembly, for Noreen, we are now the hit on the 

afternoons; we’ve pre-empted Oprah and Dr. Phil. So I’d like to 

welcome you to the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I’d like to introduce to you 30 students who are seated in 

the west gallery. These students are from Prairie Spirit School. 

They are the West Senior Band, and they come together from 

various communities around in the Biggar constituency and also 

outside; I believe Dalmeny. They come to Asquith to practise 

and perform. 

 

Along with the students are teacher Ms. Kendra Worman and 

chaperones Curtis Crabb, Carol Crabb, Brian Cole, and Craig 

Sparrow. We got together and had pictures taken, and we got 

together in room 218, had a good discussion about politics and 

how government works. So please join me in welcoming these 

students to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have 

a wonderful program that we have MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] participating in every year, and it’s 

called the Saskatchewan legislative internship program. And 

this year again, we have members from both sides of the House 

participating in the program. 

 

The program provides for up to five university students or 

recent graduates a unique educational experience each year, of 

which one position is dedicated to a First Nations or Métis 

applicant. The seven-month program will give participants the 

opportunity to use their theoretical knowledge of government 

and parliament in a practical setting. They will get first-hand 

experience with the day-to-day work of elected representatives 

from both sides of the House. And some of the things that they 

get to participate in are such as the economic summit, the 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

convention, a visit to Government House, and this week they 

get to participate in the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] convention. So there is lots of activities 

that they get to undertake. 

 

This year I have the privilege of working with another one of 

such interns, and his name is Justin Redekop. And he is sitting 

in the Speaker’s gallery. And perhaps he can stand and take a 

bow and so everyone can recognize him. Thank you. 

 

And Justin was born in Herbert, Saskatchewan, where he 

attended elementary and high school. His family operates 

Marnie’s Coffee Shop, so we can all go for a good cup of coffee 

in Herbert when we stop by. Following high school graduation, 

Justin enrolled at the south Alberta institute of technology in 

Calgary. He received a diploma in architectural technology, 

specializing in building development. 

 

But Justin didn’t stop there. He has many talents. In 2003 Justin 

returned to the province because he realized his ways, and 

attended the University of Saskatchewan. He has completed a 

Bachelor of Arts degree with a major in political studies. And 

he has been a member of the Political Studies & Public 

Administration Students’ Society at the University of 

Saskatchewan. Throughout his life, Justin has been very 

actively involved in sports — volleyball, curling, track and field 

— but he has a true passion, has been mostly involved in 

playing baseball and hockey. 

 

I’m sure his parents are very proud and his family are very 

proud of the accomplishments that he has achieved so far. He 

has clearly demonstrated great ambition and diversity. So I’d 

like all the members of the House to welcome Justin to the 

program this year. And I’m sure he looks forward to working 

with the member from the government at the middle of April 

when he switches sides. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you a group from my constituency, the 

Westhill Park Baptist Church. And there’s 20 members that are 

here today, and they are accompanied by Reverend Henry 

Friesen. So please do welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley in 

welcoming our guests from Westhill Park Baptist Church and 

Reverend Henry Friesen. 



258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2008 

I look up and I see a lot of friendly faces that have known me 

since I was probably a babe in arms, and it’s with a lot of 

pleasure that I look up and to see those very friendly faces. 

 

I know that the Speaker shares a great interest in the doings at 

Westhill Park Baptist Church via the youth pastor at Westhill 

Park. And certainly my brother had been the youth pastor at 

Westhill Park, and certainly Henry had served as his mentor 

when he was studying for ordination. And it’s a great bunch of 

people, and it’s so great to see you in the gallery today. You 

bring back a lot of great memories, and I know that you’re a 

very vital congregation and still have a lot of fun with my sister 

and my niece. 

 

So I’d ask all members, Mr. Speaker, to join with me and the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley in welcoming this 

very special group to the legislature today. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

take this opportunity to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly some distinguished leaders of 

Saskatchewan’s business community. 

 

I’d like to introduce Mr. Dave Dutchak, president of 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. I’d like to as well . . . 

Ms. Marilyn Braun-Pollon is here, vice-president Saskatchewan 

agribusiness for the federation of Canadian independent 

business; Ms. Virginia Labbie, who also is with the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business. Mr. Steve McLellan is 

here, CEO, [chief executive officer] Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce. Mr. Alan Thomarat is here I see, CEO, Saskatoon 

and Region Home Builders’ Association. Mr. Tom Mullin is 

also here. We’d just like to extend a warm welcome to all these 

individuals. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — As the critic for Enterprise and Innovation 

for Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I would like to join the 

member opposite in welcoming these business leaders here. I 

know many of them have made long contributions — not to 

suggest that any of them are getting older — they have made 

long contributions to economic life and cultural and social life 

in the province of Saskatchewan. I want to join with the 

government in welcoming them here to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — As well I would like to just acknowledge the 

three other interns that have joined Justin. We have Avery and 

Dwayne and Patrick as well sitting together with Justin. And 

welcome to the chambers this afternoon. 

 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in this time of unprecedented and overflowing 

resources in the province of Saskatchewan, I am very pleased to 

represent a petition on behalf of my constituents that by 

expanding and renovating the Moose Jaw Union Hospital, this 

facility will be in a better position for success in retention and 

recruitment of health care professionals and provide better 

services for Moose Jaw and surrounding area. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I gladly present this on behalf of Moose Jaw 

citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to develop, announce, and implement a plan to 

address school closures. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to present a petition. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to honour their commitment to obtaining a 

fair equalization deal for Saskatchewan to retain the 

earnings of our non-renewable resources similar to the 

deal of other provinces such as New Brunswick, Nova 

Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and Newfoundland. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the residents of North 

Battleford and Saskatoon. 



March 11, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present several pages 

of petitions, and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by the people of Indian Head, 

Sintaluta, Regina, Kronau, Alida, Redvers, Carnduff, Maryfield, 

Wauchope, Manor, Yorkton, Saltcoats, Esterhazy, Gerald, 

Whitewood, Foam Lake, Ituna, Wynyard, Ebenezer, Saskatoon, 

Moosomin, Bredenbury, Qu’Appelle, McLean, Odessa, 

Melville, Springside, Rhein, Canora, Willowbrook, Wroxton, 

Churchbridge, Theodore, Goodeve, Tuffnell, Grayson, Neudorf, 

Duff, Kelliher, Leslie, Kamsack, Roblin, Bangor . . . 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members to allow the 

member to present his petition. Thank you. Member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Tuffnell, Grayson, Neudorf, Duff, Kelliher, 

Leslie, Kamsack, Roblin, Bangor, Sheho, and Veregin. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 

order a number of petitions regarding school taxes presented on 

March 10, 2008, have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 16(7) 

are found to be irregular and therefore cannot be read and 

received. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Recruitment of Nurses 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I was part of a 

trip to the Philippines as part of a delegation with 

representatives from five health regions — the SRNA 

[Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association], SUN 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses], and the Ministry of Health. 

During this nine-day trip, I had the opportunity to meet and 

speak with many wonderful people and gain an understanding 

of the Philippines. 

 

One gentleman I spoke to, Archie Redula, last month his wife 

Beverly arrived in Regina to begin her new life as a nurse here 

in Saskatchewan. This will provide her with an amazing 

opportunity as she goes from making $10 an hour to . . . $10 for 

an eight-hour shift — let’s clarify that — in the Philippines to 

$23 an hour here in Saskatchewan. And if everything else goes 

well, Mr. Redula and their three children will soon join Beverly 

here in Regina. It should warm all of our hearts to hear stories 

like these about young families that have a chance to move to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Beverly Redula will soon have a lot more 

company. Our trip this month was incredibly successful, and we 

were able to offer jobs to nearly 300 nurses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Ross: — By this summer our government will be well on 

its way to fulfilling its promise to hire 800 additional nurses. 

These nurses are trained with American standards curriculum, 

taught in English, and will be certified to Canadian standards. 

Soon residents in health regions across the province . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Regina Citizen of the Year 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, recently I was privileged 

to attend a special luncheon in honour of my constituent Dr. 

Roberta McKay, the 2007 CTV [Canadian Television Network 

Ltd.] Regina Citizen of the Year. When he announced that Dr. 

McKay had been selected as the CTV’s Citizen of the Year, 

Dennis Dunlop, the vice-president and general manager of CTV 

Saskatchewan, said, quote: 

 

Dr. McKay’s history of volunteer service is exceptional. 

And her commitment to the well-being of the community 

is ongoing. 

 

In addition to her busy practice as a dermatologist, lecturing at 

times for the College of Medicine, and serving as president of 

the Saskatchewan Medical Association, Dr. McKay over the 

past 22 years has helped served the needs of many community 

organizations including Women of the Dawn, Regina Transition 

Women’s Society, Regina Rescue Mission, Regina & District 

Food Bank, and the Regina Open Door Society. Dr. McKay is 

also a founder of the Saskatchewan Health Care Excellence 

Awards and helps to support AIDS South Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in extending congratulations to Dr. 

McKay for being named the 2007 Regina Citizen of the Year 

and also to convey our thanks for the contributions she 

continues to make to our community to make this a better 

world. Join me too, Mr. Speaker, in applauding the efforts of 

CTV in recognizing our outstanding citizens. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 



260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2008 

Saskatchewan Business Success Story 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

this year the Leader-Post business columnist Bruce Johnstone 

wrote an article about Regina-based company Ozonator 

Industries and their new ozonator machine, an invention used to 

reduce the cost of processing bio-hazardous waste while 

preventing the release of toxins and greenhouse gas emissions. 

The article detailed the company’s first shipment of an ozonator 

to a Terre Haute, Indiana hospital. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what the article didn’t mention is that this 

device was manufactured by a Weyburn firm. Mr. Speaker, 

Stewart Steel, based in north Weyburn, is an ABEX 

[Achievement in Business Excellence] award-winning firm, and 

they were hired by Ozonator Industries to manufacture the 

machine valued at over $1 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of attending, this past 

December, the official unveiling of the machine along with 

officials from Terre Haute Union Hospital and company 

officials from both Ozonator Industries and Stewart Steel. Mr. 

Speaker, this machine will provide a more environmentally 

friendly alternative to the current practices of incinerating 

medical waste. Both Ozonator and Stewart Steel are optimistic 

that this will be the first of many machines that will be 

manufactured — a machine described as the best medical waste 

technology in the world. 

 

The work of both Ozonator Industries and Stewart Steel serve 

as another Saskatchewan business success story, Mr. Speaker. 

On behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy, I offer my 

congratulations to Brad Stewart, sales manager Del Croissant, 

and their employees who worked so hard over the past year to 

bring this Saskatchewan solution for a worldwide problem to 

fruition. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

High School Boys’ Curling Championship 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I had the 

privilege of bringing greetings to the Saskatchewan High 

Schools Athletic Association boys’ curling championships held 

at the Granite Curling Club in Saskatoon. In the 50 or more 

years that this event has taken place in the province, this is the 

first time the event was held in the city. 

 

Playoffs were held throughout the province, and 16 teams 

emerged to represent the divisions in the tournament. Bishop 

James Mahoney High School was the host team for the event, 

while Marion Graham Collegiate won the city division and 

represented the city of Saskatoon at the tournament. 

 

Competition during the three-day tournament was tight, but 

Langenburg High School curling team capped an undefeated 

run with a 6-5 victory in the final Saturday afternoon game. The 

team won the A event by going 4 and oh in the preliminary 

round. The Kirk Muyres rink of Muenster took home the silver. 

Congratulations to the Langenburg team skipped by Kody 

Hartung; third, Tyler Hartung; second, Cole Thorpe; lead, 

Derek Haberstock. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to give special recognition to Dwight 

Harnish, a teacher from City Park High School in Saskatoon, 

who headed up the organization of this championship event. I 

would also like to recognize the countless volunteers and family 

members who made this event the huge success that it was for 

both the participants and the community. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is known as the 

volunteer capital of the country, and this championship 

tournament is an example of the spirit of volunteerism that has 

built this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Recognition of Ms. Josie Der’s Long Service 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to rise in 

the House today to ask members to join me in recognizing Josie 

Der, a long-time employee of a hotel in Saskatoon. 

 

Ms. Der is a resident of Saskatoon, and she has for the last 30 

years worked in the kitchen of the Hilton Garden Inn. That 

hotel was originally incarnated as the Holiday Inn, later a 

Ramada Hotel, then after that the Quality Inn, and for last seven 

years the Hilton Garden Inn. She used her income from that job 

to put her son, Balfour Der, through law school, and she 

enjoyed her work there so much she continued for a long time 

afterwards. 

 

She has worked very hard over the last 30 years, is very 

competent, highly regarded. This in and of itself is not terribly 

unusual. Mr. Speaker, what is unusual is that Ms. Der started 

working at the Hilton Garden, in that hotel, when she was some 

57 years old, and she is now working full-time at age 87. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, last year we passed legislation in this House doing 

away with mandatory retirement. She voluntarily went past her 

retirement age some 22 years ago when she reached her 65th 

birthday. I think all employers would be well served by looking 

for employees like Ms. Der. 

 

I offer my personal congratulations and would like to ask all 

members to join with me in congratulating Josie Der and 

seeking another 30 years of employment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Cultural Diversity and Race Relations Month 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, racism is far too often an ugly 

reality faced by many residents of our province. The city of 

Saskatoon has declared March as Cultural Diversity and Race 

Relations Month. This is a month in which we are encouraged 

to examine our thoughts and actions, to challenge the influence 

of racism in our broader society, to reaffirm our resolve to 



March 11, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

stamp out racial discrimination wherever it is exists, and to 

celebrate and embrace the diversity. 

 

An important event kicked off Cultural Diversity and Race 

Relations Month in Saskatoon. On March 3 I joined the 

members from Saskatoon Riversdale, Saskatoon Meewasin, and 

Saskatoon Centre in attending a special signing ceremony 

between the city of Saskatoon and the Saskatchewan Humans 

Rights Commission. This event signified the beginning of a 

partnership designed to promote ethnic diversity through public 

education. Unfortunately no government members took the time 

to attend this special event, but the Minister of Justice was kind 

of enough to send along written greetings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, among the many people who attended the event, 

there were some particularly special guests in the chamber that 

morning. I want to recognize the great contribution of Ms. 

Laliberte’s grade 1 and 2 class from Confederation Park School. 

This highly diverse group of students assisted Mayor Atchison 

in the hoisting of a special flag at city hall to celebrate diversity 

and promote equality. 

 

I ask all members to join me in observing Cultural Diversity 

and Race Relations Month as we work together to build a more 

harmonious society. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Spending on Staff Salaries 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m almost starting to feel a little sorry for the Leader 

of the Opposition, and I must say almost. On the first day of 

session he doesn’t even get to lead off question period. And 

then when he does get up, someone has set him up with bad 

information. 

 

Yesterday the former premier accused the new Premier of 

outspending him on staff salaries. Turns out the former premier 

was dead wrong. The fact is, the fact is, Mr. Speaker, the new 

Premier is spending about $50,000 a month less than the former 

premier was spending. And based on the quality of the research 

we saw yesterday, we seem to be getting a lot better value for 

our money. 

 

Now the Leader of the Opposition says he wants to do a 

freedom of information request to find out more. Interesting, 

Mr. Speaker. It was his own numbers he had wrong. I guess he 

should have done a freedom of information request on his own 

office when he was still premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is now admitting that 

his numbers were wrong and that he may have been, quote, 

“mixing up some oranges in the apple crate.” Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think he should be worried about oranges. I think he has 

some bad apples in his caucus trying to make him look bad just 

before the NDP [New Democratic Party] debates a leadership 

review at their convention this weekend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Communication Regarding Plans for Education 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s decision day today. 

Our Regina school board will be deciding the fate of schools 

tonight. Many other boards will soon be making the same 

decisions. 

 

Today the Premier told SARM delegates, and I quote, “In the 

meantime our government has contacted every single school 

region to say these changes are coming.” 

 

But according to today’s Leader-Post, the Deputy Premier said 

he did not send out notice to every single school division. 

 

Regina parents deserve to know that the government did its due 

diligence, that they shared the plan equally with all boards. Mr. 

Speaker, to the Minister of Education: whose statement is 

correct, the Premier’s or the Education minister’s? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been an interesting time having to discuss 

school closures and the goals of boards of education throughout 

this province. I’ve had a great opportunity to meet with boards 

of education, public boards of education to convey the same 

message that the Premier conveyed to his own school division 

board by way of a letter to his own board. 

 

As I indicated before, Mr. Speaker, I have not sent out a letter 

to any of the boards of education because I communicated with 

them at a meeting here in Regina at the Burnett Centre and had 

an opportunity to talk about the momentum in this province and 

the growth that was occurring. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also had the opportunity to encourage 

boards of education, who are autonomous boards of education, 

to take a step back, to take a look at what was happening in 

their school division and to determine what that course of action 

will be, based on the boards of education’s decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to date the 

information on the Sask Party school closure plan has been 

shared selectively. This creates an inequity and hurts 

communities, school boards, and families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation, with his 

privy information as a cabinet minister, has shared information 

with his constituents that was not made available to others. In 

the story posted on DiscoverMooseJaw.com on February 1, the 

minister told constituents that the plan would be released, and I 



262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2008 

quote, “in the next few days.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this plan has not been released. My question 

to the Minister of Education: why has he chosen to withhold 

releasing the ministry’s plan that his cabinet colleague said 

would be ready for release more than a month ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 

Leader of the Opposition stood yesterday with information that 

was far less than factual. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 

today to note that the member opposite asks a question about 

the changes to The Education Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those changes are coming. I’ve indicated that. I’ve 

also indicated that the plan to arrive at those changes started a 

long time ago. There have been stakeholder meetings with all of 

the people involved. There has even been a draft of that material 

sent out to the SARM delegates, to SUMA, to SOS [Save Our 

Schools], and there is now a preparation of a second document. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the member opposite that the 

changes to The Education Act will be coming. Stayed tuned. 

We’re going to be delivering them, but we’re going to be 

delivering the changes that are required and needed for all 

education in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate. There’s a 

rather urgent circumstance going on in our province, and I 

guess waiting for change is something that school boards and 

communities might . . . might not sit well with them. 

 

What has been released to date has simply incited confusion. A 

short time ago in The Southwest Booster, it reported that the 

Premier told his constituents that the process for closing schools 

must be, and I quote, “much more rigorous.” The Premier is 

also on record on the necessity of reforming The Education Act. 

The statements of the Premier and absence of a clear plan has 

caused confusion, dismissed the efforts and sincerity of school 

boards, and disrespected our communities by offering false 

hope. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Education minister is: can 

Regina schools expect the same treatment as the boards in the 

backyards of the Premier and a couple of cabinet ministers? Or 

will the solutions be as inequitable as the communications to 

date? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

needs to do one thing. He needs to dig out The Education Act 

and he needs to read section 87 of that Act which describes the 

powers of a board of education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — He would then know, he would then 

know that very specifically the Act does not apply to cities in 

terms of school closure because they don’t have school districts. 

That is the distinction, Mr. Speaker, between the city of Regina, 

the city of Saskatoon, and all of rural Saskatchewan that have 

school districts. Mr. Speaker, that has been made very clear. 

That has been made very clear to boards of education. 

 

The Speaker: — I call the members to order. I would ask to 

allow the minister to respond to the question. The minister has 

10 seconds to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as we indicated in our 

election platform, there needs to be an expansion of the rules 

that are in place for school closure and grade discontinuance. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do that. We have consulted, 

and we’re going to put in place a plan that is going to deal with 

those school divisions that have school districts. The city of 

Regina is not involved in that particular section of the Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Labour Relations Board 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just seconds after accusing the outgoing Labour 

Relations Board members of being, and I quote, “legacy” 

appointments of the NDP, the member from Greystone admitted 

there was an obvious connection between the new Chair of the 

Labour Relations Board and the Sask Party. 

 

What’s so interesting is that the Sask Party not only bypassed 

standard hiring practices in appointing a connected member of 

their party, but they’ve also decided to significantly increase the 

salary of the new board Chair. According to the government’s 

own cabinet documents, which I’ll table immediately, the new 

Chair will be making $180,000 per year. I also want to table a 

document showing that the previous board Chair had a salary of 

$121,632 after having been with the Labour Relations Board for 

close to a decade — a $60,000 increase for one of their pals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the member opposite assure us that a 

more qualified candidate couldn’t have been found for this new 

job at a substantially reduced cost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

That salary has gone up. And what we’ve done is we’re moving 



March 11, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

to one Vice-Chair. That way we’re actually going to save the 

taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to speed up 

the process with one less Vice-Chair, which they complained 

about prior to the election. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order and ask 

members to allow the member from Saskatoon Nutana to place 

her question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — . . . talk about the $60,000 pay hike for one 

of their buddies. How much will the taxpayers be on the hook 

as a result of these firings? We know that we now have to pay 

$180,000 for one of their political friends. We know that 

litigants and people with cases before the board will likely have 

to pay additional legal fees. Can the minister tell us what the 

Sask Party vendetta against the Labour Relations Board is going 

to cost the people of our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. What we’ve 

promised to do is establish a fair and balanced labour 

environment in this province, and obviously that’s what we’re 

moving towards. Mr. Speaker, you can see that in the 

legislation, that we’re moving forward, and you can see that in 

our recent appointments. We see experienced, qualified 

candidates that have taken over the helm of both the WCB 

[Workers’ Compensation Board] and LRB [Labour Relations 

Board] and, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will be 

well served with both individuals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, prior to the election the 

members of the Sask Party were complaining about the need to 

increase the time that it took to make decisions at the Labour 

Relations Board. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister now says that firing the Chair 

and the Vice-Chair and replacing with two people is going to 

speed up the process, and I have some bad news for him. A 

hearing was scheduled for yesterday; that hearing did not occur. 

There is now a tremendous amount of uncertainty regarding the 

30 cases which are before the board. 

 

To the minister: was there any consideration whatsoever given 

to these 30 cases before the decision was made to terminate the 

Chair and the Vice-Chair? And does he honestly expect his 

appointment of two people is the best way of speeding up 

decisions before the board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 

advanced employment and labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, we have great 

confidence in the individuals that have been appointed. What I 

can say to the member opposite is that if we take a look at our 

immigration file, we’ve increased production by 36 per cent 

over the last year since she was responsible for that file, Mr. 

Speaker. So I anticipate that it will be done as a matter of 

course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 

say this to the member. The minister yesterday told this House 

that verbal instructions were given that cases could continue. 

Does the minister still stand by that statement that he made in 

this House? Can he clarify what verbal instructions were given, 

who gave the instructions, and even did the minister give those 

instructions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we see once again is 

that the member opposite misses the point. The point that the 

people of Saskatchewan want to hear about is that 13,300 new, 

full-time jobs have been created. More people are coming to the 

province of Saskatchewan. A more fair and balanced labour 

environment is being created. And, Mr. Speaker, what I can 

guarantee is that communication was directed, and there were 

instructions given to ensure that the cases that were already 

under way did continue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know the member 

wants to talk about the record of our government, and they’re 

flying on our coattails, and he doesn’t want to answer the 

question. 

 

But you know, the reality is that he didn’t answer the question. 

He said yesterday in this House that verbal instructions were 

given. I was told that one of the dismissed Vice-Chairs had had 

a discussion early last week with one Doug Emsley, a key 

member of the Sask Party transition team, and their discussion 

centred on her role at the Labour Relations Board. Two days 

passed; she was fired in the middle of a hearing. From what I 

understand of as of this morning, she still has not had a single 

discussion with the government about continuing hearing open 

cases before the board. 

 

So to the minister: what really happened leading up to your 

government’s decision to terminate the Chair and the two 

Vice-Chairs at the Labour Relations Board? 



264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we can go on the 

public record on is to simply say on November 7 the people of 

this province elected a new government. That new government 

makes changes to agency, boards, and commissions. And, Mr. 

Speaker, obviously the changes that have been made to these 

two boards, we’ve made sure that we have capable, qualified 

individuals at the helm of these two organizations. This way we 

can ensure that our growth continues, Mr. Speaker. We can 

ensure that we’re looking to the future instead of being held up 

by the past. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, obviously what 

we’re focused on is sustaining the growth and sharing the 

benefits of that growth with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well either the member from Greystone is 

refusing to answer these questions or he plainly doesn’t know 

the answers to the questions. He can’t explain why the firings 

happened. He can’t explain how much it’s going to cost 

taxpayers. He can’t explain what’s happening to the cases 

presently in front of the board. And he can’t explain how much 

the inevitable appeal process will cost. I’m starting to think he 

had nothing to do with the decision. 

 

The Deputy Premier is someone who does consider himself an 

expert on the political independence of the Labour Relations 

Board. It’s his name that’s on the cabinet document firing these 

people. It’s his transition team that’s carrying out the political 

purge of the civil service. And will the Deputy Premier admit 

that he’s the fellow behind the recent hiring? 

 

Can he answer any of these questions and can he, at the very 

least, take some of the heat off of the minister that clearly the 

Sask Party has allowed to be hung out to dry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what I said yesterday — and 

perhaps the member opposite missed it — I am not going to 

refer to any of the specific cases, not in this House. That is not 

the purview of the ministry. 

 

And as far as the signature, I will just simply say that last week 

I could not sign that because I was attending the funeral of my 

father-in-law. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the Deputy 

Premier, who refuses to answer the question, he’s on the Sask 

Party transition team. He’s the fellow that asked questions 

about the Labour Relations Board when they were sitting on 

this side of the House. He’s the fellow that has time and time 

again said there should be no political interference in a 

quasi-judicial board. Yet his fingerprints are all over the order 

in council and his transition team fingerprint . . . One Doug 

Emsley has been talking to the members of this independent, 

quasi-judicial body. 

 

I ask the Deputy Premier: he is leaving his minister to hang out 

to dry. Can he not come clean and tell us why they decided to 

fire these particular people and replace them with a person who 

I understand has only had six cases before the board — he’s 

more of a tax expert — at a cost of $180,000 a year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve been having great difficulty out of 

my right ear hearing the question. I would ask the member to 

place her question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, there’s a question and there’s going to be 

a lot more questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the Deputy Premier that has his fingerprints 

all over the order in council and the transition team. Can he not 

tell us why they really decided to fire the Labour Relations 

Board and replace them with a $180,000 political friend? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think we 

heard very clearly from the minister as to why his signature is 

not on that document. The fact that he was in Ontario attending 

his father-in-law’s funeral should be enough for the member 

opposite, but it’s not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about transition in 1991. I want to 

talk about the former premier who’s quoted on the front page of 

the October 23 Leader-Post as saying this. 

 

He said “If they are politically incompatible with an NDP 

administration, it makes the person not competent to carry 

out the job.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — That’s the quote of that member 

opposite. That is the feeling over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read a couple of entries into the record. 

November 29, 1991, “Government fires deputy minister of 

Social Services.” November 29, 1991, “Sedco, STC, Crown 

Management Board presidents dismissed.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a long list of people that were dismissed. 

And I’m sure that the member opposite will provide me with an 

additional question so I can get these on the record, Mr. 



March 11, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Party has spent at least a year in their backrooms 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 

spent at least a year in their backrooms studying and drafting 

legislation that could affect tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 

workers. 

 

Only after introducing their legislation in the House did they 

begin to meet with workers and labour unions to discuss 

potential changes to the province’s labour legislation. 

 

We saw it first in Domtar, Mr. Speaker, and now we’re seeing it 

again with essential services and changes to The Trade Union 

Act. This is a government that shoots first and only asks 

questions later. 

 

Can the minister outline to this Assembly exactly how 

consultations on this legislation took place? Can he tell us who 

he met with? And can he tell us, what was the outcome? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — I appreciate the question. Eighty-four 

invitations were sent out. Over 100 ads were placed. I 

personally met — either myself or the deputy minister — with 

almost 100 people. Twenty meetings were held. And I’m happy 

to provide a list of those that we met with. What I can say, it 

wasn’t just with labour, it wasn’t just with business, it wasn’t 

just with community-based organizations or post-secondary 

institutions. We heard from right across the policy community. 

We heard helpful, constructive ideas about how to bolster and 

improve the legislation, and I appreciate the time that everyone 

took during those meetings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, since the government first 

introduced their two Bills, my NDP colleagues and I have been 

meeting and discussing the Bills with our constituents and 

stakeholders. We have heard concern, we have heard anxiety, 

and we have heard apprehension. Workers are still concerned 

about the scope of the government’s essential services 

legislation, and they are concerned that the amendments to The 

Trade Union Act will disrupt the strong relationship between 

employers and employees that has led to record job growth and 

a great standard of living. 

 

I thought that the minister’s meetings were an attempt to listen 

to those concerns and to substantively address them, but 

apparently not. My question to the minister: did he actually 

intend on listening to and negotiating with the working men and 

women who voiced their concerns about these private 

consultations? Did he not hear any of these criticisms during his 

closed-door meetings, or did he just choose to ignore them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, when we think about 

essential services, and I want to be really clear because 

obviously the members opposite are having a little bit of 

challenge regarding figures. So what we can say is nine out of 

ten provinces have or have tabled essential service legislation. 

We’ve added our number to that so we can say it’s across 

Canada. What we can say is two-thirds of the people of 

Saskatchewan support essential services because they know that 

the right to strike should be balanced with public safety. 

Regarding the democratization of the workplace, we promised 

in our platform that we would act on that. Mr. Speaker, we will 

go forward but we will go forward being mindful of the 

communications and consultations that we’ve had. I guess the 

bigger question is really, will the members opposite, will they 

actually vote against public safety and vote against the essential 

service Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we know what we will vote 

for but, Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to know what to believe with this 

government. They said a couple of weeks before the election 

that they wouldn’t legislate essential services and now they’re 

doing just that. They said they’d meet with stakeholders and 

now it seems that, while they have met, they certainly haven’t 

listened. Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing here with a government 

that thinks it can govern with impunity, a government that 

makes up its mind before consulting with anyone. Both labour 

Bills 5 and 6 are wide-ranging, open-ended, and unnecessary, 

and both raise a lot of questions that the government has yet not 

answered. 

 

There’s only one way for the government to answer the 

concerns of the public: come clean and hold meaningful public 

consultations. 

 

Can the minister explain why he’s so afraid of holding public 

consultations? Is it because he knows if he did he might be 

reminded of his broken promises? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 

advanced employment and labour. 



266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised. The word 

unnecessary — the only provincial jurisdiction in Canada not to 

have essential service legislation at least tabled, and he says it’s 

not necessary. 

 

Why would we stand back and say 400 people per day being 

turned away from the Royal University Hospital? That’s not 

acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. Why would we say 

that during snowstorms, snowplow operators wouldn’t clear the 

streets? Mr. Speaker, that’s not acceptable. Why would we be 

afraid of making sure that secret ballots can be used, Mr. 

Speaker, so that people can vote their conscience? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m a little bit surprised at the language of 

unnecessary. In fact these are the very steps that it will take to 

help ensure that growth and security is a part of Saskatchewan’s 

future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, what is the minister afraid of? 

Mr. Speaker, with the minister unable to answer questions here 

in the House, it’s no wonder he doesn’t want to go out and hold 

public consultations. It’s no wonder he doesn’t want to meet out 

in the open with people who have valid and serious concerns. 

And it’s no wonder he doesn’t want to take the debate outside 

the legislature and into the open. 

 

Onlookers are left wondering why he even bothered to hold 

private meetings in the first place. We know that he met with 

groups who have serious reservations about the legislation, and 

we know that their concerns have not been addressed. Did his 

meetings really mean anything? Did he initiate the meetings 

knowing full well that he wouldn’t budge on his position? Can 

the minister explain why his consultations were nothing but 

window dressing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very impressed with the 

member opposite. Obviously he can see into the future. The 

problem is he can’t see clearly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just want 

to revisit a matter that I first raised in the Chamber back on 

December 18 and on which you ruled, Mr. Speaker, on 

December 19. It’s a matter that has to do with members’ 

statements and government members perhaps misusing this for 

purposes as ministerial statements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier today in member statements, the member 

from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley — who is the Legislative 

Secretary to the Minister of Health, with recruitment and 

retention as her responsibilities — used members’ statements to 

outline government policy with respect to nurse recruitment and 

retention and, in fact, did not mention her constituency or her 

constituents at any point during her remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your comments when I raised this issue earlier in 

December with regards to comments made by the member from 

Cannington, Mr. Speaker, your ruling stated: 

 

. . . I recognize the view that the minister’s statement could 

leave the impression that he was addressing a matter that 

falls within his ministerial jurisdiction. In reviewing the 

record, the minister was not technically out of order. 

However in order to avoid confusion, ministers may want 

to make a clear distinction that their statement is not related 

to their ministerial responsibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I argue that a Legislative Secretary to a minister 

with responsibility for a specific issue is doing the work of a 

minister and therefore, Mr. Speaker, the rules relating to 

ministerial statements apply as opposed to the rules relating to 

members’ statements. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the point 

of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if members of this Assembly listened closely to the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle, Regina Qu’Appelle’s 

member statement this afternoon, they would clearly see that 

she was speaking about an issue that is very important to her 

and all people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The people of this province have laboured under a shortage of 

nurses created by those members opposite when they were 

government of this province. And she, as everyone in this 

Chamber and in this province, should be rejoicing at the fact 

that this government under the leadership of our Premier has 

been able to successfully recruit almost 300 nurses to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

only of an interest as a minister or ministerial assistant, it’s of 

an interest as every member of this Assembly, and I think the 

member is justifiably proud of the fact that Saskatchewan has 

achieved this result today and it’s a very appropriate statement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member for that, from The 

Battlefords, for his point of order and the Government House 

Leader for his points. I am aware of what was brought to the 

member’s attention back last fall regarding ministers. As has 



March 11, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

been pointed out in the past, the members’ statements have a 

period of time where members can address issues pertinent to 

their constituencies. However, members’ statements have also 

been used to be relating to government activity by private 

members in particular, away from ministers, and I don’t . . . I 

would suggest today that outside of ministers, all members have 

an opportunity to relate to and discuss issues that are of concern 

to them and particular interest to their constituents. Thank you. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you a couple 

of constituents of mine, Ron Risling and Scott Haas, who are 

taking a break from SARM convention today. Ron is the 

administrator of the Saltcoats RM [rural municipality] which I 

was part of before, and Scott is a councillor. And I ask all 

members to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Legislative Assembly I’d like to . . . Two guests who are sitting 

in your east gallery, the president of the Federation of Labour, 

Larry Hubich, and the secretary-treasurer of the Federation of 

Labour, Marvin Meickel, I’d ask all members to welcome these 

two gentlemen to our legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 5, The 

Public Service Essential Services Act be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I speak to the legislation that will ensure 

Saskatchewan people have access to essential services during 

labour disruptions. In two prominent labour disputes in 2007, 

the people of our province were put at unfortunate risk. 

Snowplow operators walked off the job as a result of the SGEU 

[ Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union] 

public service strike last winter, and as many as 400 patients per 

day were being left without adequate medical care during the 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] strike at 

Saskatchewan’s two universities. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Our government will not sit by and allow the interruption of 

essential services as the result of these types of work stoppage. 

We are committed to ensuring the health and safety of the 

Saskatchewan people in event of strikes like these. This said, 

our government respects and will continue to respect the 

collective bargaining process. This legislation balances the 

rights of unions and workers with the need for essential services 

to ensure public safety, and it is similar to legislation passed in 

every other province in Canada except Nova Scotia, where the 

legislation like this has been tabled. 

 

We know that any strike can affect the lives of Saskatchewan’s 

people, but this legislation will ensure that lives are not 

jeopardized in the process. The legislation defines four 

categories of essential service. They are: danger to life, health, 

or safety; destruction of equipment or premises; serious 

environmental damage; or disruption to the courts. While the 

Act defines categories of essential services, it is up to the 

employer to determine the number of employees required to 

deliver those services. That said, it also provides for an 

adjustment if that number changes due to circumstances. This 

legislation is about our commitment to the health and safety of 

the people of Saskatchewan, and to our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill was introduced in the Assembly on 

December 19, 2007. At that time I undertook to gather feedback 

from concerned parties and to provide the public with an 

opportunity to make submissions and to provide advice on the 

issues raised by the Bill. During January and February, my 

officials and I had the opportunity to consult with nearly 100 

representatives. 

 

These were representatives of stakeholder groups during 20 

face-to-face meetings that either myself or my deputy minister 

were part of — stakeholders from the unions like SUN, CUPE, 

SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations], 

SEIU [Service Employees International Union]; stakeholders 

like Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, CFIB [Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business], and the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce; stakeholders from our universities and 

the health sector. Mr. Speaker, this is by no means a 

comprehensive list of individuals and groups we heard from on 

this legislation. 

 

As a result of our advertisements that ran in daily newspapers 

like The StarPhoenix and the Moose Jaw Times Herald and the 

Prince Albert Daily Herald, we received submissions from the 



268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2008 

public at large — ads that also appeared in weekly newspapers, 

alternative, and First Nation publications and coincided with 

our website explaining what the legislation would include. In 

response, we had 68 letters and emails back providing feedback 

and insights and ideas about this legislation. This consultation, 

this consultative process, was broad, constructive, respectful, 

and a necessary part of moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to 

the people who took the time to meet with me and my officials, 

and the individuals and organizations that provided written 

submissions. During the consultations we received some 

important and valuable feedback concerning this legislation. In 

response to that feedback, our government will be proposing 

some House amendments when the Bill proceeds to committee 

— House amendments that will help to clarify the spirit of the 

legislation without affecting its intent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s public service essential services 

Act will ensure that the safety and health of the public will not 

be put at risk in the event of labour disruptions. A prosperous 

and safe future for all Saskatchewan people is a commitment 

that this government will not hesitate to keep. Once again, I 

move second reading of Bill 5, The Public Service Essential 

Services Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak to Bill 

No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act. I understand 

that shortly the Assembly will move into committee to discuss 

supplementary estimates. In the interest of time and to ensure 

that my full remarks will not be interrupted later when we move 

to committee, and to preserve my place in the speaking order, I 

move that debate on Bill No. 5 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the motion agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move 

second reading of Bill 6, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 

2007. Through these amendments to our legislation, we’re 

keeping our promise to foster a fair and balanced labour 

environment in Saskatchewan. These amendments aim to 

promote co-operative, productive, and healthy work 

environments for employers and employees while ensuring that 

Saskatchewan is competitive with other Canadian jurisdictions. 

 

We are proposing amendments to section 6 of the Act to require 

a secret ballot vote before any union is certified as the 

bargaining agent for a group of employees. The amendment to 

section 6 will also require that a union show 45 per cent support 

in the proposed bargaining unit before the Labour Relations 

Board will order a certification vote. 

 

Secret ballot votes are already required for every union 

certification in Alberta, Ontario, and British Columbia. Secret 

ballots are also an integral part of the democratic system, and I 

don’t think it should be necessary to trumpet their virtues in this 

Assembly where all members have been chosen by secret 

ballot. 

 

As well the requirement that a union show 45 per cent support 

in the proposed bargaining unit before the Labour Relations 

Board will order a vote is within the bandwidth of legislation in 

Western Canada. Alberta, Manitoba, and Ontario have a 40 per 

cent threshold; in British Columbia, the requirement is 45 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. In Western Canada the 

threshold is between 40 and 45 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can only maximize its great 

promise and potential if we are competitive with other Canadian 

jurisdictions. We are experiencing growth in this province right 

now, and we want to sustain this economic expansion by 

ensuring that we are moving forward with moderate, 

progressive legislation. The 25 per cent threshold currently 

required for a certification vote in Saskatchewan is a curious 

and now antiquated anomaly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not amending section 8 of The Trade Union 

Act respecting the quorum of votes. Right now certification of a 

union requires that a majority of employees who actually vote 

favour a union in its workplace, and that will remain. 

 

Regarding amendments to section 10.1 and 10.2 concerning 

certification and decertification after an unfair labour practice, 

this amendment will also require 45 per cent threshold of 

employee support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next change to The Trade Union Act we are 

proposing concerns section 11(1) of the Act. We clarify the 

right of employers to communicate with their employees at all 

times, including during union organizing drive. Fundamentally 

this is about responsible communication. This communication 

will still not allow for interference, for restraint, to intimidate, 

threaten, or coerce an employee. 

 

It’s an unfair labour practice anywhere in Canada for an 

employer to interfere with, restrain, intimidate, threaten, coerce 

an employee in the exercise of an employee’s right. Similar 

prohibitions exist for unions. This amendment makes it clear 

that an employer has the freedom and responsibility to lawfully 

communicate facts and opinions to his or her employees. 

 

Let me be clear. Our government will defend the right of 

employers to engage in responsible communication. We believe 

that open, two-way communication can help to ensure both 

workers and employers are able to make informed decisions. 



March 11, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

Currently in Canada federal employers can express a personal 

point of view to employees. British Columbia, Alberta, 

Manitoba, and Ontario allow employers to communicate with 

their employees in some fashion or another. Again, however, it 

must be done without threatening or providing influence. 

 

Let me reiterate, Mr. Speaker, in Western Canada, open 

communication is the norm. 

 

Several sections have also been added to the Act within the 

proposed legislation. Section 12.1 has been added to impose a 

90-day deadline on employers and unions for filing application 

alleging an unfair labour practice. This will ensure that parties 

bring their concerns to the board in a timely matter. 

 

Section 21.1 is added to impose a six-month deadline on the 

board to issue a decision following a hearing. If the decision is 

not issued in that time, either party can apply to the court for an 

order requiring the board to issue its decision; and from both 

employers and bargaining units, we heard that there was a 

consensus on this. They wanted more rapid decisions from the 

LRB [Labour Relations Board]. 

 

In recent consultations with unions, employers, and interested 

stakeholders, we saw this consensus come to the fore. As well, 

to promote transparency for business, section 21.1 has been 

added. It requires the board to submit an annual report 

containing the details of cases heard, the time between filing of 

the application and hearing, and the time between the hearing 

and issuing a decision. 

 

Section 21.2 will require details on each member of the board 

respecting the matters heard and the average length of time 

between hearing a matter and rendering a decision because what 

gets measured gets done, Mr. Speaker. We want greater 

transparency, Mr. Speaker, and so do the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the fourth amendment we are proposing is 

to section 33 of the Act. Members will know that section 33 

limits the effective length of a collective agreement to three 

years. In the past, employers such as IPSCO and Shaw Pipe 

have requested and received legislation allowing them to enter 

into collective agreements that are longer than three years. The 

most recent example of this was The Collective Bargaining 

Agreement Expiry Date Exception Act passed in 2005. No 

other jurisdiction in Canada has a legislated limit on the length 

of collective agreements, other than Quebec where first 

collective agreements only are limited to a three-year term. 

 

Further, as of 2005, there were approximately 50 collective 

agreements in force in Saskatchewan that ran longer than 36 

months. The obvious question that arises is how desirable is it 

to maintain an arbitrary limit of three years duration for 

collective agreements when there are already 50 exceptions in 

place? So we’re removing that arbitrary limit by repealing the 

related subsections of section 33. 

 

Our government is committed to ensuring Saskatchewan has 

legislation that is clear, effective, and sensible. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe this package of amendments is both timely and 

appropriate. Mr. Speaker, we live in a democratic province in a 

democratic country. Unions themselves are also democratic 

organizations. Nothing in the amendments intrudes on the rights 

of either unions or employers, and the changes are rooted in 

long-established democratic principles — principles that our 

province and country value and respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will help to ensure a fair and 

balanced labour environment for workers and employers alike 

in Saskatchewan while keeping us competitive with other 

Canadian jurisdictions. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I move 

second reading of Bill 6, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 

2007. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has moved second reading 

of Bill No. 6, The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007. Is it the 

privilege of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak to 

Bill No. 6, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act. Mr. 

Speaker, if passed in its current form, Bill No. 6 will have very 

serious consequences for the working people of Saskatchewan, 

consequences that the Sask Party government seems not to have 

considered. Mr. Speaker, as poorly written, unnecessary, and 

severe as Bill No. 6 is, in many ways it should not be a surprise 

to anyone. In many ways it’s absolutely consistent with 

everything that the Sask Party has always stood for. 

 

As you will recall, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party was formed by a 

union of rabid right wing Conservatives too determined to allow 

a little scandal to deter them from their attempts to impose their 

ideological views upon the people of Saskatchewan and 

Liberals, Mr. Speaker, Liberals willing to forsake any of the 

views they had subsequently professed in order to change their 

political fortunes. These types of Liberals were the types not 

principled enough to remain relevant to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Of course only a person of particular grace and vision could 

have led such a group, Mr. Speaker, which inevitably led the 

party to a man too severe, too conservative, too interested in 

political success to remain involved with the beloved Reform 

Party. It was under the leadership of this man that the Sask 

Party first introduced the idea of boot camps for young 

offenders, the notion that private, for-profit health care was the 

best option for Saskatchewan, and of course the idea that our 

great province was a labour . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask . . . Order. I would ask 

members to allow the member from Regina Walsh Acres to 

continue her statement. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And of course 

the idea that our great province was a labour dictatorship. It 

wasn’t long however before the leader and his Sask Party 

realized that few people in Saskatchewan shared their hard, 

right wing ideology and, under the leadership of the current 

Premier, they softened their image. Soon the people of the 

province began to hear that the Sask Party intended only to 

rebalance labour legislation without ever mentioning what it 

was that led them to believe that any imbalance existed at all. 



270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2008 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a few short months after an election, we see 

that the Sask Party had anything but balance in mind. It should 

now be clear to everyone that the Sask Party members were 

simply willing to say anything they thought the public wanted 

to hear before the election and then do things entirely different 

after the election. In light of Bills 2 and 5, it seems that the Sask 

Party is allowing itself to regress or perhaps its members never 

believed in its more moderate image at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the true Sask Party is back, and it’s not going to 

allow simple facts or public outcry to interfere with the 

imposition of its misguided ideology. Bill No. 6 clearly proves 

that one of the few promises to the people of Saskatchewan that 

the Sask Party intends to keep is the promise to go to war with 

labour. 

 

My colleagues and I will have much more to say on this topic, 

Mr. Speaker. But I understand that shortly the Assembly will 

move into committee to examine supplementary estimates. In 

the interest of time and to ensure that my full remarks will not 

be interrupted later when we move to committee and to preserve 

my place in the speaking order, I move that debate on Bill No. 6 

be now adjourned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the important work of the committees to go forward this 

afternoon, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:43.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 257 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 257 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 267 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 267 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 258 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 258 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 259 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel .................................................................................................................................. 259 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Recruitment of Nurses 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 259 

 Regina Citizen of the Year 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 259 

 Saskatchewan Business Success Story 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 

 High School Boys’ Curling Championship 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 

 Recognition of Ms. Josie Der’s Long Service 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 260 

 Cultural Diversity and Race Relations Month 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 260 

 Spending on Staff Salaries 

  Huyghebaert .............................................................................................................................................................................. 261 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Communication Regarding Plans for Education 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 261 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 261 

 Labour Relations Board 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 262 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 264 

 Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 265 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 265 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 266 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 266 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 266 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 267 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 268 

 Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 268 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 269 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


