




















































Hansard: October 27, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 3A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1365 

 October 27, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I move to introduction of guests, I just 

want to take a moment and indulge the members. Thank you. 

Last week we had a request for an extended introduction of 

guests and leave was granted. But after having listened to the 

introduction, I would just like to ask members that when you’re 

doing introductions, to introduce people directly is appropriate; 

a short comment is certainly appropriate. However I’ve found 

that . . . In the future, the extended introduction could have been 

part of a member’s statement as well. So if members would 

keep that in mind, that would be greatly appreciated. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Through you and to members of this Legislative Assembly, it’s 

a great pleasure and an honour for me to introduce to members 

His Excellency, Tsuneo Nishida. Mr. Nishida is Japan’s 

ambassador to Canada and he joins us today in the Speaker’s 

gallery. He is accompanied by Mr. Koji Tamura. Mr. Tamura is 

the second secretary in Japan’s embassy in Canada. 

 

And joining both of them today is someone who is no stranger 

to this Assembly or to really any government building in the 

city of Regina. Mr. Arthur Wakabayashi has joined these two. 

Mr. Wakabayashi is the honorary consul for Japan in 

Saskatchewan and of course a very distinguished public servant 

here in the province. 

 

And may I say on a personal note, he was willing some years 

ago to provide some accommodations to a well-meaning 

summer student who had yet not made the proper rental 

arrangements, and something that I’m still grateful for today. 

 

It’s going to be my pleasure to meet with the ambassador and 

the second secretary and Mr. Wakabayashi a little bit later on. 

Of course the relationship between Saskatchewan and Japan is 

very important and we want to further it. We want to see it 

develop and, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the meeting. But 

I’d ask all members to welcome our very special guests to this 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier in welcoming His Excellency the ambassador, the 

second secretary, and Mr. Wakabayashi to our Chamber this 

afternoon on behalf of the official opposition, and to thank the 

ambassador and the people of Japan for the hospitality that you 

have shown to the province and the people of Saskatchewan 

when we’ve had opportunity to visit in Japan. We hope that you 

feel the same hospitality here. And with the Premier, we look 

forward to building the relationship between your great nation, 

our great province and nation. 

And a vivid memory that I have of my own opportunity to visit 

in Japan was the warm reception we were given in regard to the 

Saskatchewan barley that appears in every can of Sapporo beer. 

So we hope you enjoy the hospitality as you have extended 

hospitality to us. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the Assembly I would like 

to introduce, seated in your gallery, Senator Rich Wardner and 

his wife Kayleen of North Dakota. Their hometown is 

Dickinson. And Senator Wardner was here today to have 

various meetings with government officials and members of the 

opposition to discuss the relationship between North Dakota 

and Saskatchewan. 

 

As well he was here on the weekend to watch the Rider game 

and to see Weston Dressler perform. Weston Dressler, as 

everybody in Saskatchewan knows, is from North Dakota, and 

played his college ball in Dickinson. But also, as well Rich 

Wardner and Kayleen both went to college with Ken Miller 

who is the coach of the Riders. So I’d ask everyone to welcome 

them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords, 

the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too wish to welcome the 

senator and his wife from North Dakota. I had the opportunity 

to spend some time in North Dakota this summer. I’ve had the 

opportunity with members of government in the past to visit the 

North Dakota legislature, and I find the similarities between the 

state of North Dakota and the province of Saskatchewan to be 

very similar. 

 

It is a great pleasure to have the senator and his wife with us 

today, and we join the members of the government today in 

welcoming them here to our fair province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly the new 

assistant commissioner of the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] for F Division, Dale McGowan, and his 

second-in-command, Chief Superintendent Randy Beck, in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Assistant Commissioner McGowan joined the RCMP back in 

1978. In those days I was 14 years old and didn’t have a clue 

what I was going to do in my life, Mr. Speaker, and I have to 

wonder how many people in this Assembly were even born 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

back then, Mr. Speaker. And over his 30 years with the RCMP, 

Assistant Commissioner McGowan has acquired a wealth of 

operational, northern, and First Nations experience, making him 

the perfect candidate to lead our provincial police force. This 

summer we were extremely pleased too that he accepted the 

highly sought after position of Commanding Officer of F 

Division. 

 

Chief Superintendent Randy Beck started with the RCMP in 

1975. He served in British Columbia and Alberta before 

moving to Saskatchewan earlier this year with his wife, Lois. 

He’s currently the officer in charge of criminal operations in 

this province. 

 

Over the past few weeks my ministry officials and I have met 

with these two gentlemen on several occasions. Assistant 

Commissioner McGowan and Chief Superintendent Randy 

Beck are full of new, innovative ideas that I believe will help 

this government in the goal of creating a safe province for all. 

 

So I want to say to the assistant commissioner, welcome to 

Saskatchewan and congratulations on your new position. We 

are incredibly fortunate to have someone with your experience 

and background leading our provincial police force and I’m 

confident with your abilities and I . . . We’ll both look forward 

to seeing a very safe, secure province in the future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you again, I want to 

welcome our new guests, F Division commander Dale 

McGowan and Chief Superintendent Randy Beck. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I would like to join with the minister 

in welcoming our guests today — Assistant Commissioner 

McGowan, Chief Superintendent Beck. We wish you well in 

your endeavours here in our province and we all, on behalf of 

the official opposition, welcome you to Saskatchewan. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today I had the honour of meeting with 14 individuals who have 

given tirelessly of themselves, their time, and their knowledge 

to work with people on our various housing authorities. We had 

a long service awards luncheon and many of them have joined 

us today in the legislature. And I would like to name the 

recipients who received long service awards, and if I could get 

them to wave when they are named, that would be great. 

 

So with us today from the Borden Housing Authority, we have 

Jean Hryniuk who served for 25 years. From the Edam Housing 

Authority, we have Minard Thom who served for 30 years. 

From Lake Lenore Housing Authority, we have Bernadette 

Schemenauer who’s served for 25 years. From the Leroy 

Housing Authority, we have Dianna Knaus who has served for 

30 years. From the Ogema Housing Authority, we have Garnet 

Eden, who has served for 25 years. 

 

From the Pelly Housing Authority, we have Peter Negraeff who 

has served for 25 years. From the Radville Housing Authority, 

we have Darlene Lund who has served for 25 years. From Rose 

Valley Housing Authority, we have Rose Gandzalas who has 

served for 25 years. From the Theodore Housing Authority, we 

have Violet Luciw who has served for 25 years. Also from the 

Theodore Housing Authority, we have Sheila Koshman who 

has served for 25 years. 

 

From the Turtleford Housing Authority, we have David Wooff 

who has served for 30 years. From the Warman Housing 

Authority, we have Elmer Boehr who has served for 30 years. 

And from White Fox Housing Authority, we have Ruth Davis 

who has served for 25 years. 

 

Someone who couldn’t join us today, Mr. Speaker, from the 

Parkside Housing Authority, was Stewart Johnson. I would like 

everyone in the House to join me in thanking these individuals 

for all of the work that they have done to serve those within 

their various communities. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join in with the minister in recognizing these outstanding 

individuals for their long service in making these programs in 

Saskatchewan Housing Authority work right across this 

province. So thank you very much on behalf of her loyal 

opposition. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I would like to introduce to the House 

today 22 grade 11 history students from the town of Kelvington, 

Saskatchewan. One student that I’d like to point out in 

particular is a young man that came from Holland. He joined 

with us this morning. We had an opportunity to discuss what we 

do as elected officials. And I assure you that there was a lot of 

not only interest, but there was a lot of enthusiasm. And these 

young people are watching what we are doing as elected people. 

 

I would also like to welcome Jim Lissinna here again. He brings 

his students here every year, and I appreciate that. And while 

I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome the 

people from the housing authorities and the people that drove 

them today from our constituency. Please welcome these people 

to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you three visitors who 

are seated behind the bar on the floor of the legislature. They’re 

here from The Bentley, which is a retirement and care facility 

on Hillsdale in the constituency of Regina Douglas Park. These 

visitors are Janice Kerr — she’s the activity director for The 

Bentley — Jerry Deshaye and Jean Smith. 

 

And I would ask all members to join with me in extending a 

very warm welcome to our visitors. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a pleasure to introduce a young lady seated in the west 

gallery. The young lady’s name is Gabriela Ivascu. Gabriela 

joined the Ministry of Education as a communications 

consultant earlier this month. 

 

But more interestingly, Gabriela immigrated to Canada from 

Romania in June 2007. She lived in Toronto for one year and 

then moved to Saskatchewan two months ago. Gabriela visited 

her friends in Regina twice while she was still living in 

Toronto, and this gave her an excellent opportunity to get to 

know this city and the province of Saskatchewan. Gabriela 

decided to move to Regina because of the growing economy of 

Saskatchewan and the welcoming nature of its people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in welcoming Gabriela to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Assembly, I’d like to introduce a couple sitting in the east 

gallery, George and Bernice Adolph. They’re in the city visiting 

friends. They’re constituents of mine. They are avid viewers of 

the legislative channel, and they’ve come here to take in the live 

proceedings. 

 

But I think what is specially, and what gives me some pride in 

doing this, is that they have come here and they are celebrating 

their 52nd anniversary with us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, they were married in Duff on 

October this day in 1956. They have two children and five 

grandchildren. Mr. Speaker, I think it is because of people like 

this that democracy is alive and well in Saskatchewan. And I 

ask all members to welcome this great couple to our Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I was remiss when I was on 

my feet earlier to introduce a special guest that’s joined us in 

the west gallery, a constituent of mine, an individual from Swift 

Current who dedicated much of his life to education and then in 

education administration in Swift Current. In fact when I was at 

the comp high school, this gentleman, Menno Martens, was the 

vice-principal there — in charge in part, to be sure, with dealing 

with kids who were truant. And I’m happy to report today, Mr. 

Speaker, that I really never got to know him in a professional 

capacity. 

 

But he’s also undertaken a number of leadership activities in 

our community, and undertaken some very important leadership 

work within the Mennonite brethren conference of Canada. And 

I just want all members, if they would, to join with me in 

welcoming Mr. Martens to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you I’d like to introduce a constituent of mine 

seated in your gallery. Ken Sutherland is the mayor of Torquay. 

And he’s also on my executive, Mr. Speaker, and he’s very 

involved with several boards in his area. So I’d like everyone to 

welcome Ken to this legislature. And while I’m on my feet, I 

would also like to again welcome Darlene Lund from the 

Radville Housing Authority. And I hope you both enjoy your 

visit here today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move further, I’d just like to 

remind our guests that we’re really honoured to have you with 

us here today, but we would ask that you refrain from any 

further involvement or participation in the debate. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 

families that are struggling or unable to find child care spaces 

for their children. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan by the year 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw 

and Regina. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I offer a petition in support of public safety and 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

security in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker:  

 

That public safety and security of our communities is of 

critical importance to Saskatchewan families and 

residents; that as dangerous escaped inmates were loose in 

our communities, residents and families feared for their 

safety; that responding to concerns over the jail break, the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing denied 

that gangs are a problem; that this displayed the minister’s 

lack of understanding of the risks and challenges that 

street gangs pose to our communities and to our 

correctional institutions. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders including the policing 

community, the corrections community, community 

agencies, organizations, and educators that interface with 

gangs and understand the risks and challenges that gangs 

present to our communities. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning tuition fees in Saskatchewan. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to addressing the burden placed by 

high post-secondary tuition fees on Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Just another reminder to 

members: in presenting petitions it’s been a standing tradition 

that we only read the prayer, maybe just a brief outline of what 

it is, but we don’t read the whole petition. So if we can keep 

that in mind. For those members who did follow the rules, thank 

you very much. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday I was pleased 

to attend the 25th annual Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] Awards, 

recognizing business excellence in our province. 

 

The winners in the various categories were: Terminal Systems 

International Inc. of Saskatoon for new Saskatchewan-made 

products, Millennium Directional Service Ltd. of Carlyle for 

new venture, Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority for job 

creation, Cowtown of Regina for marketing, PSI Technologies 

of Saskatoon for physical environment, Casinos Regina and 

Moose Jaw for service, Partners In Motion of Regina for capital 

investment, Seed Hawk Inc. of Langbank for exports, and 

Cameco Corporation for Aboriginal business. 

 

Dennis Goll of Westwind Aviation LLP, Saskatoon, was 

recognized as Business Leader of the Year; while Jessica 

Williamson of Hoopla Clothing in Moose Jaw was recognized 

as Young Entrepreneur of the Year. The Mosaic Company was 

a double winner for community involvement, and it was 

recognized as overall Business of the Year. Finally, Mr. 

Speaker, Doepker Industries Ltd. was inducted into the 

Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame for their contribution to 

the province’s economic well-being.  

 

I would ask members to join with me in recognizing the 

winners and all finalists of these ABEX Awards, as well as the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce and all the sponsors who 

made for a successful awards evening. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Expression of Deep Concern 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 

23, 2008, the Premier of Saskatchewan wrote a letter to the 

Governor General of Canada expressing our deep concern over 

the case of the late Master Corporal Jeffrey Scott Walsh. Master 

Corporal Walsh, formerly of Regina, died on August 9, 2006 

while on patrol near Kandahar, Afghanistan. He died just six 

days after being redeployed, just one day after he celebrated his 

33rd birthday. 

 

Walsh’s father, Ben, works in this building. That means Master 

Corporal Walsh is not only a member of a proud military 

fraternity; he is also a member of our family here in the 

Legislative Assembly. The family has been told that Master 

Corporal Walsh is not eligible for the recently announced 

Sacrifice Medal since his death was not the direct result of 

hostile actions. We respectfully disagree. As the Premier wrote 

in his letter, and I quote: 

 

I would argue that the origin of the fatal wound is entirely 

irrelevant. Master Corporal Walsh put himself in harm’s 

way in a field of battle in response to a direct order from 

his military superiors . . . [He] died serving his country in 

a combat theatre. He made the ultimate sacrifice for you 

and me, for our country and in the selfless service of 

others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank Mr. and Mrs. Walsh for attending our 

Speech from the Throne last week. Our thoughts and prayers 

are with them as they continue their healing journey. 

 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

In closing I’d like to read a few lines from a poem that Master 

Corporal Walsh wrote to his six-year-old daughter when she 

asked, why are you going to Afghanistan? And the poem reads: 

 

I know that they are out there 

I will not be ignorant any more 

Pulling the blanket over my head will not keep them from 

coming ashore. 

Instead, I choose to confront them, as afraid as I might be. 

Because if I don’t stop the monsters, our children will 

never be free. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Nashi Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, poverty in the Ukraine has 

created a society in which children have become that country’s 

greatest social concern. Economic instability is at the heart of 

this issue contributing to high unemployment rates in Ukraine. 

 

Due to this extreme situation, children as young as eight are 

being forced into the sex trade. Nashi, a Saskatoon-based 

volunteer organization, has made the injustice of human 

trafficking the centre of their focus. Their projects address 

poverty, but their goal is to ensure that children do not become 

sex trade workers. It is their belief that this can be achieved 

through education and awareness. 

 

Four years ago Nashi partnered with the Pochaiv project in 

Ukraine to establish a small trade school that taught sewing and 

computer courses. The school was moved into a larger facility 

in Ivano-Frankivsk, and now over 50 young women are 

enrolled in sewing and computer classes daily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the privilege of attending the 

Nashi harvest brunch at St. Philip School auditorium in 

Saskatoon. Over 200 guests and volunteers at the event were 

given an opportunity to bid on homemade harvest auction items 

from the silent auction, as well as enjoy a delicious brunch. 

 

All proceeds from the event will be used in the establishment of 

an educational living model project. The Klenovi Lyst or Maple 

Leaf Centre in Ukraine will have an educational component 

coupled with a strong emphasis on building social and 

economic life skills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in recognizing 

Nashi and its devoted group of volunteers for taking on the 

daunting task of fighting the exploitation of children of 

Ukraine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

 

Achievement in Business Excellence Awards Dinner 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 25th annual 

ABEX dinner Saturday night in Regina gave us an opportunity 

to recognize businesses which have made great achievements 

and contributions to our province. 

 

The Mosaic Company, one of the largest potash producers in 

the world, was named Saskatchewan Business of the Year as 

well as the winner of the ABEX award for the community 

involvement category. 

 

The New Venture Award, presented by the Minister of 

Enterprise and Innovation, was won by Millennium Directional 

Services of Carlyle. And as a member of Moose Jaw North, I 

watched with pride as Jessica Williamson of Hoopla Clothing 

of Moose Jaw won the Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award. 

 

Inducted into the Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame was 

Doepker Industries. After starting as a small machine shop in 

Annaheim, Saskatchewan 60 years ago, Doepker now serves 

Western Canada and the northern United States with 

manufacturing locations in Annaheim and in Moose Jaw. 

 

The ABEX awards for exceptional performance in creating new 

permanent jobs was won by the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 

Authority. The Business Leader of the Year was presented to 

Dennis Goll of West Wind Aviation and the Aboriginal 

Business Award was won by Cameco Corporation. 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I congratulate 

the award recipients and extend congratulations to all 

businesses and organizations involved in the ABEX awards. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Saskatchewan Education Week 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this week marks Education 

Week, intended to celebrate and thank all who contribute to 

education within Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to thank the parents whose support of and 

involvement with their children’s education is so valued. I 

would like to recognize the many community partners, 

agencies, groups, and businesses that rally to support education 

and students within their respective communities. I would like 

to thank all of those employed to ensure excellence in education 

in Saskatchewan — from the custodians who keep our facilities 

safe, clean, and inviting; to the teacher assistants who support 

our most vulnerable students. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our educational 

administrators for their direction, innovation, and leadership; 

our school board trustees for their governance and commitment; 

and our professional civil service for their work. 

 

I would like to specifically thank our teachers within 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan teachers are of envy around the 

world for their leadership methods, education, and commitment 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

to, and care for, their students — our future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, education is the backbone of a healthy society, a 

democratic nation. Education is integral in progressing the 

social and economic circumstance of each student, our 

communities, and our province as a whole. Mr. Speaker, as 

Education critic for the official opposition, it is my honour to 

highlight, celebrate, and thank all who contribute to education 

in Saskatchewan. And I ask members on both sides of this 

Assembly to join me in extending this recognition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Women’s History Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, each 

year in October Saskatchewan joins with fellow Canadians to 

celebrate Women’s History Month and to recognize how 

women have shaped our history and continue to make vital 

contributions to the economic, social, political, and cultural 

fabric of our country. 

 

October is also the month when we celebrate the 1929 Persons 

Case — a court challenge that fundamentally altered and 

advanced the status of women in Canada. It began with five 

women who sought to overturn the 1876 court ruling that 

women are persons in matters of pains and penalties, but are not 

persons in matters of rights and privileges. They succeeded. For 

the first time in Canada, women could serve as elected officials 

on school and hospital boards and in politics. 

 

As you look around this legislature today, you will be reminded 

of the role women are playing in shaping the future of 

Saskatchewan. In 1919 Sarah Ramsland sat as the first female 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in Saskatchewan. 

Today there are 11 other female MLAs sitting in the legislature 

with me, all striving to make a difference in their province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to take the time to honour 

the women in their lives and ensure that future generations of 

Saskatchewan women have equal opportunity with men to 

enjoy security and prosperity in our province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, October is Breast Cancer 

Awareness Month which presents itself as an added opportunity 

to provide information on breast health and breast cancer, as 

early detection and treatment remains instrumental in fighting 

back. 

 

Breast cancer is the most common cancer among Canadian 

women. One in nine Canadian women is expected to develop 

breast cancer during her lifetime. In 2008 an estimated 5,300 

women and 50 men will die from breast cancer in Canada. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that in Saskatchewan the efforts 

being undertaken to raise funds to deal with the many aspects of 

breast cancer are monumental. I’d like to mention a few of 

them. The CIBC Run for the Cure was yet again a major 

success despite the inclement conditions. Approximately 2,100 

participants raised more than $360,000 to contribute to the 

national total of $27 million. 

 

Saskatchewan Roughrider Mike Abou-Mechrek, whose mother 

is diagnosed with breast cancer, along with his wife Kathie and 

the help of the Riders organization raised $30,000 to date with 

an ongoing option at www.abou67.com. Runner Ted Jaleta, 

whose sister lost a battle with breast cancer at the age of 31, 

donated $2,000 raised from the sale of his book, Never Give 

Up. 

 

Having lost my mother, Marianne Grobmeier, to breast cancer 

only a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, I commend the efforts of all 

those who help make these fundraisers a success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Utility Rates 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you to the 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]: why did the Sask Party care about the 

affordability of utility bills in opposition but now is completely 

insensitive to people’s immediate needs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

question. I will attempt to answer it the best I can. Mr. Speaker, 

nobody likes to see utility rates when they increase or they go 

up in our province. It’s happening across the country; it’s 

happening across North America. What we do have in 

Saskatchewan is a commitment to keep the rates as low as 

possible. And that’s what’s been happening. 

 

If we use SaskEnergy for an example, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy 

does not make any money on the commodity itself. Rates have 

gone up recently, but if you look at it over a two-year period, 

the rates went down 11 per cent. They went up 19 per cent. 

They went up an average of 10 per cent over a 24-month period 

— 5 per cent per year. That’s the reality of the situation here. 

But we do have a commitment that we’ll keep rates as low as 

possible for Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for 

Coronation Park. 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the 

government’s Throne Speech, which is the blueprint for the 

coming year, there’s not one mention at all about Saskatchewan 

families struggling with higher home heating bills this winter. 

From north to south, Saskatchewan people are trying to figure 

out how to pay their bills and heat their homes this winter. All 

these people are being ignored by this minister. Why does the 

Sask Party minister insist on hoarding the surplus when people 

are in need of help this winter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It seems like we’re going to get 

more doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, from the opposition, the 

members opposite. But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to . . . I’ll use SaskEnergy for example. Saskatchewan 

residents paid the lowest cost across the country in the last 12 

months when it comes to SaskEnergy. 

 

Furthermore to that, Mr. Speaker — and I know that the 

member opposite will know this because of what happened in 

the legislature last week — but Saskatchewan residents, 

because of this government, saw the largest tax decrease ever in 

Saskatchewan’s history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, a family of four with 

an income level of 25,000 saw their benefits increased $1,440 

— that’s what they will be receiving from them. Mr. Speaker, 

this is a commitment from this government to ensure that all 

people in Saskatchewan will join in the prosperity that we’re 

seeing in our province today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing held a news conference 

to announce that yet another dangerous offender from the 

Regina Correctional Centre was unlawfully at large — the 

second time this has happened in less than two months. During 

the scrum, the minister said, the first priority I have is public 

safety and letting the public know when a dangerous offender is 

unlawfully at large. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: if keeping the 

public informed is indeed his first priority, why was the public 

kept in the dark for several hours after his officials realized that 

a dangerous offender was on the loose? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the member opposite for that question as well. Public safety is 

this government’s priority, Mr. Speaker. And just on that note, 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney back in 2006, 

when talking about notification of the public, Mr. Speaker, in 

Hansard — a great research tool we have here — said that, 

quote: 

 

When an escape occurs at the provincial correctional 

centre, Mr. Speaker, the RCMP are immediately notified 

and it is the purview of the Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police to notify the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Really, to let the RCMP notify the public is one step, Mr. 

Speaker. This government changed the policy that we will in 

fact do one measure higher. We will in fact notify the public as 

well, Mr. Speaker. As well, Mr. Speaker, unlike that other 

government and that previous minister, this government takes 

public safety seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in late August the minister 

unveiled with great fanfare a so-called new policy that would 

ensure the public was kept informed. Now it appears that the 

minister’s hand-picked deputy minister failed to implement his 

new policy. Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: why 

has this so-called new policy of public disclosure failed at its 

very first test? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the 

members opposite and I want . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Justice has been 

recognized and has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the 

members opposite for the question. It is the position of this 

government that we wish to be open, transparent, and 

accountable. The most senior official in my department, 

Douglas Moen, has been tasked with doing a review not only of 

the first incident but of the second incident which happened in a 

Saskatoon courthouse. Mr. Speaker, that review and 

examination will be careful and thorough and will determine 

what problems existed before, what problems existed now, and 

what changes need to be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can advise you that that senior official, Douglas 

Moen, worked through the weekend with officials from 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing; Justice, and the various 

courts, to ensure that there is an interim protocol put in place. 

And that protocol, Mr. Speaker, has been put in place effective 

today. We will work forward from, and we will improve that as 

we go on, as we learn from that protocol, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

unfortunate they won’t let the minister answer his own 

questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was not the only incident last week where the 

public was kept in the dark about an offender being unlawfully 

at large. On Saturday Saskatchewan people learned that an 

individual who had been sentenced to eight months in jail was 

mistakenly released at the Saskatoon Court House last Monday. 

That’s five days, Mr. Speaker, that the public was kept in the 

dark after the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety assured 

us we’d be notified immediately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: why did it take so 

long for the minister, and more importantly the public, to be 

informed that a person convicted of violence was unlawfully at 

large in Saskatoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House, 

when the incident that happened last Monday happened in a 

Saskatoon courtroom . . . It did not happen in a correctional 

centre; it happened in a courthouse with Ministry of Justice 

officials. There is no doubt there was a mistake made on that 

date. It was a mistake, Mr. Speaker, that should not have 

happened. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the troubling aspect of that 

was that the matter was not brought forward for several days 

later on. It was troubling for me personally to learn about it at a 

Crime Stoppers event later on in the weekend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the House that that incident is 

included in the review that Mr. Moen has undertaken, and I can 

advise this House that we have already put steps in place to try 

and ensure that this does not happen again. 

 

It is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that when those members 

were in government that there was no such process in place, and 

what happened when they were in government was they left it 

up to the police. There was no protocol, there was no sharing of 

information. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there was nothing that they 

did on their watch, and they sloughed it off and did not take it 

seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will be open, transparent, and 

accountable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It seems 

once again the Premier doesn’t have enough confidence to 

allow his Minister of Public Safety to speak. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only reason the public learned that a person 

convicted of violence was unlawfully at large in Saskatoon is 

because the Minister of Justice went to dinner with Crime 

Stoppers. Mr. Speaker, it’s deeply troubling and disturbing, to 

say the least, when matters of public safety depend on a 

minister’s social calendar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: why has the 

minister failed so utterly in his responsibility to keep the public 

informed of threats to their safety? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when the members 

opposite were in government, there is a series of troubling 

repeat events where they had done nothing about it, nothing to 

indicate. And I can go back, Mr. Speaker: May 2006, Provincial 

Court in Regina, individuals switched identity and were 

wrongfully released; 2007, January, the serving person released; 

July ’07, serving person released by . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It’s not only difficult when the 

opposition interferes, but it’s extremely difficult when members 

of the minister’s own caucus are interfering with the response. 

Order, member from Regina Dewdney. The Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the events go back until 

May 2006 that we’ve located so far, and I’m sure that there are 

many more of them that go back even further, where individuals 

have switched identity, were released while serving, and were 

improperly released. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people across did nothing when they were in 

government. The difference with this government now is that 

we will take responsibility for these things. We will ensure that 

proper protocols are put in place. And we will take steps, Mr. 

Speaker, to try and reduce the risk to the public by having 

people at large when they should not be at large. Public safety is 

paramount, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, they need to come clean. In last 

Friday’s scrum, the minister stated, and I quote, “It sure makes 

me wonder who is running the ship over there.” Mr. Speaker, I 

had assumed that the minister and his hand-picked deputy were 

running the ship over there. But it appears I was mistaken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: did his 

investigation manage to find out over the weekend who’s 

steering the ship at Corrections, Public Safety and Policing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

just to once again clarify the record here, Mr. Speaker: from 

2002 to 2007, 21 inmates escaped under that previous 

government’s watch, Mr. Speaker. And in not one of those 

cases, Mr. Speaker, did that government notify the public, Mr. 

Speaker. The RCMP . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Not one? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Not one. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, after the escape in August, our government 

put a new policy in place, Mr. Speaker. While I was notified 

about the offender that was released at 4 o’clock in the 

afternoon on Thursday, I directed my officials, Mr. Speaker, to 

do that and the media policy was followed, Mr. Speaker. This 

government takes public safety very seriously, Mr. Speaker, 

once again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the minister said that the public can 

rest assured that he is in control of his ministry. Unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, recent events — and in some cases the minister’s 

own words — call that into question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: who should the 

public hold responsible for the fact that a dangerous offender 

was unlawfully at large for more than a day before they were 

informed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 

in the House that it is our intention to find out who is 

responsible. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the House and I 

want to advise the members that our intention is not just to find 

out who is responsible, but to ensure that we have good 

protocols and proper protocols to ensure that public safety is 

protected; that when inmates are released, they are released in a 

timely and appropriate manner. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there is a problem with somebody 

escaping or a problem where a mistake has been made, that 

people advise their superiors immediately, Mr. Speaker, so that 

we can, where appropriate, issue a news advisory or a public 

advisory, so that the public is not unduly put at risk. Mr. 

Speaker, for this government public safety is the absolute 

paramount requirement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety can’t be in charge of 

his department because he doesn’t understand what his job is, 

Mr. Speaker. We saw the Minister of Corrections and Public 

Safety two months ago — two months ago, Mr. Speaker, in a 

scrum — tell the public that he didn’t understand we had a 

problem with gangs in our correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he didn’t read the mandate letter from the Premier 

which clearly indicated that. He certainly didn’t read their own 

budget which indicated additional resources to deal with the 

issue, Mr. Speaker. And he certainly didn’t read the 

Ombudsman’s report dealing with the very issue that he 

received just days before. Mr. Speaker, this minister does not 

know his file. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Corrections and Public 

Safety: why should anyone believe that you have public safety 

as your first priority? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The day of that 

press conference, Mr. Speaker, I made an error and a mistake, 

Mr. Speaker. And immediately after that mistake was made, an 

error on my part, Mr. Speaker . . . I do recognize we have a 

gang problem in our prisons, Mr. Speaker — briefed very well 

by my staff. It was an error on my part. I took immediate action, 

Mr. Speaker, to notify the media, all in attendance that day, that 

I made a mistake and I apologize for that error, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Through them to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s what I can say today. And I have no problem admitting 

that publicly, Mr. Speaker. I am only human. And I made an 

apology, Mr. Speaker, and I moved on. 

 

Since that time, Mr. Speaker, I will tell you something else. 

This government did numerous steps to ensure public safety. 

We met with the mayor and town council of Fort Qu’Appelle. 

We issued an external investigation team in this matter, Mr. 

Speaker. We issued a new public notification policy, Mr. 

Speaker. We also issued a province-wide search of all our 

correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker. And the most important 

thing, Mr. Speaker, is that we in fact now are going to ensure 

the integrity of this ministry. The Minister of Justice, his 

officials will look at why the mistake happened last week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Ministerial Responsibility 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

governments and parliaments that follow the Westminster 

system, there has been a long-held constitutional convention 

called ministerial responsibility. Mr. Speaker, I am of the view 

that the current Minister of Public Safety does not understand 

the concept of ministerial responsibility. That long-held 

convention holds that ministers of the Crown are ultimately 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

responsible for what goes on in their departments. 

 

My question is to the Premier. Does the Premier support the 

convention of ministerial responsibility? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say to you, to the 

members of this Assembly, and to the people of the province 

that the Premier — myself — and this government has 

complete confidence in this Public Safety minister, this 

Corrections minister, and the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I will also say this, Mr. Speaker, that what 

we have seen in the last number of months on this particular 

issue, on the issue of corrections, is a government that has 

prepared to take responsibility. 

 

You’ve seen a government, Mr. Speaker, who’s been prepared 

to say, look when these sorts of events happen, the number one 

obligation of the Government of Saskatchewan is not a political 

obligation; it’s an obligation to the people of Saskatchewan to 

ensure safety. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And we saw, Mr. Speaker, during the time 

that that member was the premier and that member was the 

minister responsible, where they just simply refused to put in a 

policy for their government to be transparent, to notify the 

public in the case of an escape. Maybe that was good enough 

for them; it’s not good enough for us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question was not regarding 

the Premier’s confidence or lack of confidence in the minister 

but the question about, does he support the convention of 

ministerial responsibility? 

 

Mr. Speaker, late Friday afternoon this government announced 

that it was suspending the deputy minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing, with pay, pending a review. 

 

Now we’re told today that the Minister of Justice — the 

Attorney General — and the deputy of Justice are undertaking a 

review into the circumstances to inform the public of a threat to 

their safety. 

 

I’m going to ask the Premier this question: who, Mr. Premier, 

ordered the suspension of the deputy minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The premier will 

know that that is the duty and the obligation of Executive 

Council, which was exactly the case in this particular decision 

that was taken. 

 

This government wants to send a very strong signal that public 

disclosure in events like this, and public safety, is our number 

one priority. I would suggest this to the hon. member, that he 

may want to review the 21 cases of inmates who’ve escaped 

between 2002 and 2007 and determine whether or not public 

disclosure was his number one priority, was the minister’s 

number one priority — or was it something more akin to what 

was in their interest in terms of their political interest, Mr. 

Speaker? I advise that hon. member to do that, to take that trip 

down memory lane and ask himself about the priorities that his 

government had. 

 

As for our government, we’re prepared to move forward. We’re 

going to determine exactly what went wrong here. We’re going 

to ensure that the policy that this government has instituted in 

terms of disclosure is implemented and followed by all of us, 

both the elected and the official side of government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has 

indicated that it was his office and Executive Council that 

decided to place the deputy minister of Public Safety under 

suspension during the process of the investigation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that in fact is only fitting. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are questions here to be answered about 

the minister’s ability to control what’s happening in his own 

ministry. Today we learn that the Attorney General and his 

deputy are conducting a review, an investigation into what’s 

happened here. 

 

So my question to the Premier is this: he has expected the 

deputy minister to be suspended. He has enforced that. Will he 

today then hold his own minister to the same standard? Will he 

today suspend his Minister of Public Safety while the Minister 

of Justice and Attorney General conducts his review? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the events of last week were 

certainly troubling, troubling because our number one priority is 

public safety. And we now have a policy in the province of full 

disclosure by the government, not waiting for the police to 

notify as was the case when that gentleman was the minister, 

Mr. Speaker, or the person that just asked the question was the 

premier. 

 

And so what was troubling last week is that, when there was 

knowledge within the Government of Saskatchewan about the 

mistake that meant that someone was at large that should not 

have been at large, and that information was not passed along 

per the policy to the minister, Mr. Speaker, that is a challenge. 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

That is a problem. It is troubling. 

 

As for the minister, when he became aware of the situation, he 

took immediate action. He followed the policy of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And when the Minister of 

Justice at a Crime Stoppers banquet was informed that 

something similar had happened last week in Saskatoon, I guess 

he could have said, well no one’s reported on it so far so we 

don’t have to disclose it. No, he did not. I was aware of it on 

Saturday. The government took action on Sunday. That’s the 

kind of transparency people should expect from their 

government, and they will expect it from this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier claims he supports 

the notion of ministerial responsibility. The Premier then 

suspends the deputy minister of Public Safety for a review into 

what’s going on in that department. The minister in charge of 

that department stands in front of the people of Saskatchewan 

and says, I don’t know what’s going on over there but I’m 

going to find out. Well now the Premier has instructed the 

Attorney General, Minister of Justice, to find out what’s going 

on in that department. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask again, why does the Premier not hold the 

minister to the same standard that he is holding the deputy 

minister and the public servants within the department? Why 

does he not ask the minister to step aside — suspend the 

minister today while the Attorney General does his 

investigation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Under the minister’s leadership, this 

government implemented a policy of immediate disclosure to 

the public. The policy was not followed by officials and so 

action was taken. The policy was followed exactly by the 

minister. As soon as he became aware — all too late, mind you 

— but as soon as he became aware, he followed the policy of 

the Government of Saskatchewan. Therein lies the answer to 

that hon. member’s question. 

 

Another question that might be asked by the people of the 

province today is, what happened prior to this policy being in 

place? What did this government inherit in terms of public 

disclosure from that party opposite when they were in 

government? There was no policy, Mr. Speaker. They took no 

steps to ensure that the public was protected, that public 

notification happened, maybe because it would be a political 

embarrassment to that government. That is not how we will 

operate on this side of the House. Public disclosure, public 

safety will be our number one priority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

Mr. Calvert: — The Premier claims, the Premier claims that 

the minister in charge of Public Safety and Corrections in fact 

put in place a new policy. Well how’s the policy working so 

far? That’s what the people of Saskatchewan are asking. That’s 

what we’re asking. And in fact that is what, I think, now the 

Attorney General is asking. 

 

Again I ask the Premier, why does he hold the deputy and the 

department to one standard and not hold to the same standard 

that minister whose policy it apparently was? There’s 

something wrong here, Mr. Speaker. There is something wrong 

here. The Attorney General is supposed to find out on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan. It’s only right . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If members are not prepared to come 

to order, we will move on with further business. Allow the 

member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — It is only right and fitting, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Premier today suspend his Minister of Public Safety and 

Corrections while the review is undertaken by the Attorney 

General, Minister of Justice. I ask the Premier again, why will 

he not do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is this. The 

answer to the hon. member’s question is this: because the 

minister followed the policy of this government and put public 

safety ahead of all other considerations and, for that matter, so 

did the Attorney General and the Minister of Justice. This 

perhaps is vexing to members opposite because they left this 

new government with no such policy. 

 

That particular government was about oh for 21 from 2002 

when there were escapes, when there were identity switches. 

Did that member who asked the questions earlier, who was the 

minister, did he disclose this to the public, Mr. Speaker? Did 

that member when he was premier say, people of 

Saskatchewan, this has happened under our watch; it’s 

important that we protect ourselves. No, he didn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

Maybe because they put politics ahead of good public policy. 

We will put the interests of the public in terms of transparency 

and safety first every time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Technology Infrastructure Funding for Schools and 

Libraries 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this week Saskatchewan is celebrating the 

achievement of our schools, our teachers, and our students. 

Today is the first day of Education Week 2008 which also 

coincides with the last day of Library Week. These events 

provide an opportunity to recognize and celebrate the successes 

that take place every day in Saskatchewan’s libraries and 

schools. 

 

The learning success and achievement of our people is vital for 

securing the future of our province. And education plays an 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

important role in the growth and success of Saskatchewan and 

its citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce in the House today that 

the provincial government is making a significant investment to 

benefit education and lifelong learning. This morning I 

announced the allocation of nearly $10 million to improve 

technology infrastructure for schools, regional colleges, and 

public libraries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the province is investing 

$5.2 million over four years to implement a single integrated 

library system — S-I-L-S, SILS for short, Mr. Speaker. The 

funding includes $1.3 million for the purchase of local 

computers. 

 

Presently each library system operates independently on 

different platforms, often using outdated hardware and 

software. The new system will connect all public libraries, 

making it possible for them to share their resources no matter 

where they are located in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the system will ensure 

easier access to library services for the province’s 500,000 

users. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province is also providing over $4 million for 

three primary education infrastructure components, and they are 

the live satellite network, CommunityNet, and the blackboard 

learning management system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the live satellite network 

will be upgraded and enhanced and will be expanded to include 

all pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] schools in the 

entire province. CommunityNet, the province’s high-speed data 

network, will be made available in all schools, public libraries, 

and regional college. At the same time, many of the existing 

connections will be upgraded. Blackboard learning management 

system will be available to more students and teachers and will 

offer new features such as collaborative tools, courses, and 

resources. People across Saskatchewan will benefit from these 

improvements to the technology infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province is growing. Our economy is growing, 

and we are making investments today in our province that will 

prepare us for tomorrow. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This certainly 

is a needed and good investment into the communities of 

Saskatchewan. Certainly I think it’s been quoted in the past that 

when the sun is shining, it’s time to fix the roof. This certainly 

categorizes this announcement. It’s good movement, needs to 

happen. 

 

I would like to highlight the single integrated library system 

which is a real good step that’s been long worked towards by 

Saskatchewan libraries and Saskatchewan government. I also 

want to recognize the advocacy of the Saskatchewan libraries’ 

association who have been calling all year long through, kind 

of, letter after letter to the minister for these needed programs. 

So it’s important to pay credit to the libraries’ association, 

highlight individuals who have been working so hard to see this 

announcement come through — Mrs. Verna Brenner, the 

Churchbridge library board Chair who has long been calling for 

this needed funding. 

 

The library system has the potential of becoming a model in 

Saskatchewan, being more accessible and equitable than many 

other regions, and we, the opposition, certainly supports the 

continued action on this front. 

 

The dollars into education are valued as well. I know that the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association value these dollars. 

Divisions do. I know that we had some concern and still do 

have some concerns with the canning of the technology 

supported learning and the correspondence school, that equity 

had been attacked in rural Saskatchewan. Certainly we’re 

hearing those concerns across rural Saskatchewan, in particular 

communities like Unity who no longer have the same access to 

courses that they once did. So it’s important that we see this 

capacity being invested back into the divisions so that we have 

an accessible and progressive education system. So that’s very 

good. 

 

On the blackboard management systems, you know, I know my 

wife’s currently teaching with one here in Regina. My wife 

teaches grade 6’s, and she really adores the process of learning 

this blackboard system. She feels it enhances education in the 

classroom. It’s good to see these dollars are coming in that 

direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this side of the House always supports equity and 

advancement in education. It’s a good announcement. The 

dollars are needed and it’s a good day for education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I hereby table in 

accordance with the Board of Internal Economy directive #22, 

the members’ accountability and disclosure statements for the 

year ended March 31, 2008. And in accordance with directive 

#23, I also table the audited financial statements and auditor’s 

opinion statements for the New Democratic Party caucus and 

for the Saskatchewan Party caucus for the year ended March 31, 

2008. 

 

As well pursuant to subsection 4(5) of The Election Act, 1996, I 

lay on the Table the resignation of the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister responsible for First Nations and 

Métis affairs has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Minister responsible for First Nations 

and Métis affairs. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to all my 

colleagues. In the Speaker’s gallery is a young lady who I am 

delighted . . . who has come back from Alberta to 

Saskatchewan. She used to live in Edmonton. Now she’s 

brought my grandson back. They’re living in Warman, and I’m 

absolutely delighted that she’s at the legislature and in our 

province. Welcome home, Jeanette, and I ask all my colleagues 

to welcome her as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

great pleasure that I am able to enter into this debate, to rise on 

this the second session of the twenty-sixth legislature. It is 

indeed a privilege to represent the people of Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, and it’s a job that I take seriously.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to also thank those at this time that 

help me do my job in this legislature — certainly my wife, 

Trish, and my constituency assistant, Beth Epp, and those in my 

ministerial office. I know more than ever that you just cannot 

do this job on your own. You have to rely on good people 

around you. And I want to thank Marlin and Karen and Jacquie 

and Tamarha and Luanne for all that they do in ensuring that 

the Crown corporations operate in an efficient manner and 

people across Saskatchewan are able to get the answers that 

they deserve. 

 

It’s with great pleasure that I join today to voice my support in 

what will truly be remembered as a Speech from the Throne 

focused on and for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

the title of the speech. and an interesting title that it is, “A 

Stronger Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” This sets the stage for a 

firm commitment from our government to the people of 

Saskatchewan to make positive changes that truly benefit 

people across our province. That’s what my constituents want 

in Saskatoon Silver Springs. That’s what they want. They want 

a better life for themselves, for their family, Mr. Speaker, but 

more importantly for their children and for the future of this 

province. And that’s what this Speech from the Throne sets out 

in spades, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speech from the Throne before us today offers support for 

everyone in the province, from youth to seniors. It contains a 

commitment that celebrates and shares the incredible economic 

momentum we are experiencing today in our province and into 

the future. Saskatchewan is enjoying unprecedented success and 

our success stands out amongst a world full of economic 

challenges and uncertainty at this present time. 

 

Since 2003 when I was first elected, I have listened to many 

speeches from the throne, but none have come close to 

epitomizing the pride and pleasure that I feel today when 

discussing the 2008 Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Speech from the Throne today clearly outlines how 

everyone in Saskatchewan will share in the benefits that our 

prosperity brings through lower taxes — I know members 

opposite will be interested to know lower taxes — increased 

infrastructure spending, some $1.5 billion, a record amount . . . 

Well I know that the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Northcote is fully aware of that. And further, major reductions 

to the province’s debt. Some 700,000 tax filers will benefit 

directly and their children will benefit and every person in the 

province will benefit by reducing the debt by 40 per cent in our 

first year in office. 

 

I know the fine people of Saskatoon Silver Springs are 

extremely pleased with our government’s announcement this 

week. And I have to say, Mr. Speaker, it was indeed a unique 

day when I went in my constituency on Tuesday, when the 

Premier made his announcement, and people were coming up 

and saying, right on, you guys did the right thing. I was quick to 

say that it wasn’t just this government. It was the people that 

worked hard over the years to make sure that we had the 

resources to do what we were able to do. 

 

In fact we were giving people back some of their own money, 

that what we’re doing is securing their future to ensure that we 

pay down the debt of this province and to ensure that we also 

have a rock to stand on in the future because there might be 

some stormy seas ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Over the last few months, I have been in my constituency 

talking and more importantly listening to people, listening to 

constituents’ opinions on where Saskatchewan’s windfall 

revenue should be spent. And the vast majority of them said 

exactly that, exactly what we did, Mr. Speaker: cut taxes, 

reduce the debt, and improve our infrastructure because the 

infrastructure deficit in Saskatchewan was huge. They realize 

that and they know that there is work that had to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that they will be very pleased today not 

just for the announcements before us, but they are pleased that 

we consulted, pleased that we listened, and pleased that we 

acted upon their opinions and suggestions, Mr. Speaker. We 

asked them what to do. We listened and we acted, Mr. Speaker. 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

The residents of Saskatoon Silver Springs have spoken, just as 

residents of other constituencies have spoken, and the results 

are before us, Mr. Speaker — the largest single-year income tax 

reduction in Saskatchewan history. Absolutely huge, Mr. 

Speaker. The largest amount of debt reduction in Saskatchewan 

history, some 40 per cent in the first 10, 11 months in office, 

Mr. Speaker, and of course the largest investment in 

infrastructure in Saskatchewan history, some $1.5 billion — 

$1,500 for every man, woman, and child in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, indeed October 22, 2008, will be remembered for 

a long time in Saskatchewan history as the day that everyone in 

Saskatchewan shared in this province’s prosperity. 

 

Just a few of the details that are important and should be noted 

by everyone in this legislature includes 80,000 low-income 

taxpayers will be dropped off the tax rolls altogether and no 

longer pay provincial income tax. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I hear some chirping from the members 

opposite, but I want to remind them just very recently when we 

were in opposition and I had the opportunity to serve as Finance 

critic, we recommended that this be done. And what did 

members opposite say? They said it couldn’t be done. It 

couldn’t happen. It wouldn’t happen. And they were right about 

that. It wouldn’t happen under an NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government. It wouldn’t happen under an NDP watch. 

 

Those making $30,000 or less, Mr. Speaker, you know what 

they did? Do you know what they did, Mr. Speaker, those 

making $30,000 or less? They paid the highest rate of 

provincial tax of anybody in the country under that NDP 

government. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Shame, Mr. Speaker, indeed. It is a 

shame, Mr. Speaker. That should not happen in Saskatchewan, 

and that’s why this Finance minister and this government took 

immediate action to ensure that that NDP legacy is erased once 

and for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the refundable tax credit for lower income 

individuals is doubled. And eligible families will receive an 

additional $600 per year, Mr. Speaker — $600 that can be 

well-spent in the pockets of those individuals, well-spent by 

those people who know how to spend it best, those moms and 

dads who can spend it on their kids and on their families, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know even members opposite will agree with 

that. 

 

Our family-based tax exemptions are now the highest in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. Never mind Alberta, never mind talking 

about NDP Manitoba, never mind talking about any other 

province — here it is right here in Saskatchewan, the largest 

exemptions in the country. A couple with two children earning 

$50,000 will save $1,320, Mr. Speaker, and I know that the 

members opposite will listen very carefully as we explain that. 

 

The basic personal exemption and the spousal exemption will 

both increase by $4,000, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a huge 

increase. From $8,945 to $12,945, all in one step. Never mind 

phasing it in, never mind talking about it and saying what we’re 

going to do in the future. Do it today. But there’s one way to do 

it even better than that, and that’s to make it retroactive to 

January 1, 2008. And that’s exactly what our government did, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve often said it’s either lead, follow, or get out of the way. 

And we’re leading, Mr. Speaker. We’re leading the way. Mr. 

Speaker, the child tax credit will increase by $2,000 per child. 

And that’s also a huge increase, and I know members opposite 

will agree with that. It’s increasing from $2,795 to a whopping 

$4,795, Mr. Speaker — again the largest increase in the 

country, the largest deduction in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I move on from this major tax reduction, I 

want to point out that a working family with two children — 

and that represents a lot of what is in my constituency, 

representative of that — can earn up to $41,300 before they 

start paying tax in our province. Mr. Speaker, this is indeed an 

accomplishment for a government in its first year in operation. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the highest level of any province in Canada 

and we should be very proud. All members should be very 

proud — even members of the opposition should be very proud 

that we are able to do that in Saskatchewan today because it 

benefits all Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. It means 

people living in our province benefit, but it also means more 

than that. It means that there will be an added attraction for 

people to move to our province. 

 

We saw members introduced today in this legislature that have 

moved back for our province. And because of this initiative 

that’s what’s going to happen in our province — more and more 

people are going look at their own finances and say 

Saskatchewan is the place to be. Under a Saskatchewan Party 

government, Saskatchewan is the place to be, Mr. Speaker. It 

means more nurses living in our province, it means more 

doctors. It means more teachers, it means more taxpayers. 

 

[14:45] 

 

When I was collecting advice from Saskatchewan people, and 

particularly those in Saskatoon Silver Springs, many seniors 

told me in no uncertain terms focus on reducing or eliminating 

the provincial debt. And that happened wherever I went in my 

constituency. When I went to Mackenzie Cole or to Reggie’s or 

to Robin’s or to the Tim Hortons, there was no shortage of 

advice from people telling me make sure that you take care of 

that debt. The NDP talked about it for 16 years — they talked 

about debt, but they did very, very little in those 16 years. 

 

And I’m happy to say that we’ve done more. We’ve done more 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I’d be interested to see 

your numbers. I’d be interested to see your numbers. Members 

opposite will have the opportunity to bring those numbers 

forward and to bring them into the debate. But I would 

challenge them that we have done more in the first 10 months 

then they have done in 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That’s the truth. That’s the truth. 

They can ask the Provincial Auditor. They can look at the 

documents from the Department of Finance. And I hope that 

they do that. 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It’s amazing that the additional 

billion dollars . . . This government has now reduced the debt 

by 40 per cent in a short period of time. I’m hoping members 

opposite aren’t arguing with that fact, but if they are, I’d sure 

like to see their numbers. There’s a reduction of $2.6 billion, 

Mr. Speaker, from 6.8 billion to 4.2 billion. It’s an enormous 

achievement welcomed by the people of the province. Mr. 

Speaker, by the end of March, we will have reduced the debt 

down to 4.2 billion. And the challenge, Mr. Speaker, and the 

challenge for all of us, is to take it from there and to reduce it 

even further. 

 

And I dream — like I’ll be honest with you — I dream about 

the day that we can totally eliminate the debt within a few 

years. It seems like a real possibility. And all members of this 

House will have to work together to ensure that this does 

happen. But I know it will happen with the leadership here 

shown by the Finance minister, the Premier, and my colleagues 

in cabinet, Mr. Speaker. As our Premier’s pointed out, this is an 

unprecedented opportunity to leave a mortgage-free house to 

the people of Saskatchewan, to our children and our 

grandchildren, to take care of that mortgage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to note that along with reducing 

taxes and eliminating debt, we are also investing in 

infrastructure. The previous government left a large 

infrastructure deficit. That’s one fact that the members opposite 

may want to research, and they certainly will find evidence. 

Paying off a debt without dealing with the infrastructure deficit 

would be like paying off the mortgage on your house while 

letting your house fall into disrepair. It will take a lot of hard 

work and money to do the repairs that were not done by the 

previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is indeed an infrastructure deficit and we 

know that. We know that there was an infrastructure deficit in 

hospitals, in schools, and even in the Crown. And a member 

opposite who was a former minister of SaskPower, there is even 

an infrastructure deficit within the Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. The members opposite talk about the Crowns all the 

time, but when you look at what the commitment was from that 

government, they did not make a commitment to renewing the 

infrastructure in Crowns like SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyone who has driven over our roads over the last number of 

years doesn’t need this explained to them. We have done a lot 

of work on our roads this year and will continue to do more into 

the future. 

 

We will fix roads. We will build hospitals. We will build 

schools. And yes, we will honour our commitments to the 

Crown corporations, and we’ll honour our commitments to 

things like the Saskatchewan children’s hospital. Instead of just 

putting forward news releases like the members opposite did, 

we will put our money where our mouth is and ensure that that 

does happen. 

 

In fact we are increasing infrastructure spending. It’s an 

exciting prospect to see what a budget of $1.5 billion can do, 

and $1 billion dedicated to rebuilding and improving our roads, 

highways, schools, and hospitals. It’s an exciting time to be in 

our province to watch it flourish, to watch it build, and to watch 

our province prosper, Mr. Speaker. And more importantly, 

more importantly it’s an interesting time to watch the public 

attitude in Saskatchewan change. We are now living in a 

positive-thinking province, Mr. Speaker — a group of citizens 

eager to grow with Saskatchewan and eager to see our 

economic momentum continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve even noticed a different tone from the 

opposition. They’re just not quite as negative as they were even 

a few months ago. Now maybe that’ll change, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t know, but I think they’re seeing the light. I think maybe 

their constituents are having an effect on them and bringing 

them along, albeit begrudgingly. That was easy to say — 

begrudgingly. It’s about attitude. It’s about commitment. It’s 

about building. And above all, it’s about ensuring the people of 

Saskatchewan have the opportunity to realize their dreams right 

here in our province, right here in this year country, Mr. 

Speaker. This year country, that’s what Saskatchewan is. For 16 

years we heard about next year country from the NDP opposite, 

but not this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

About one year ago we were on the doorsteps of Saskatchewan 

voters. We were asking for their support, and we were asking 

them on how they felt. And what they told us, Mr. Speaker, and 

members opposite — I can tell by their interest in my speech 

that they are very interested in what I have to say, but it’s 

something that I certainly hope they haven’t forgotten the last 

year — we learned that hope beats fear, Mr. Speaker. Hope 

beats fear. We heard that in spades on November 7, 2007, and 

it’s true today. No matter what the opposition tries to bring up, 

Mr. Speaker, hope beats fear every time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne promises a better 

future: a better future for seniors; a better future for children 

and their parents; a better future, as we learned last week, for 

people with disabilities; and a better life, Mr. Speaker, for 

children at risk. 

 

A better future for seniors is possible with the new tax cuts, the 

new Saskatchewan low-income tax credit. And through an 

increase in Saskatchewan income assistance program, the first 

increase — now I just want to spend an extra minute on the 

Saskatchewan income assistance program — the first increase, 

Mr. Speaker, in 16 years. 

 

Members opposite, they had a lot of time to do all they wanted 

to do. Nothing happened for 16 years. These people had to wait 

till there was a Saskatchewan Party government in place to 

ensure that this increase happened, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a shame. And that’s one of the many reasons why members 

are sitting on that side of the House, and will continue sitting on 

that side of the House for many, many, many years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our children are our future. The plan before us 

today includes an increase in licensed childcare spaces, a 

dramatic increase in pre-kindergarten programs, and more 

capital spending on our schools and universities. Our children 

will also benefit by better co-operation between our 

universities, regional colleges, and technical institutes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have not forgotten about our most 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

vulnerable, the children at risk. We are committed to renew and 

improve Saskatchewan’s Child and Family Services Act as we 

will renew and improve The Adoption Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The plan before you today will improve Saskatchewan lives, no 

doubt about it, through better and accessible and more 

affordable housing, through better health care, and through 

building safer and stronger communities, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

indeed what this plan does. That’s what this Throne Speech 

does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll strive to improve our environment by 

developing cleaner forms of energy to fuel our province and to 

maintain our economic momentum. Mr. Speaker, as the 

Minister of Crown Corporations and being responsible for 

SaskPower, I take the challenge of reducing greenhouse gases 

very seriously. We are developing an energy plan to meet our 

future demands. We are closely studying and moving forward 

on cleaner forms of energy, Mr. Speaker. We see the future as a 

blend of energy sources made up of wind, hydro, clean coal, 

natural gas, and yes, Mr. Speaker, hopefully nuclear energy in 

our province. 

 

We made a major step forward last week with the 

announcement of the uranium development partnership which 

will make recommendations on where Saskatchewan can add 

value to the uranium we mine. Mr. Speaker, there was only one 

voice — only one voice, only one critic, only one person in the 

entire province — that I heard from that was negative on that 

and that was the member from P.A. Northcote. I just couldn’t 

believe that a member that comes from a city that supplies this 

industry, that relies on this industry for its vibrancy, was critical 

of studying the development of nuclear energy in our province 

of uranium development. And I just can’t, I just can’t 

understand that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On the clean coal front, we are taking large steps to pursue the 

technology needed to develop a clean coal system of creating 

energy. A world leading approach, Mr. Speaker. We’re also 

investigating options to further opportunities increasing hydro 

sources in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our future is bright, challenging, and full of 

opportunities. Innovation is one of the most important factors in 

maintaining and growing our economy. We are innovative 

people and history will remember us as such. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the development of Innovation 

Saskatchewan and the potential that it brings to our province. 

Our Crown corporations are an important part of our economic 

growth. Through innovation and change, our Crowns will 

continue to be vitally important to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne outlines the 

importance and clear focus of Crown corporations. Very shortly 

I will announce a new policy for their investments, a policy that 

takes them from making high-risk investments around the world 

to focussing on the economy, Mr. Speaker, that we know best 

— Saskatchewan. It will be a Saskatchewan-first policy, Mr. 

Speaker. And I very, very much look forward to making that 

announcement and sharing that information with all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with one of the strongest economies in Canada, if 

not the strongest, renewed focus on Crown corporations and 

their investments through a Saskatchewan-first approach will 

help create jobs and continue the momentum of our province 

well into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the plan before us today, the Speech from the 

Throne 2008 will lead us in an exciting and rewarding direction. 

It will lead us to an exciting future, Mr. Speaker. No longer will 

we talk about Saskatchewan being next year country, Mr. 

Speaker. As the Premier said last week, next year has arrived. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to participate in this 

debate and I look forward to the presentations by other 

members. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When 

speaking to the first Saskatchewan Party budget, I recognized 

the difficulty that a government has in making choices. I was a 

member of a treasury board; I was a member of a cabinet; and I 

understand the difficulty that a government has in making 

choices. I recognized that when I spoke to the Saskatchewan 

Party budget, and I want to recognize that again today, speaking 

to their Throne Speech. 

 

It is no longer possible for the current Minister of Agriculture to 

say anything, as they say he did when he was in opposition, and 

not to have to back it up. The circumstances have changed for 

the member and now the Minister of Agriculture. He can no 

longer just say anything in opposition. He now has to back it 

up, and he has to make real choices, to make real trade-offs. 

 

It is no longer possible for the member from Swift Current to 

call for government solutions that he now, as Premier, can say 

are gimmicky, as Premier, Mr. Speaker. As Premier, now his 

proposals are gimmicky, and now of course he’s got to make 

real choices and he has to stand by them. He can’t do that any 

longer. No longer can they say anything and not back it up. No 

longer can they rely on gimmicks and not back those up. 

 

And so choices have to be made. And choices have to be made 

even in circumstances of rising government revenues, perhaps 

record government revenues. Still choices have to be made. 

 

And I understand that to a certain extent, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s why I wasn’t too surprised by a Throne Speech that 

covered all the bases or practically all the bases, that addressed 

practically all the issues. The Throne Speech almost does that, 

Mr. Speaker. It almost includes everything but the kitchen sink. 

 

That is perhaps why the silence on forestry, in a Throne Speech 

that covers so many topics, rings so loud. And that is why the 

statements from the Minister of Energy and Resources over the 

last almost year now about discussions and imminent 

announcements ring so loudly hollow, Mr. Speaker. After all 

these discussions, after all these announcements in just a few 

days that the minister referred to, now are there no 

announcements. Not only were there no discussions, apparently, 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

but the word forestry does not make it into the Throne Speech. 

But governing is about priorities and I want to concentrate on a 

couple that were mentioned in the Throne Speech but deserve 

more than mention, received notice in the Throne Speech but 

deserved far, far more than that. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And the first I want to talk about is affordable housing. Unlike 

forestry, housing was mentioned in the Throne Speech. And I 

think government now recognizes — although they didn’t when 

they were campaigning; it wasn’t mentioned in their platform, 

and didn’t seem to immediately recognize upon becoming 

government — that housing is in a crisis in this province. 

 

And it’s not an issue just in Saskatoon Meewasin or Saskatoon 

Massey Place or Regina Coronation Park, Regina Dewdney, or 

in Prince Albert or in North Battleford or in Moose Jaw. It is an 

issue in Kindersley and Biggar and Rosetown and Weyburn and 

Estevan and Nipawin. It is a circumstance, a difficulty in every 

municipality, every community in this province. 

 

And it’s not just an issue of people having decent, affordable 

housing. The consequences move out further than that. When a 

couple of members of the opposition and I were in Kindersley, 

one of the interesting meetings we had was with the volunteers 

at the Kindersley Food Bank and we were told that one-half, 

one-half of the people using the Kindersley Food Bank are 

working, are employed, and would drop off the list of people 

using the food bank in that community if there was affordable 

housing in Kindersley. And this issue of affordable housing, of 

having a decent place to live, is probably most acute in those 

parts of our province that have the most economic activity. 

 

The other statement that was made to us was a very interesting 

one which is that . . . They used the example the Tim Hortons in 

Kindersley had dropped a shift, and truckers driving through 

and people wanting to use the Tim Hortons at night could no 

longer do that. And the reason the shift had been dropped is 

because what you get paid to work at Tim Hortons doesn’t rent 

you a home in Kindersley. 

 

And so it’s not just a matter of, as serious as it is, of people 

having a decent, affordable place to live. The issue of housing 

goes to hunger, people who can’t afford both their rent and their 

food. And it goes to our economy, people who can’t afford to 

take jobs that they would like to take, can’t afford to serve 

people that they would like to serve because they can’t afford to 

live in the community where those jobs exist because there is no 

affordable housing. 

 

Now a regulated market, Mr. Speaker, is a wonderful thing. 

And I say a regulated market. I don’t think even the members 

opposite, after the last few weeks, would disagree with me 

about the value of a regulated market. And if they were, if they 

were, some of them might, the member from Cannington might, 

but I would in my defence call upon the words of one of the 

greater of the Republican presidents, Theodore Roosevelt, who 

said when a similar crash happened in the 1870s in Europe and 

then in the United States, that we need to constrain capital the 

way that we constrain force. 

 

Now I hope that if, having quoted a Republican president and I 

think a hero of the member of Cannington’s, that he might cut 

me a little bit more slack. But a regulated market provides a lot 

of things. And a regulated market is very good at providing a 

$500,000 house to a person that can afford a $500,000 house. 

But a regulated market does not provide low-income housing, 

decent low-income housing to people. And we have learned in 

Saskatchewan that at a time of increasing economic activity, the 

pressure on housing becomes much, much worse and the dark 

side of the boom — in large part, not entirely — but the dark 

side of the boom is the availability of low-income, affordable, 

decent housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And therefore a public investment is required. And what is the 

government’s response to the requirement for a public 

investment in housing? They actually cut money in their budget 

to the Housing Corporation in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is some suggestion that there is 

something forthcoming at some point, that there’s something 

forthcoming from the government in housing when they can put 

their own political stamp on it, when they can claim this is not 

the NDP program. This is not the NDP money that was invested 

in housing in 2007. This is our investment. This is our program. 

 

If indeed that is what we are waiting for, Mr. Speaker, is the 

opportunity to put their own stamp on housing programs that, 

Mr. Speaker, is shameful because in the meantime, in the 

meantime, Mr. Speaker, people do not have a decent place to 

live. They are being driven from communities where they 

would be employed. Mr. Speaker, the economic activity — 

putting aside that the huge pressures put on those individuals’ 

lives — the economic activity that could be again promoted in 

those communities that are some of the most prosperous 

communities in the province of Saskatchewan is also being 

hampered, Mr. Speaker, by the failure to make this public 

investment, which must be a very large public investment, 

Speaker. 

 

Another aspect of the housing of course is keeping the house 

warm, Mr. Speaker, and I only want to speak about this for a 

moment. But it is passing strange, Mr. Speaker, to say the least, 

that as natural gas goes down in price, what we pay to heat our 

homes goes up. 

 

I guess this is what happens when you elect a business 

government, Mr. Speaker. This is a government that says that 

we want to run the Crowns on a businesslike basis, so as natural 

gas drops in price, we will increase the price paid by 

consumers, Mr. Speaker. That’s the approach of the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. And they want to pick up a 

slogan or a motto or a principle from the previous government 

and say, the best service at the lowest possible cost. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to natural gas, not so much, not so 

much. 

 

The lowest possible cost is the market price, which again 

dropped today I think while the rates went up, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s because of forecasts made by the sensible business minds 

across the way in the government, Mr. Speaker. And it just 

seems passing strange that they would get up today in question 

period and defend, and defend Saskatchewan people paying 

more for natural gas while the Crown corporation is paying less, 

on the basis of the principle that we’re providing the best 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

service, the best product at the lowest possible cost. Well again, 

Mr. Speaker, not so much. 

 

The other matter — and it’s a serious one, Mr. Speaker, not so 

much the immediate although it’s immediate in going into the 

long term — that received considerable notice in the Throne 

Speech and even in the minister’s statement today, is a matter 

of early childhood learning and early childhood care and 

intervention in some cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is notice in the Throne Speech, if one reads between the 

lines, the current government has a lot of good to say about the 

previous government, commending it for community schools, 

commending the NDP government for KidsFirst, commending 

the NDP government for pre-kindergarten. The current 

government seems to recognize that these are all good programs 

and that while we’re spreading around the money and spreading 

around the notice of what we care about, that they deserve some 

mention in passing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, we have an 

enormous challenge. Today we have an enormous opportunity. 

There is only one other component that is missing to bring those 

two together and that is the vision. Much has been made of 

some of the divisions in our province between conservatives 

and progressives, rural, urban. I think sometimes way too much 

is made of those. Democracy requires politics. Politics requires 

tension and conflict sometimes, and those require differences. 

And I think you can make too much of some of our differences. 

 

But the difference that I don’t think we can make too much 

about, be too concerned about, is the growing gap of inequality 

in our country — that as the rich grow richer, the poor grow 

poorer, and the distance between them becomes much greater. 

And in our province, we have a majority, the majority of the 

population descended from European settlers who lead lives of 

some relative affluence even in times of crisis, even in times of 

uncertainty. And we have a minority, largely the descendants of 

our Aboriginal population, who even now in this time of 

prosperity have employment conditions similar to what people 

at large were used to suffering during the Great Depression, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have now the opportunity with early childhood learning, 

with pre-kindergarten, with interventions in the case of 

vulnerable children, to make this the last generation that suffers 

from this divide so that 20 years from now a Justice minister 

and a Corrections minister and a Health minister is not trying to 

explain that there aren’t simple solutions because of serious 

investments that were not made 20 years before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is a Russian proverb that the best time to plant a tree is 20 

years ago and the second best time is today. And we know 16 

years ago, Mr. Speaker, where our province was at. Sixteen 

years ago, Mr. Speaker, our province was on the very brink of 

bankruptcy. That’s where we were 16 years ago. We were not 

in the position to plant these trees, Mr. Speaker, and every 

member opposite knows it. Now we are. Now the need is here 

still, Mr. Speaker. The opportunity is here, Mr. Speaker. And 

only the vision is lacking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is not unimportant to argue about what sentence a 13-year-old 

young offender should receive, Mr. Speaker. It’s not. But isn’t 

it more important to debate now and discuss and seriously 

consider, when the resources are available, what can be done for 

the three-year-old so that he does not become the 13-year-old 

young offender, Mr. Speaker? 

 

There’s some recognition on the government side that this is, I 

think, a time when we have these kind of opportunities. There 

seemed to be some notice paid to it in the Throne Speech, but 

not enough in my view, Mr. Speaker. Some members opposite, 

I think, are nodding on occasion, Mr. Speaker, when I mention 

this. But now comes the second-best time to plant that tree, Mr. 

Speaker. And now that the resources are available, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the government doesn’t have the will. 

 

In this province there is a need. There is an immediate need in 

respect to housing — safe, decent, affordable housing — in the 

immediate time. There is a need to build a province that is not 

divided between the rich and the disenfranchised. And there is 

the opportunity, both in housing and in the education and the 

future of our children, to meet these needs. The need is there; 

the opportunity is there; all that is needed is the vision. The 

vision is not there, Mr. Speaker. And that is why I’ll be 

supporting the amendment and will not be supporting the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Advanced Education and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, hon. colleagues, thank you 

very much for the opportunity to speak in support of our 

impressive Premier, our new government, and of course the 

visionary and far-reaching Speech from the Throne. 

 

I’d like to take a moment to note in this Assembly the 

significance of obviously family, especially my wife, Martha 

Smith-Norris, and my dear daughter Jacqueline who is in grade 

4 at the Saskatoon French School. Just the other night she 

accompanied me to an event that involved . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . She didn’t go to that event . . . With the 

Fransaskois community. And it’s amazing to see how fast she’s 

growing and maturing. 

 

As well, I extend my thanks and appreciation to our friends and 

many supporters in and beyond Saskatoon Greystone. And I 

certainly appreciate the support which has poured in from 

Greystone, around the province, and from right across the 

political spectrum in recent days. 

 

As we focus first on the Throne Speech, the themes are clear. 

Our government is creating a more prosperous and a more 

generous Saskatchewan — a Saskatchewan which is playing a 

leadership role in the new West and across the country, and 

most especially a province which is offering a much better life 

to its citizens. 

 

It outlines a clear, fresh and prudent vision for our fine 

province. It outlines a vision of Saskatchewan that is 

resplendent with opportunities, a vision of a province that is a 

full partner in Confederation. Our obligation to our constituents, 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

our neighbours, our friends, our family members, and most 

especially the future generations, is to realize and maximize our 

potential to meet the promise of Saskatchewan within a 

framework of fiscal prudence and sound stewardship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech, His Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor noted that in a province whose people refer to their 

home as next year country all too often, our next year has 

finally arrived. Indeed, Saskatchewan has become this year 

country. 

 

As His Honour noted, this year Saskatchewan is expected to 

lead the nation in economic growth. This year Saskatchewan is 

number one in wholesale trade growth, export sales growth, and 

retail sales growth. This year more people are working in 

Saskatchewan than ever before. Mr. Speaker, that number is 

well over 520,000 people. 

 

Not only that, but they are working in higher quality jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. A July report from CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of 

Commerce] reinforced that the highest quality jobs in the 

country are now in Saskatchewan and they’re earning more 

money. This is a clear indication that the people of 

Saskatchewan are benefiting from our remarkable economic 

momentum. 

 

This year our population is growing at its fastest rate in over 50 

years. This year more of our young people are choosing to stay 

in Saskatchewan and moving back from other provinces, and 

we’ve seen witness of that today. 

 

Because of this tremendous growth and new economic activity, 

government revenues continue to grow. And based on our 

dialogue with the people of this province in recent months, as a 

provincial community we stand ready to take on various 

challenges — mostly to overcome the legacy of lethargy that 

was the signature of the last government — and seize the 

opportunities presented by our prosperity. 

 

In my role as Minister of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour with responsibilities for immigration among other 

various serious duties, including the WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board] and the Status of Women, along with my 

legislative and executive colleagues and our highly capable 

ministry staff, together we are working to meet not just the 

government’s goals but the objectives for the people of this 

province. 

 

Our challenge is simple in its intent, and far and wide reaching 

in its execution. Together as practical and possible with partners 

like the federal government as well as various institutions of 

governance within our First Nations and Métis communities, 

and municipalities across our own provincial government, with 

community-based organizations who in the Throne Speech 

received a commitment of long-term stable funding agreements 

thus strengthening their ability to contribute to the peoples of 

this province, in the post-secondary sector, and where we can 

with organized labour — a door that remains open — and of 

course with industry, we shall continue working in a diligent 

and disciplined fashion to build an even stronger Saskatchewan 

and create an even better life for the people of our fine 

province. 

 

Focused, strategic partnerships are vital in helping to transform 

our communities and our province. For example, partnerships 

will be vital to addressing our labour market needs. We are 

challenged by key characteristics of a very vibrant labour 

market. Put simply, we need more people with increasing levels 

of skills training and education to participate in and benefit 

from the growth that’s under way. 

 

First, like many other jurisdictions, we face the threat of losing 

a major portion of our skilled and seasoned employees to 

retirements as baby boomers begin to transition into a new stage 

of life. And we must work with employers and other 

stakeholders to extend more opportunities for these people to 

have on core careers. 

 

Second, until recently, Saskatchewan’s sad trend of supplying 

skilled and educated young people to growing economies in 

other jurisdictions created a void in our own labour force — an 

out-migration that numbered 35,000 people under the previous 

government alone. While I’m pleased to note that this is no 

longer the case — Saskatchewan has grown by over 16,000 

people recently — we are aware that we now must work 

diligently to fill that void, to grow our population, and enhance 

the education and skill sets for the people in our province. This 

will help to inform not only the decisions we are making today 

but those we will take in the future — decisions to offer 

conditional but very real support, for example, for the First 

Nations University. 

 

Third, we’re obviously facing increased competition for 

workers from other jurisdictions, most notably other Western 

provinces. But our recent missions across Canada — for 

example into Ontario where we were joined by 50 employers — 

have demonstrated that we are more than capable of competing. 

 

We view these circumstances as a clear call to action. 

Saskatchewan no longer has a job shortage. We have a people 

shortage. We need more people with skills and training. We 

need more people making contributions to our communities, 

and we know that the work that is required must go on at 

several fronts at once. To that end the ministry that I have the 

honour of serving has already fulfilled a number of promises 

made by the government, and we are rolling up our sleeves to 

do even more. 

 

Our province now has the most aggressive youth-retention 

program in Canada thanks to a tuition rebate of up to $20,000 

over seven years, and in the coming days we will announce 

improvements to this program so that even more post-secondary 

graduates will build their futures right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have taken steps to address the need for employees in key 

professions. Our post-secondary system has the capacity to 

educate and train more than 67,000 students, but we know we 

must work to ensure that these students are ready for the 

workforce. That is why we have created more than 6,000 new 

training and workforce development opportunities for 

Saskatchewan’s people. 

 

Our commitment is of $100 million to improve health science 

facilities, a commitment that was questioned by the official 

opposition, that was questioned recently. And I’d like to know 

what the position of the official opposition is. Maybe in the 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

coming days we’ll have an opportunity to explore that. 

 

To help train new opportunities for physicians and nurses, to 

enhance recruitment strategies which will allow our province’s 

health care system to be in a much stronger position than it was 

when we assumed office . . . just this morning another 

announcement in Saskatoon regarding nurse training. 

 

We are and we’ll continue to look for greater co-operation 

between universities, regional colleges, and technical institutes 

to help ensure that our advanced educational system produces 

the talented, skilled graduates our province needs to propel our 

knowledge economy forward. The greatest resource we have in 

the province of Saskatchewan, our people. And we will 

continue to search for innovative means to deliver programming 

to more Saskatchewan people wherever they are. 

 

Speaking of innovation, through the creation of Innovation 

Saskatchewan, our government’s new focused commitment to 

research and innovation will provide new opportunities for our 

universities, our students, and our scholars to excel across new 

frontiers of the knowledge economy. 

 

Of course we will continue to build on and benefit from an 

improved relationship with federal counterparts, an area that 

was too often underdeveloped by the previous government. As 

the members of this Assembly will know, earlier this year we 

secured a labour market agreement. We were among the first 

provinces to sign such an agreement with the federal 

government that provides $90 million over six years for skills 

training. That type of funding is only possible through a 

productive relationship with the Government of Canada. 

 

In our first budget we provided a significant funding increase to 

Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions with a range of 

support increasing from between 8 and 50 per cent. And last 

month we announced an additional $3.5 million investment to 

the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 

Commission to provide an additional 900 new training 

opportunities for more apprenticeships. That is $3.5 million for 

900 new apprenticeships. Again we’re waiting from the 

response from the official opposition. 

 

We also continue to seek out and build new partnerships with 

businesses, community-based organizations, the post-secondary 

sector, and with other governments — partnerships that have 

the ability to create new programs and initiatives that help build 

the labour force in key areas of our economy, but as 

importantly, help to ensure that we’re building more diverse, 

dynamic, cosmopolitan, and creative communities. 

 

The labour market agreement is one example of that, but 

certainly not the only example. The Regina and Saskatoon 

Trades and Skills Centres make education and skills training 

more accessible to unemployed and underemployed youth and 

young adults in order to prepare themselves to engage more 

fully in our economy and across our communities. The centres 

represent a partnership between the province, the cities of 

Regina and Saskatoon, school boards, training institutions, First 

Nation and Métis institutions in communities, business 

associations, among other stakeholders. Program availability is 

based on immediate labour market needs as identified with the 

help of local business and industry. 

I’m proud to say that the graduates of the Regina Trades and 

Skills Centre, for just one example, who entered the labour 

force following graduation last spring, almost all of them 

obtained gainful employment. Now that is a significant 

outcome, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A second example was announced earlier this year as federal 

and provincial governments, First Nation and Métis 

organizations, communities, training institutions and industry 

came together to form the northern career quest partnership 

under the Aboriginal skills employment partnership. The 

partnership represents a major investment — $33 million — in 

the future of First Nation and Métis employment in northern 

Saskatchewan and will link 1,500 First Nation and Métis 

peoples to training and employment opportunities. 

 

We acknowledge the crucial role that First Nation and Métis 

peoples will continue to play in the future of Saskatchewan, in 

our workforce, across our broader communities, and we are 

committed to providing First Nation and Métis people with 

enhanced educational opportunities, skills training, and 

employment options to become full partners in our common 

future. We recognize the importance of working with First 

Nation and Métis communities and institutions to assist and 

support basic adult education, employment readiness, and skills 

development initiatives. 

 

To date, participation rates by these communities have been 

lower than hoped for, but recent statistics suggest that some 

progress is being made. For First Nation and Métis peoples 

living off-reserve, employment went up 2,500 to a total of 

35,600 in September 2008 over September 2007. What a 

difference a year makes. 

 

Once again we are working with our partners in Saskatchewan’s 

post-secondary system to help ensure that more progress can be 

made in short order. A broad range of education and training 

programs for First Nation and Métis learners are offered at First 

Nations University, SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies], Dumont Technical Institute, as well as the U of 

R [University of Regina], the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan], SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology], and regional colleges. 

 

At this time it seems only appropriate to say how pleased we 

are with the recent installation of the new president of the 

University of Regina, Dr. Timmons. We’re delighted that she 

has opted to move from Prince Edward Island and come to 

Saskatchewan. She follows in the footprints of another 

esteemed scholar and leader within our community, Dr. Peter 

MacKinnon, who made a very similar migration from PEI 

[Prince Edward Island] to Saskatchewan. 

 

Overall Saskatchewan’s post-secondary system currently 

educates and trains more than 12,700 First Nation and Métis 

learners. We know there’s more to do, but there’s a solid 

foundation in place and we’ve made a major effort to build a 

strong relationship with Saskatchewan’s First Nation and Métis 

peoples based on mutual respect and understanding within our 

ministry and well beyond. We continue to support First Nations 

University because we know that the future well-being of this 

province depends on the full participation of First Nations 

people within our economy and across our community. 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

[15:30] 

 

When we began to review the circumstances in and around First 

Nations University over the summer, we focused first and 

foremost on the students. Our young First Nations and Métis 

peoples provide Saskatchewan with a cultural, a cosmopolitan, 

and a competitive advantage that ought to be the envy of 

Confederation. Through the full range of education and 

employment services, our government is committed to working 

with First Nations and Métis peoples to enhance their ability to 

engage more fully in our growing economy and diverse 

communities. 

 

At the same time, even when successful in achieving a goal that 

enhances participation, the work will be more than the 

population is presently within Saskatchewan. We know we need 

to grow our communities. We need to create an ecosystem of 

innovation — to borrow from Thomas Friedman — and build a 

knowledge economy that allows our province to meet its full 

potential, the demand for highly skilled and educated citizens, a 

demand that will only increase. As a result, we are listening to 

Saskatchewan employers and engaging in public-private 

partnerships that allow us to reach out in a meaningful, 

measurable way to skilled people beyond our borders, across 

Canada, and indeed around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this month the Premier, the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation, and myself had the 

opportunity to attend a national job fair in Toronto, along with 

50 Saskatchewan companies — 50 employers, Mr. Speaker. 

Those companies did not return empty-handed. We’re 

surveying those employers. Out of 50, we’ve heard back from 

18. They’ve collected 2,600 resumés. They have short-listed 

220 people and hirings are already under way. We’re measuring 

the results . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They’re updating. 

We’ve implemented an aggressive strategy. 

 

You know, importantly, last year, the previous government did 

go to the National Job Fair and they had one organization: 50:1 

— kind of sounds like a recent score in a football game. We’ll 

take that number any time. We have implemented an aggressive 

strategy to attract skilled newcomers to Saskatchewan from 

other parts of Canada and from abroad by significantly 

improving the processing times under the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program. 

 

We’re also providing additional funding to support settlement 

agencies. And for the first time ever, for the first time ever, 

we’re designating staff to help ensure that the transition into the 

labour force is as smooth as possible for workers and employers 

alike. That was something overlooked by the previous 

government. To date we’ve seen an 81 per cent increase, year 

over year, in nominations from the same time last year. And 

soon we will be implementing an even more aggressive strategy 

to ensure we receive and welcome even more newcomers in the 

years ahead. 

 

Through these measures we’re delivering a clear message to all 

those who are looking to new opportunities right across our 

province: Saskatchewan is a great place to make a living. It’s an 

even better place to make a life. 

 

Beyond that we’ve followed through on the government’s 

promise to create a fair and balanced labour environment. When 

this government was elected just under a year ago, we promised 

to ensure that both the rights and obligations of employers and 

employees were acknowledged and clearly understood by all. 

Our intention was to proceed in the public interest, and this is 

what we’ve done. 

 

We passed essential service legislation right here in this 

Assembly that was necessary to protect the health, safety, and 

public assets of Saskatchewan’s people. We know that over 70 

per cent of Saskatchewan people support that measure. 

Saskatchewan was one of the last provinces to put essential 

services in place and, you know, if I recall correctly, last spring 

in committee even one of the members from the official 

opposition said, yes, it’s probably a pretty good thing. 

 

We’ve also passed amendments to The Trade Union Act that we 

believe are necessary to assure democracy and freedom of 

information in our workplaces and provide for the renewal of 

the Labour Relations Board. Seventy-five per cent of the people 

in this province, based on a poll in the Leader-Post, supported 

— supported — secret ballots. 

 

We will continue to review our labour laws, regulations, and 

policies to ensure they’re transparent, fair, effective, 

competitive, and up to date in a routine manner. Our objective 

is to ensure that we have a fair and balanced labour 

environment for the people of this province. 

 

This is ultimately part of our government’s effort to create a 

stronger democracy that serves the need of Saskatchewan’s 

people. That effort also includes restrictions on government 

advertising in the period leading to an election and giving 

Saskatchewan people a real say in our province’s next nominee 

to the Senate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has turned a page on the past and 

has confidently started a new chapter, a chapter represented by 

the announcement today — the support for libraries, too long in 

coming but finally arrived with the new government. 

 

Our economic growth has captured the attention of the nation. 

Incomes are growing, and thanks to our tax cuts people will be 

keeping more of the money they earn. Let’s just review this. 

 

Debt reduced by 40 per cent. Since taking office, our Premier’s 

government has cut the province’s debt by about 40 per cent, 

from nearly 7 billion to 4.2 billion, saving taxpayers millions in 

interest costs over the coming years. 

 

The largest income tax cut ever, saving a family of four $1,320 

a year and removing 80,000 low-income earners from the tax 

rolls. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Record investment in infrastructure: 1.5 

billion next year to ensure Saskatchewan’s infrastructure 

contributes to our province’s growing economy. And 

responsible financial planning. You might want to look that one 

up in a dictionary, responsible financial planning. Have a read. 

You’ll make reference to this. 

 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

We know there’s more work to do. But as we’ve noted already, 

there are over 12,700 First Nation and Métis peoples enrolled in 

our post-secondary institutions. People who moved away years 

ago to find work are coming home to great jobs. Joining them 

are residents from other provinces and country who are looking 

for new opportunities in the new Saskatchewan. Our 

government is committed to ensuring Saskatchewan is a great 

place to live and raise a family, a place where people have 

confidence in the future and are assured that they will share in 

the benefits produced by a growing economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as noted in the Throne Speech, our government 

also remembers the men and women of this province who have 

sacrificed everything in the service of this country and of their 

homes. Well beyond the gifts of providence that have propelled 

our province into prosperity, that sacrifice lies at the very heart 

of why Saskatchewan is such a great place to make a life. I am 

humbled to reference that during this session, we will introduce 

measures to honour returning soldiers as well as the sons and 

daughters of those who have made the ultimate sacrifice with a 

scholarship for post-secondary education. I sincerely hope that 

this small gesture will help to contribute to a life and a future 

that our armed forces members and their families, that is 

reflective of the efforts they make on a daily basis. All of this is 

good news for Saskatchewan as we reflect on the very real 

losses that we know families are experiencing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in short, this has been a remarkable year for the 

province, and I’m confident that as we look across this 

Assembly, we see many more years like this in the future — 

prosperity through the right policies. 

 

Finally I’d also like to express my gratitude to the people of 

Saskatchewan, most especially in Saskatoon Greystone, for 

their continued support over the past year. As they say, in recent 

days it’s nice to see that support reaffirmed by so many 

regardless of political stripe, regardless of orientation. These 

good people have been helpful and supportive. They’re 

reflective of the people of our province. In a time that we’ve 

had a very unique opportunity to ensure that the foundations of 

growth are in place, we can see right across the province a sense 

of optimism, a sense of optimism too often overlooked by 

members opposite. 

 

I think sometimes some of their own internal fractures keep 

them from seeing the broader picture of a sunny Saskatchewan. 

Too often they’re confused by the internal divisions that they 

confront when they go out and see a Saskatchewan that is 

optimistic, that is moving forward. 

 

Most especially as I thank my colleagues, especially within the 

Assembly, I’d like to ensure that we also extend a very sincere 

thanks to our Premier for helping to ensure that we, the 

governing party, have the very best interests of the people of 

this province in mind as we undertake the decisions to sustain 

our growth and share the benefits of this growth with the people 

of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to 

speak in favour of the Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Arm River. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible] 

. . . be back here in the House addressing another Throne 

Speech in my career. 

 

First thing up, I’d like to welcome the new member from 

Cumberland on his recent by-election. And I hope that you find 

your time here fulfilling and rewarding, because unfortunately 

with your party you might only have three years here. So use 

them well. 

 

Talking about the Throne Speech, you know, this is a Throne 

Speech of the people. The Premier had asked us to go talk to 

our constituents, but that’s something he didn’t have to tell me 

and many MLAs on this side. We’ve been doing that for many 

years. That’s why every election we’ve gained more seats every 

time, because we’re out there talking to people day to day. 

 

And this is what we’ve been gathering. We’ve been listening to 

them bringing it in, bringing our inputs in, bringing our policies 

forward, and that’s why every election we’ve gained more seats 

than the opposite party since I’ve started this election, since I’ve 

started with this party, since I started in this legislature. 

 

And it’s always been interesting to go out and listen to your 

constituents. That’s where we gather the ideas. And one of the 

many things that we gathered here when we were talking about 

our things was debt reduction. You know, when we talk to 

people about debt reduction, that was very important, very 

important to most of our constituents. 

 

In fact every constituent says, you know, if you have extra 

money, pay down the debt. Because nobody likes to be holding 

debt, you know, for any period of long time. And we’ve been 

struggling with debt in Saskatchewan for many, many years. 

And other provinces have paid them off. Our neighbour has 

paid them off in Alberta and it showed dividends. 

 

The money you’re saving in interest on our debt, I think this 

year it’s going to total somewhere close to $100 million. I don’t 

have the exact numbers here. But I think over a four-year period 

we’re looking at, if we stay on the same course, saving $190 

million. That’s very, very huge. That’s money we have every 

year. And I know that that was a priority that the other MLAs 

had heard when they went around, to pay down the debt. So that 

was one of the main things that our focus of our government 

was working towards — debt. 

 

And we’ve paid off, I think, close to 40 per cent of it in the 

short period of time we’ve been here. We haven’t even been 

here a year. We’ve paid down almost 40 per cent of the debt. I 

mean that is huge. That’s significant. And the people appreciate 

that. When you talk about that, that is like . . . They can hardly 

believe that we paid that much down. And keep going, they say, 

if you can. 

 

And also setting aside extra money in the . . . We used to call it 

the rainy day fund. This money is actually there, close to $2 

billion. And that is real dollars. Those are dollars that are there. 

Those are money that can be used in case there’s an economic 

downturn. 

 

We’re right now, I think, we’re saving probably $5,000 a 

minute in interest rates as we speak of the debt that’s paid 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

down. So probably in the few minutes I’ve saved, I think I must 

be up to 20,000. And I can tell the members opposite I don’t 

think we’re going to save $1 million with my speech. I’ll tell 

you that much. 

 

But that was a big part of what we were hearing when I was 

going door to door. That was, you know, if I brought that up 

and say debt. 

 

The next thing was infrastructure, you know. The infrastructure 

in my constituency, many constituencies throughout rural 

Saskatchewan, through the cities, have been neglected over the 

number of years, and they say extra money should be used for 

infrastructure, whether it’s highways or hospitals, universities, 

road repair, schools, whatever. Like towns, water and sewer, 

subdivisions is one of the issues that have come up. 

 

[15:45] 

 

When I was first elected, when I used to meet with the mayors 

in ’99 and the RMs [rural municipality] was a concern of people 

leaving vacant houses. Like you know, that was a concern to 

them. How are we going to deal? Our tax base is shrinking in 

these towns. People are leaving. We’ve got empty houses. What 

are we going to do? 

 

Now when I meet with them, the problem is subdivisions. 

Every house in my constituency, in every town — every town 

— when I was about this summer and this spring, every house 

is sold. There wasn’t a vacant house that was left that hadn’t 

been sold. 

 

And subdivisions, I’ve got my bigger towns looking at 

expanding subdivisions. And we were addressing that through 

programs and that is huge there, like in my time, to have that 

turnaround. That’s one of the main reasons that I ran, was to see 

Saskatchewan become a have province. And it has — it has. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Brkich: — And you know what? It’s going to stay a have 

province under our government. It’s going to stay that way 

permanently. We’re not going to be in and out of equalization. 

We’re not going to be flirting from, you know, struggling. We 

are part of what they call the new West — a new West in 

Canada and Confederation. 

 

We are a province basically that has respect now throughout the 

country, you know. And at one time, we didn’t. You know, 

down east, I have, you know, friends and relatives. They used to 

joke about Saskatchewan. You know, like calling it, you know, 

the wee province. You know, you’re struggling all the time. 

You know, not any more. Not any more. We have respect 

through Canada. 

 

And that’s one of the reasons that our party has grown so much 

and our government has grown so much in seats and in strength 

and keeps growing out there. Because the people of 

Saskatchewan, that’s what they want. They want to be in a have 

province. They want to be a province that’s growing. They want 

to be a winning province. They want a province that has 

strength. 

 

They also want a caring province, a province that is spending 

money throughout the province, looking at all sectors of people, 

you know, and not just looking more at one sector. Or it seemed 

like under the old government, the NDP, was city. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan seemed to get neglected. And it did 

through highways. Every highway in my constituency was beat 

up, as most of them know. In our short term, we’ve worked on 

No. 2 and we worked on No. 20. And what we did on them 

highways, we fixed them right, and we fixed a length of them. 

 

Under the NDP, they used to patch. By Watrous there was, 

between No. 2, between the junction of 15 to town of Watrous, 

it was in bad shape ever since I first got elected. And what 

they’d do, they’d go out and fix 1 kilometre and leave it, you 

know, and then next summer go out and fix another kilometre 

and not fix the first one even that great. So what we did, what 

the people told me, they says, if you’re going to fix . . . We 

realize you can’t fix every highway in the first year or two. But 

when you’re going to fix a highway, go out and do it right. 

Spend some money on it and do it right and fix it from one 

point to another point so that we know that that whole section is 

fixed. 

 

What the old government used to do, the NDP, they used to fix 

sometimes . . . on 15 Highway from 2 west, they’d fix the first 5 

klicks. And you thought gee, you’re on a pretty good highway, 

and then the centre of it was just beat to crap. 

 

Now No. 20 was another highway that we fixed, and we made it 

primary weight. That was the people out there since I was first 

elected said, if you’re going to do some work on No. 20, make 

it primary weight because there’s some businesses in the area 

that need it. There’s some expansion. There’s a feedlot going in 

there. We said, we need primary weight highway. We listened 

to the people. And that’s what we’re doing. That’s what this 

Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is dealing with — is 

dealing with a province that’s growing, listening to the needs 

and the wants of the people. 

 

Another one it deals with is tax cuts. You know, the people say 

if you have extra money after that, you know, give us some 

money back; try and help us. And we made the most significant 

tax cuts that’s ever, in one single year, that’s ever happened. I 

won’t go into the numbers. Other members will. The Finance 

minister, he’ll have the numbers; he’ll be reciting them off. But 

that’s still the biggest single thing that we’ve addressed in one 

year — that significant tax cuts. And that is huge. That is 

something that passing on back to the people, giving them some 

of the extra money that we’ve taken in in revenues, and it helps 

all sectors. It helps low-income and it helps middle-income 

people. And that’s what a government should be doing, is 

helping all sectors. It’s also going to help the province grow. 

It’s going to keep it moving in the right direction. 

 

Agriculture is important in my constituency as it is through 

most of them. And one of the things we’re working on is the 

crop insurance. I’ve heard that since ’99, is we have to look at 

making crop insurance a better program — either more 

affordable and also better coverage, moving with the times. 

Pretty near all the farmers now continuous crop. And you’re 

going to have to work that in when you’re working your crop 

insurance review on your rates. And I know that this review 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

that’s going to be coming out — it has come out — is going to 

be . . . I’m looking forward to providing a better program 

through crop insurance because that’s what the farmers want. 

 

They want a program that covers them, you know, as your cost 

of inputs are going up. That’s what we have to be looking at, is 

at least covering the cost of production. They don’t want 

handouts and that’s probably not the way to go. And they 

realize that. But they want a decent insurance, long-range 

insurance program that we’re working on. 

 

One of the ones is CAIS [Canadian agricultural income 

stabilization]. At least they know that we’re going to fully fund 

CAIS at the beginning of the year. And I can remember making 

speech after speech and this government hardly ever, ever fully 

funded CAIS in the budget, at the beginning of the budget. 

They would near the end. I think it was 2003 you didn’t fund 

CAIS at all. 

 

But there was years you waited till the fall — till the fall — 

before you announced that you were going to fully fund it, put 

in your full share, because in the budget a few times you just 

put in a set amount. I remember the one year it was $80 million. 

It was capped. That was it. And I think it was also . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure of the year — I think it was 2002, 

you didn’t put in the full amount. So the farmers only got . . . I 

think I had farmers that got 60 per cent of the federal share. Our 

share was 40 per cent. We only funded up to, I think it was 31 

per cent, 30 per cent. That’s all they got. So they were missing 

10 per cent the other provinces got. 

 

You did that a number of years. There was a few years, the last 

few years you fully funded CAIS. You fully did that. I think 

there was only two years you ever announced that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that they ever announced it right in the budget. We’re 

doing that every year. We’re going to fully fund it so at least the 

farmers know that they’re going to fund the full amount. It’s not 

going to be a set rate of only pulling in 80 million or 90 million 

— I think the one year it was 100 million, on that side. 

 

Another one is bringing back the administration of 

Saskatchewan. I know we talked about that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We’ve talked that in the House before. Why aren’t we 

running it like Alberta is? But, you know, the government never 

seemed that interested in doing that. And I think that’s going to 

help the farmers and talking about CAIS and talking to 

somebody that understands farming. 

 

One of the things in the Throne Speech, talking about, is 

expanding the agrologist services and also expanding services 

that will help understanding your CAIS programs. I think 

they’re going to be expanding that in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I can remember when this government took out every rural 

service centre in rural Saskatchewan — took it out, moved it to 

Moose Jaw, I believe. And I know that’s what we’re talking 

about, is expanding those services back to rural Saskatchewan. 

And one of them is talking about helping the people fill out 

their CAIS forms, helping them understand it because there’s 

going to be a long-range program that’s going to be 

implemented for a long period of time. Farmers are going to 

need that. They need to understand how it works. And I think 

we have a duty as the government to help them understand how 

it works and to work with them. And we’re willing to help 

them. That’s one of the ways, through agriculture. 

 

Another one, listening to the people, is the library, is the 

integrated system that we just announced today. I remember 

getting letters talking about that. I can remember that three or 

four years ago that people wanted that. And I think it was just 

mentioned today. We were talking about that, that it was 

presented first about four years to the other government, the 

NDP government, about that service. And they just kind of, 

well we’ll see; we’ll get to it. We’re going to get to that, you 

know. We’re going to get to it. But they didn’t. We did that in 

the first year. We’ve gotten to more things in the first year than 

that government ever did in 16 years. 

 

And that is why this is a great, great Throne Speech, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It’s even better than the one last year. But I 

mean what it is, is it’s a speech; it’s a Throne Speech from the 

people. This is what the people brought to us. This isn’t 

something that was just written by a bureaucrat here in Regina. 

This is written by all of us, and it was all written by our 

constituents because this is what they want. These are the things 

that they wanted, to see the direction that their government is 

moving in. 

 

And that’s what’s the most important. And that is why, you 

know, I can’t believe the other side’s not going to . . . vote 

against it. There is great things in this speech that’s going to 

help this province grow, keep moving it in the right direction. 

 

I know that adjusting the program for the seniors is one of them. 

And I forget the exact . . . Excuse me for a sec while I just go 

through here. I forget the exact . . . We’re adjusting the income 

program for them, for low-income seniors. We’re adjusting that. 

Because I’ve had a lot of calls over the years and that’s never 

been increased. And we’re looking at that. We’re getting that in 

our first year. And you never, never got to that in 16 years. You 

never helped that, you know. 

 

Those are one of the many, many things. The CBOs 

[community-based organizations], the extra money going to 

community-based organizations, that was a great, great thing. 

That’s helping throughout the province.  

 

This is a Throne Speech that reads like a budget — I mean, 

what we’re doing. But it’s a great Throne Speech, and it deals 

with things that are important to the people here in 

Saskatchewan, not just in my constituency, in all the 

constituencies spread out through the province. 

 

I know when I was home on the weekend, we were talking 

about it. And I, you know, tried to talk to as many people as you 

can about the Throne Speech and the many things that are in it. 

And I don’t think I had a negative word against it. 

 

It touches on all bases — the debt reduction, these huge tax 

cuts, the extra infrastructure going in, the ready-for-growth 

infrastructure program. It’s the largest capital commitment in 

Saskatchewan’s history, and that’s what we need out in rural 

Saskatchewan. You know, we’ve been neglected for many years 

out there, and the people could never understand why that 

government would never want to spend money on 

infrastructure. And that’s something that we’re committed to — 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

to build. That’s what I’m committed to. That’s what we’re all 

committed to, you know, to growing Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s one of the great things about this present government. 

That’s why I enjoy being here. It’s why I spent two long terms 

in opposition to work towards this, so we could put our plan in 

effect and see this province grow. To see it to keep growing, to 

make it a have province. To make it what it is today, and what it 

is going to be in the future. 

 

I’m very excited about the potential of this province: the growth 

of it; the people coming back; the expansion in the oil and gas; 

the mining; all the other things that are going on. We’ve had 

interest in feedlots out in our way, ethanol plants. I mean people 

are looking at investing money in Saskatchewan, and they want 

to come home. 

 

We’ve got people working now. There’s a pipeline that’s 

running up by Regina right now, going up to the Manitoba 

border. And there’s a guy from Bladworth that’s always worked 

for that company that’s building it. He’s always been in 

Alberta. This is the first time in I think 12 years since he’s been 

away working that he’s been actually working on a pipeline in 

Saskatchewan. He’s working a few minutes or a few hours from 

home instead of a day or two days from home. You know, that 

is what is very important. That is part of this province growing. 

That is the new reality, the new West, the new Saskatchewan. 

And that is why this is a great Throne Speech. 

 

This is a great Throne Speech. And I will be supporting this 

Throne Speech, and I will not be supporting the amendment. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s my distinct privilege to stand in the House and represent the 

residents of Regina Walsh Acres for a second term as their 

MLA. Regina Walsh Acres is a constituency in Regina’s 

vibrant northwest end and is comprised of the residential 

subdivisions of Normanview West, Normanview, Regent Park, 

Walsh Acres, and McCarthy Park. While the majority of 

housing units are stand-alone homes, the constituency also 

boasts two condominium complexes and several rental 

properties. Also the constituency is home to the bustling 

Normanview Crossing mall. 

 

It is adjacent to the Normanview Crossing mall where, on 

September 10 of this year, a major fire destroyed several condo 

units leaving a total of 20 units damaged. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to confirm that everyone managed to escape safely from 

the fire. Nevertheless the residents of these units continue to 

face significant challenges and uncertainty. 

 

It does not go unnoticed, Mr. Speaker, among the principal 

causes of bankruptcy in this country is fire and accordingly a 

lack of fire insurance to protect property owners from hardship. 

Some residents have been fortunate to be assisted through 

insurance policies; others are coping with financial loss on an 

unprecedented personal scale. 

 

The warm-hearted residents of Regina Walsh Acres, prompted 

by an appeal of the Leader-Post . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

It’s funny how the members opposite think this is funny when 

people are suffering absolute devastation and hardship. These 

people have no insurance, no belongings because they were 

completely damaged in this fire. And the members opposite sit 

there and laugh — member from Cannington and member from 

. . . Minister of Environment. Unbelievable. 

 

The warm-hearted residents of Regina Walsh Acres, prompted 

by an appeal in the Leader-Post, have responded with 

abounding generosity. Indeed even my local MLA office has 

been very active in coordinating donations to fire victims with 

the management team of Medford Mews. I would like to take a 

moment to commend the outstanding efforts of Valetta and 

Linda in particular at the Medford Mews office who have 

absolutely dedicated themselves to this, Mr. Speaker. It is 

through their practical efforts and personal commitment to the 

welfare of their neighbours that such a successful donation 

drive continues. I would also like to extend thanks to everyone 

who has contributed donations of money, clothing, household 

items, and furniture, with special thanks to the members of my 

own caucus for their efforts, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

should be noted that donations are still being accepted, and I’d 

be very willing to coordinate this for the contributors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign I had the humble 

opportunity, along with my dedicated supporters, to knock on 

the doors of hundreds of people and talk to each one of them on 

their doorsteps, in their living rooms, garages, or in the 

hallways of their rental units. It was during these conversations 

I had the opportunity to listen and to convey the New Democrat 

vision for a fair and caring Saskatchewan. 

 

I talked to pensioners trying to cope with rising prices. I spoke 

to renters young and old who live each day hoping that they 

will not receive yet another rent increase notice that they cannot 

afford. I spoke with families who are concerned about the price 

of medications for their loved ones. And I met with students 

who are studying to fulfill their dreams while at the same time 

are worried about their huge debt load they will accumulate 

over the course of their studies. 

 

Each of these people told me that they were happy to see 

Saskatchewan booming and expressed hope that with this 

prosperity their quality of life, along with the lives of their 

families, friends, and neighbours, could be improved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am grateful that the residents of Regina Walsh 

Acres have once again chosen to have me represent them. And I 

pledge to work very hard every day to promote the interests of 

the residents of Regina Walsh Acres. Saskatchewan’s 

hard-working families deserve representatives that fight first 

and always for their interests. And that they can be assured that 

I, along with my New Democrat colleagues in the House as 

well as our newest member from Cumberland, will fight for the 

principle of fairness and equity each and every day. 

 

It was the New Democrats, and in particular the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, who protested the Sask Party 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

government’s callous, mean-spirited cut to Station 20 West in 

Saskatoon . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Again they laugh, Mr. 

Speaker. If that doesn’t tell you what they’re made up of, I 

don’t know what does. 

 

Our leader and our member for Saskatoon Riversdale stood up 

for the members of Saskatchewan when the Sask Party 

government accepted the broken equalization promise of their 

ideological cousins, the Harper Conservatives in Ottawa. Our 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale and our leader was a lone 

voice in this province because none of the MPs [Member of 

Parliament] that were elected to this province from the Harper 

Conservatives nor anyone from the Sask Party said anything 

about it. All you could hear was the crickets chirping on this 

subject, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was again the New Democrats who called on the Sask Party 

government to be accountable and respect parliamentary 

democracy when they hastily attempted to pass a Bill that 

would have given cabinet unquestioned, record-breaking 

spending authority with virtually no paper trail for anything up 

to $350,000, Mr. Speaker. Hard to believe after the history that 

they left this province with — $15 billion debt in 1991 just to 

be precise — and yet they think that they should be able to pass 

legislation to be able to spend what they want, unaccountable 

up to $350,000. Shame. 

 

While the Sask Party government picks winners and losers, 

declares war on working people with Bills 5 and 6, and 

enshrines the rights of the private profit to come before the 

interests of working people with the creation of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, New Democrats have demanded accountability, 

fairness, and results for working people. I am pleased to work 

alongside with the member from Saskatoon Riversdale for a 

principled opposition that provides a voice to those that the 

Sask Party government has already chosen to leave behind. 

 

Throughout the summer months, Sask Party MLAs were told by 

their Premier to go out and make a list of how they could spend 

$3.1 billion of Saskatchewan’s hard-earned money. And may I 

remind everyone, Mr. Speaker, that is money that was earned 

by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. It is something they toiled 

for, for the many years that we have been trying to rebuild this 

province since it was left devastated in 1991. 

 

It is my hope that they receive the same phone calls, read the 

same letters, and listen to the same concerns that have been 

brought to my attention, heartbreaking stories of personal 

challenges of hardworking people struggling to get by as a 

result of the Sask Party’s ideology. A recovering cancer patient 

struggles to afford the dietary products he requires because the 

Sask Party government — despite the fact that they have record 

windfall, despite the fact that they were left with $2 billion 

when they took office — because the Sask Party government 

decided to cut the nutritional products program, a program that 

allowed patients that require medically necessary supplies to 

purchase them conveniently and affordably from the hospital. 

Just another way a Sask Party government leaves ordinary 

working people behind. 

 

A pensioner worries about paying her winter home heating bills 

since she heard the Sask Party government approved an 

increase on average of 20 per cent a month for home heating 

bills. Meanwhile the Sask Party government refuses to provide 

any direct rebate as they called for when they were in 

opposition — apparently they’ve forgotten that — and 

cancelled the NDP’s lowest cost utility bundle guarantee, 

despite the fact that there were $3.1 billion in the bank and there 

still exists a $2 billion rainy day fund that they originally 

thought was unacceptable. All this woman hears from the Sask 

Party government is that broad-based tax cuts are the answer. 

Meanwhile she wonders why the government, if they have 

Crown corporations, can’t just provide a guarantee to keep rates 

affordable. Again just another way a Sask Party government 

leaves people behind. 

 

Or what about the student who faces ever-rising tuition costs? 

He found out just last week that the Sask Party government 

doesn’t believe in freezing tuition rates. Unfortunately that 

same student struggles to afford rent as he watches the Sask 

Party government’s inaction on the most basic need, which is 

shelter. Just another person who is left behind by the Sask Party 

government. 

 

It is the story of too many people being left behind by the Sask 

Party government that serves as the context for a Throne 

Speech that spends more time trumpeting the wearing 

catchphrases about growth and selling the province, and too 

little time actually ensuring that people can afford to heat their 

homes, purchase their groceries, or pay their rent. 

 

This was a Throne Speech that tries to make up for the most 

insensitive and callous cuts, callous cuts already made to the 

most vulnerable in our society, but falls short of making a real 

difference. This was a Throne Speech that casts into serious 

doubt the future of Saskatchewan’s Crown sector and its 

capacity to provide affordable goods and services to the people 

of this province. This was also a Thorne Speech where the 

future of the publicly owned and funded medicare was put on 

notice, Mr. Speaker, that it must pass a vague patient-first 

review, an ideological bone-picking of a sacred program that 

people, now more than ever, count on when they’re in need. 

 

I stand as a New Democrat today in opposition to the Sask 

Party precisely because I believe that economic prosperity 

without significant social progress undermines all that we have 

built together in this great province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — It denies people the dignity they deserve, and it 

squanders the promise of a better, brighter future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party ultimately wanted this Throne 

Speech to detract from the reality that, with billions of dollars in 

the bank, the Sask Party opposite has spent more effort over 

their year in government finding ways to provide significant 

pay increases for their friends, while finding programs to cut 

rather than deliver any real long-lasting relief for Saskatchewan 

people who today are struggling to make ends meet. 

 

It is a true shame that this government gave up on those 

counting on the success of Station 20 West in Saskatoon. It is a 

shame that this government has essentially given up on the tools 

available to deliver affordability through the Crown sector. It is 

a shame that this government has decided to attack working 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

people by constructing legislation that does unprecedented harm 

to trade unions and further takes away the very rights that the 

people in this province have fought so long and so hard to 

achieve. 

 

All of these actions describe a government that harbours an 

ideology that prevents Saskatchewan from achieving any true 

qualitative sense of a better life. Indeed these actions underscore 

Conservative, quote, “you’re on your own” type ideology that is 

proven to lead to unacceptable levels of social disruption and 

hardship, and undermine human well-being. 

 

The Throne Speech delivered on October 22 offers exaggerated 

assurances in light of the uncertainty Saskatchewan people, and 

Canadians by extension, face as they watch an economic crisis 

of historic proportion unfold. The crisis is marked by volatile 

markets and credit shortages and is strongly associated with the 

subprime mortgage fiasco in the United States. 

 

Governments in some of the most prosperous nations in the 

world are providing billion dollar taxpayer bailouts to banks. In 

the United States, Britain, Belgium, France, Italy, and 

Netherlands and Iceland, governments have responded to the 

worrying economic situation and at the same time have 

admitted uncertainty and volatility may prevail. Today there is 

mounting evidence of a slowdown across the developed world. 

It is in North America and in countries that follow the model of 

continental Europe. It affects countries that have had housing 

market bubbles and those that did not. And it is materializing 

reality that no part of the developed world will be completely 

immune. 

 

The Harper Conservatives, fresh from a less-than-substantial 

majority win, are now admitting that Canada may not be spared 

and have stopped, at least for the present moment, from 

preaching their free-market, laissez-faire, do-nothing approach 

as Canadians’ pensions, savings, and jobs hang in the balance, 

Mr. Speaker. After all, they have stopped because they know 

that they have blatantly jeopardized our jobs, our savings, our 

pensions through their own leave-it-to-the-market ideology, that 

Conservative brand which has led the irresponsible financial 

deregulation here in Canada that they have commenced as early 

as 2006. 

 

In 2006 the Harper Conservatives invited US [United States] 

financial corporations into Canada’s mortgage insurance market 

and they doubled the amount taxpayers would be on the hook to 

insure. We should all recall that it was during 2006 when 

housing prices in Canada peaked to a median higher than even 

the top of the US market. Further, Canada domestically 

witnessed weakening standards for mortgage insurance. 

 

Later in 2006 the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 

started to insure no-down-payment, interest-only, 40-year 

mortgages, stating in the National Post that, quote, “We’re the 

third guys coming up to the plate with these products . . . AIG 

has done it . . . We’re just doing something that’s in the 

marketplace.” Guess what, Mr. Speaker? AIG [American 

International Group, Inc.] has since bailed out. To be sure, this 

was a consequence of the vague, purposely misleading 

Conservative agenda to promote competition that in real terms 

compromised Canada’s economic stability and effectively 

trapped Canadians who struggle to fulfill their dreams of 

owning a home. 

 

[16:15] 

 

In 2007, one year after the deregulation by the Harper 

Conservatives, it was reported that 40 per cent of all new 

mortgages in Canada were amortized over 40 years, Mr. 

Speaker. Despite the emerging disastrous effects of the same 

type of financial deregulation in the US, the Harper 

Conservatives stood by the folly of greater choice, innovation, 

and increased competition, selling this vulgate of free market 

ideology as good for Canadians. 

 

This summer the Harper Conservatives have already moved to 

correct their own irresponsible deregulation by requiring the 

Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation to at least obtain a 

5 per cent down payment from potential mortgage holders, 

acknowledging the hazards associated with Conservative 

leave-it-to-the-invisible-hand ideology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the economic damage of the Sask Party’s 

ideological cousins, the Harper Conservatives, has yet to be 

fully determined. It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, that in this light 

the 11 Sask Party MLAs that currently hold Conservative Party 

memberships may rightly decide not to renew next year. But I 

suspect not; I won’t hold my breath. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this economic spectacle necessarily raises some 

important questions here at home in Saskatchewan. Yes, 

Saskatchewan may still boast growth as other regions suffer 

losses, but economists agree that Canada is not immune, neither 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan people are right to question 

whether the Sask Party government can be trusted to make the 

right choices to guide Saskatchewan through the world’s 

economically turbulent times ahead or to make the right choices 

for our long-term prosperity. 

 

The evidence already suggests otherwise, Mr. Speaker. While 

people struggle to make ends meet, the Premier spends his time 

making football announcements or walking the booths of job 

fairs to lure workers. While pensioners are sent a nasty letter 

telling them to prove they are alive and given only a matter of 

days to respond or the government will cut them off, the 

Premier preaches about an emerging powerhouse at the Empire 

Club in Toronto. While Saskatchewan people try to understand 

the unfolding problems in a globalized market, the Premier 

announces that he wants the esoteric body, Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, to reduce the vague yet undefined enemy to 

Conservatives all over the world, which is regulation, red tape. 

 

Woodrow Stanley Lloyd, a former premier, who instituted 

Tommy Douglas’s vision of medicare in Saskatchewan, once 

said the following about governments, quote: 

 

Governments [he said] exist in order that we may create 

those conditions without which people cannot be at their 

best. 

 

And I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, the words, quote, 

“without which people cannot be at their best.” In this sense 

Woodrow Lloyd saw the possibility of government working not 

in the backrooms or in the secret, esoteric bodies like Enterprise 

Saskatchewan — or the latest, coming to a legislature near you, 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

Innovation Saskatchewan — rather a government with 

principle, a government that respects parliamentary democracy 

and professionalism of the civil service, and a government that 

genuinely seeks to achieve things like health care, education, 

and Crown utilities that are publicly delivered and affordable so 

that people can be at their best. 

 

The Sask Party does not, however, share in this vision. They 

instead believe in an ideology that is much more individualistic, 

that does not care that society’s rewards are unevenly 

distributed, and an ideology that is being put on trial today as 

the world’s nations come to terms with a market system that left 

greed and irresponsibly unchecked as government chose to be 

absentee from its role of ensuring equity and fairness. 

 

Instead the Sask Party government passes laws without proper 

public consultation to deny working people their rights. Instead 

the Sask Party government conducts massive civil servant 

firings to purge the civil service of anyone whom they suspect 

doesn’t share their ideology. As the Public Service Commission 

identified in their latest ruling, quote: 

 

When competent employees are dismissed without cause, 

there is no return on investment to the public, only 

increased cost and loss of competence and the creation of 

instability to the public service. 

 

Last week the Minister for Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour gave a speech to the Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour convention and stated that his government, that is the 

Sask Party government, is a great place to live and raise a 

family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Morin: — I’m glad they’re clapping because they’ve just 

endorsed what I heard. I found it very, very, very disturbing and 

very interesting to note that the vision under the previous NDP 

government was that Saskatchewan was the best place to live, 

work, and raise a family. Under the new Sask Party 

government, it’s live and raise a family. Somehow we’ve now 

lost the word work. 

 

The Sask Party dropped the word work from its vision. They 

have dropped the word work from its vision. The Sask Party has 

dropped the word work from its vision. Could it be because the 

Sask Party government has declared war on the working people 

of this province? Could it be because they are so ideologically 

driven that they don’t even realize that rather than attacking 

legislation that protects and attracts workers to this province, 

that they actually need workers in this thriving economy to 

provide stability? 

 

Last week we also heard the Premier say that, no, they likely 

wouldn’t be able to succeed in meeting their greenhouse gas 

emission targets, with the first one being stabilizing emissions 

by 2010. He said they couldn’t meet this. Whoa, whoa, hang on. 

They couldn’t meet this inherited obligation. Perhaps the 

Premier and the Sask Party government need a refresher course, 

although I’m sure they prefer to stick with their revisionism 

when history doesn’t fall in favour with what they would like to 

portray. 

 

The greenhouse gas emission targets that the previous NDP 

government announced in the spring of 2007 were adopted, not 

inherited, by the Premier and the Sask Party government. They 

were actually in their election party platform. And if they don’t 

have one handy to look at, I’ll share mine with them because I 

managed to get my hands on one. And the Minister for 

Environment is barking right now because she knows that she 

hasn’t been able to say anything over the past year about 

meeting those targets. 

 

Well let me tell you what they did inherit. They inherited $2 

billion when they took over government, the largest inheritance 

of any government coming into power in this province. That’s 

what they inherited, Mr. Speaker. They also inherited 

something called the Prebble report, an extensive report done 

on how to address climate change issues and issues of the 

environment in this province. 

 

They also inherited a $320 million fund to deal with the issues 

of climate change. They also inherited the green strategy on 

how to address the issues of climate change. And what did they 

do with that $320 million fund? They gutted it, Mr. Speaker. 

They cut it down to $40 million, $40 million to address the 

issues of climate change and issues of the environment. Well 

can anyone wonder why they can’t meet their obligations that 

they adopted in their platform? 

 

Or was that simply numbers? Did they just throw numbers in 

their election party platform, or did they do any research when 

they adopted those numbers? Or was it just another gimmick as 

the Premier referred to last week about his obligation when he 

said that he wanted to reduce the gas tax once it hit a certain 

price? Last week he was quoted as saying it was just a gimmick. 

Well was this just another gimmick adopting these targets? 

 

They implode the Office of Energy Conservation. They didn’t 

even leave intact an office that was already addressing the 

issues of conservation. They absolutely disintegrated it. And 

they also gutted the climate change secretariat — another great 

initiative that was supposed to house a number of experts to 

deal directly with the issues of climate change. And what did 

they do? They completely eradicated it. This is the vision of this 

Sask Party government — no vision, I suggest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Time and time again, Saskatchewan people have witnessed the 

Sask Party government prove the folly of growth for the sake of 

growth and undermine the ability of people to be at their best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the residents of Regina Walsh Acres, 

I stand opposed to the Sask Party government’s Throne Speech 

and stand in favour of the motion passed by the members of the 

opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to respond to the Throne Speech 

today, and I must say it was a very positive Throne Speech. 

 

But before I focus on that speech, I would just like to publicly 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

thank my family and my colleagues and my constituents for 

their support over the past few months. It has been an extremely 

difficult time, and I do appreciate all the kindness that’s shown 

me and my family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was listening to the member from Regina 

Rosemont respond on Thursday. And it was like he wasn’t even 

aware that it was his socialist, NDP government that were in 

power for 16 years preceding the Saskatchewan Party victory 

last November. 

 

He spoke of financial difficulties people are having — housing 

issues and rent increases. He forgot or didn’t realize that it was 

his NDP government that were booting seniors out of their beds 

when they were raising long-term care rates. It was then NDP 

MLA Mark Wartman that yelled across, it’s the right thing to 

do. 

 

The member from Rosemont then attacked the city of Estevan 

— a city that I am very proud to represent. He spoke of the 

housing concerns. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are housing 

concerns in my constituency, and that’s because more people 

are making their home there. Of course when the NDP were in 

power, they were driving people out of the province with their 

policies. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, measures are being taken to address 

housing issues and other issues renters are facing. Communities 

are developing more lots. And in fact we are acting on 

recommendations put forward by the task force on affordable 

housing in which a former member on the opposite side was a 

part of that team. That same member spoke of, and I quote, 

“Boom times in Estevan mean a busy time for police.” Mr. 

Speaker, I think that any time a community grows, that situation 

arises. 

 

Perhaps if the NDP would have kept their promise of 200 police 

officers, communities would have an adequate number of police 

officers that would deter mischief. 

 

Again that same member questions what we want our 

communities to look like in 5, 10, 15, 20, or 50 years from now. 

Well we all know how our communities would look like if, God 

forbid, the NDP had their way. They’d be ghost towns. 

 

You see, Mr. Speaker, the NDP failed to plan, they planned to 

fail, and sadly, they succeeded. They were happy to settle for 

mediocrity. To them growth is a bad thing. And that’s just like a 

farmer sowing his crop and then praying for a crop failure 

because he doesn’t have bin room. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will tell you how I feel about Estevan. I know 

there’s a housing shortage and concerns that stem from growth. 

We were left with an infrastructure deficit, but I can walk down 

any street in that city and feel safe. I am proud of the generosity 

of my constituency and just last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Estevan was again number one in Canada for reaching their 

goal for the United Way campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Eagles: — And incidentally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the goal 

was $275,000 and they raised $292,782 in the 34-hour telethon, 

so Estevan has been number one in Canada 31 times in the 

telethon’s 32-year history. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may I 

would like to congratulate Alan Hamann and all the volunteers 

for all their hard work. 

 

My constituency is in the much-talked-about Bakken play and 

the Estevan-Weyburn area is number one with oil and gas land 

sales. The southeast corner of this province continues to 

contribute very generously to government revenues. This 

constituency is one of hard-working, proud people — whether 

they are involved in business, the oil industry, agriculture, or 

professional services. They are the backbone of this province 

and it irritates me to no end when someone who has only visited 

this community once or twice stands and focuses on the 

negative when this community has so much to offer. 

 

Just last week, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Energy and 

Resources and I attended an Oilfield Technical Society awards 

dinner in Estevan. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to publicly 

recognize the recipients for their lifetime achievement: Graham 

Shirley, Jim Coulter, and George McGillicky for their 

contributions to the oil industry. Mr. Speaker, many attendees at 

this function commented on how happy they were with the tax 

cuts, debt reduction, and infrastructure commitments as well as 

the $1.9 billion put in the Growth and Security Fund. 

 

Many people were amazed that the minister would come to 

Estevan for this event. People can count on one hand the 

number of times the premier and/or cabinet minister of the 

former government ever visited my constituency. The present 

Premier and at least seven cabinet ministers have been to my 

constituency, sometimes on more than one occasion, since we 

formed government. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be part of this government. I 

am proud to be a part of a government that doesn’t wait until an 

election year to make positive changes in the lives of 

hard-working people, historical announcements regarding tax 

cuts, debt paydown, and infrastructure commitments while 

putting almost $2 billion in the Financial Security Fund. 

 

And as you have heard from those who have spoken prior to 

me, the Premier asked each of us for feedback from our 

constituents on what they wanted from surplus revenues. This 

Throne Speech delivers on those responses. Over this past 

weekend I spoke to many people in my constituency and they 

all had very positive responses to these initiatives. 

 

The increase in the basic personal exemption and the spousal 

exemption will increase by $4,000 each. The child tax credit 

will increase by $2,000. And this is retroactive to January 1, 

2008. Approximately 80,000 residents of this province will no 

longer be paying provincial income tax. 

 

An increase to the Saskatchewan income assistance program for 

seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is the first increase in this 

program since 1992. And as you can see, Mr. Speaker, this 

targets those who need it most — those with families and 

low-income earners. 

 

I remember last spring when we made announcements 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

regarding tax cuts, the member from Regina Douglas Park went 

on about the tax cut only amounted to the value of a pizza and 

he was going to get a cute little T-shirt with some stuff written 

on it. Well maybe even he’ll see fit to support this Throne 

Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has also directed an additional 

payment of $1 billion towards the provincial debt. This, along 

with previous commitments, means that this government has 

paid almost 40 per cent of the provincial debt in the one year’s 

time since the election. Every minute meant the debt has been 

decreased by $5,000 in interest payments. The hundreds of 

millions of dollars saved on interest alone — and I believe it’s 

around 900 million over the next five years — will be a benefit 

to all Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, there is 1.9 billion in the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund and in today’s global 

economy that reserve is security, an insurance policy that will 

benefit every citizen of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also very happy to see increased 

commitment to highways and infrastructure. There is a huge 

infrastructure deficit in this province, a result of 16 years of 

NDP rule, and I look forward to the five-year rolling plan for 

highway construction. We must make safe highways a priority. 

 

Parents of young families were pleased that additional money 

was targeted for child care spaces as well as the increase in 

pre-kindergarten programs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government proves its commitment to 

agriculture by full participation in AgriStability. 

 

We all remember the guessing games and the gong show that 

the former Agriculture minister Mark Wartman played with the 

farmers. Finally we have an Agriculture minister who 

understands agriculture and the needs of farmers. We all 

remember it was the NDP who tore up GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program] contracts, made changes to crop insurance 

that forced farmers to opt out because it was unaffordable. And 

the NDP were the ones that closed down the rural service 

centres. The way farmers in this province were treated by the 

NDP was absolute proof that they didn’t understand agriculture 

or didn’t care about agriculture or perhaps both. 

 

Property taxes were another issue. We had to implement the 

recommendations of the Boughen report in order to have 

property tax relief, while the government of the day increased 

the PST [provincial sales tax], but they didn’t provide any tax 

relief. They cherry-picked. 

 

Then we had to wait until school board amalgamations took 

place. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? Tax relief still didn’t happen. 

This government looks forward to the report on the education 

property tax system in addressing these issues. This government 

is also committed to a long-term revenue-sharing program, 

something that municipalities have been asking for, for a long 

time. This is expected to be in place by the next budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very happy that this government is saying 

thank you to those who serve in our Armed Forces. The words 

as read in the Throne Speech say it best, and I will quote: 

While 2008 has been a tremendous year for our province, 

we have also been reminded that the freedom and way of 

life that we enjoy comes with a cost. 

 

We are truly blessed to have so many brave young men 

and women willing to pay that cost on our behalf. 

 

Today, the people of Saskatchewan and my government 

say thank you. 

 

Thank you to all who serve our country. 

 

. . . during this session my government will introduce 

measures to honour returning soldiers as well as the sons 

and daughters of those who have made the ultimate 

sacrifice. 

 

This will take the form of a scholarship for post-secondary 

education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it just seems inadequate no matter what we 

could do to repay those who serve our country and ensure that 

we have the freedom that we all enjoy today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech and 

the motion put forward by my colleague, the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is always a 

pleasure to stand in this Assembly and talk about our 

government’s passion for our great province, although today I 

am particularly excited to rise, relaying renewed sense of 

optimism my constituents feel about the future of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech outlines strong initiatives 

delivered by a driven, focused government who have 

aggressively brought forward fundamental change to the 

provincial landscape. Through prudent debt reduction, dramatic 

income tax relief, and historic infrastructure investment, our 

government is building a stronger Saskatchewan and a better 

life for those who live here. Mr. Speaker, it is this year country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a year has passed since I was elected and my, how 

things have changed. In reflection on the past year and what has 

been accomplished, I came to ponder the value of time. I 

thought about the historic announcements we had made and the 

improvements they will mean for the lives of my constituents in 

just one year’s time. 

 

With this in mind I thought, wow! Given more time, what could 

be accomplished — say 16 years? Some great accomplishments 

have been achieved in 16-year periods. The CPR [Canadian 

Pacific Railway] railroad was built in less than 16 years. The 

Montreal Canadiens won 10 Stanley Cups in a 16-year period. 

In fact, in fact this building was built in a fraction of that time. 

 

So it begs the question, what did the former NDP government 

accomplish in their 16 years in power . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . That’s right, Mr. Speaker — very little. 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

Mr. Speaker, let’s look at it. They let our common infrastructure 

fall into a state of shameful disrepair. Through their stagnant 

policies they drove out 35,000 people from our great province, 

including a generation of our young people. They even raised 

taxes after an election. They resigned themselves to being a wee 

province that would be in and out of equalization. 

 

It seems the former government could never have envisioned 

what could be accomplished in just one year under a 

Saskatchewan Party government, so it is no wonder that they 

now oppose this Speech to the Throne. Because of the historic 

investments we are making in this province, we will build us 

past the limitations of a wee province and we will strengthen us 

beyond equalization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in just one short year we have reduced the debt by 

over 40 per cent. Yes, 40 per cent in just one year. We have 

reduced a $7 billion debt to 4.6 billion. That works out to — as 

my counterpart tells me — about $5,000 per minute paid down 

towards future prosperity. 

 

Now debt repayment may not be a glitzy government spending. 

You can’t stand beside it and get your picture taken. There is no 

ribbon cutting when you pay down the debt, and not many votes 

come your way because you’ve paid down the debt. It is an 

abstraction, an abstraction for most people in their daily lives. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is the right thing to do. In my mind it may 

be in the long term the measure that has the greatest impact on 

the lives of our children and our grandchildren. 

 

Further, in one short year we have implemented the largest 

single-year income tax cut in our province’s history — not 

before an election, not in some vote-buying scheme, but for the 

betterment of this province and the people who call it home. 

This tax cut will make our province the lowest tax jurisdiction 

in Canada for most families. It will completely drop 80,000 

people from our tax roll. And everyone who works hard gets a 

little more of their own money in their own pocket. 

 

In just one short year we funded the ready-for-growth initiative 

which injected $1 billion into this province’s infrastructure. 

And we will monumentally increase this again this coming year 

to $1.5 billion. This commitment will improve public safety and 

support growth and opportunity across this province. 

 

The NDP planned for decline; we are building for the future. In 

one short year we set a vision for our province as an innovation 

leader where we can leverage our natural advantages and utilize 

our resources to catapult us into the future. With strong 

direction we will make the uranium industry more than just 

selling rocks, the environment more than just a photo op with 

Al Gore. Most importantly, this Throne Speech will support 

those who need it most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP claim to be the advocate for those in 

need. Well their record suggests otherwise. The wait-list for 

people with disabilities had grown under the previous NDP 

government to include over 400 women and men. This year this 

Throne Speech has committed the resources to address 16 years 

of neglect of these citizens in just one short year. 

 

Furthermore, the Saskatchewan income assistance program, 

designed to support low-income seniors, was not increased by 

the NDP since 1992. And times have changed since 1992. Let’s 

remember. 

 

In 1992 the Internet had never been heard of; Al Gore hadn’t 

invented it yet. Cellphones were still the size of a brick, Johnny 

Carson had retired, and clear Pepsi just hit the market. I was 

just out of university, and the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place was in grade 9. This was the last time income assistance 

programs for low-income seniors had been adjusted until now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech not only addresses debt 

repayment, infrastructure, tax reductions, but also affordable 

housing, security for CBOs. It trumpets health care and the 

environment. Mr. Speaker, this is a thoughtful, well-rounded 

document. Even senior members of the opposition caucus and 

the Leader of the Opposition himself were publicly extolling 

many of the initiatives as good for Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they were right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there must be quite a bit of confusion within the 

NDP ranks, the inevitable discussion of how can we oppose 

something so positive for our province. It is only out of their 

duty to the past that they are so negative at this time of positive 

change. I do get a sense that the opposition to this Throne 

Speech is mandatory. There might be some fingers crossed 

behind their backs. Mr. Speaker, I even saw the hint of a 

wink-wink on a few occasions when the members opposite 

were truly trying to fight this Throne Speech. 

 

It is evidently good for their constituents. However it seems the 

only reason they can find to oppose these measures is that they 

are bad for them politically. This bold vision sets out a new 

course for our province. In fact they struggled to find a person 

that these announcements didn’t help. They even worked so 

hard to find someone that had been harmed by our prosperous 

and growing economy that their member for Regina Rosemont 

found himself having to quote from a newspaper published 

several hundred kilometres from his own riding. He was 

referring to a letter to the editor from a person who was talking 

about a friend of his who got a note about a rent increase. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is sad. They are so out of touch with their 

own constituents that they need to find a letter from a guy, who 

has a friend who got a note a few hundred miles from where 

this member’s constituency is, to pit their image of doom and 

gloom on this prosperous times for this province. 

 

The opposition is correct, Mr. Speaker. There are challenges 

with growth. There really is challenges with growth, Mr. 

Speaker, one of which is the cost of housing. Another is the 

labour shortage. Another is the increased demand for 

infrastructure. 

 

So I encourage that member to put down his skim, decaf, 

no-whip, chai tea latte and stop by Tim Hortons for a 

double-double and talk with the families who are meeting these 

challenges head on. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Speaking of good measures, speaking of feel-good measures 

that are out of touch, just this past Thursday in this very debate, 

the Leader of the Opposition espoused spending billions of 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard October 27, 2008 

taxpayers’ dollars to end world hunger. While I applaud his 

well-meaning nature, a walk around his own constituency 

would show him that there are some priorities close to home. 

There are in my riding. 

 

It is incumbent upon me to analyze this Throne Speech through 

the Lloydminster perspective. Given we share a city with 

Alberta and that citizens of that province have enjoyed a far 

lower taxation scheme for some time, it is no surprise that the 

Saskatchewan side of the city has saw more modest growth in 

comparison to the Alberta side. So, Mr. Speaker, we can 

understand how this is welcome news for those who live on our 

side on the border. There will certainly be a celebration when 

they file their tax returns this year. 

 

I am also excited to note that some families will be in the most 

competitive tax bracket in Canada with this announcement, as 

my community is full of growing, young families who we want 

to continue to make a better life here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I can also inform the Chamber that the renewed commitment to 

infrastructure will be well received. With the demand of the 

heavy oil industry and agriculture, our roads and highways are 

continually in need of repair. 

 

Further it is worth noting that while one-third of Lloydminster’s 

population lives on the Saskatchewan side, the city’s entire 

education and health care needs are administered by our 

government. With continued population growth, our schools in 

Lloydminster and the surrounding area are full and more space 

is needed. Additionally our hospital has grown to serve more 

people, and there is now over 1,000 births a year in 

Lloydminster. 

 

It is no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that it is the farmers and ranchers 

who so often take me aside to tell me how important it is we 

take debt repayment seriously. 

 

While I am holding the floor speaking about my hometown, I 

would like to address a comment made last week by the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. I proudly rose to read a 

member’s statement trumpeting the recent honour bestowed on 

Lloydminster as the best city in Canada to start a small 

business. The member from Nutana tried to call me down with 

shouts of Alberta — Lloydminster, Alberta. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I could not understand why the member was 

shouting, Alberta. Surely she realizes that Lloydminster is a 

border city. I can only conclude that she has a case of 

prospera-phobia. Now I’m not a doctor but prospera-phobia is 

defined in the Canadian medical dictionary as a rare exotic 

disease — as the fear of prosperity, a fear of those who are 

successful. It’s not surprising the disease is highly contagious 

on the left; it is often characterized by a clinging to the past and 

protectionism. 

 

The medical association also warns it is similar to another 

disease called Alberta-phobia. In hindsight this did not surprise 

me because those members when they were in government, 

they ignored Lloydminster. They wrote us off as an Albertan 

city. That is why the Saskatchewan Party received such strong 

support in the last election. Our government is proud to 

champion the needs of our border city. Unlike the NDP and 

their federal cousins who want to ban the oil sands 

development, we applaud the hard-working people of the entire 

Lloydminster area. In fact actions of the last 11 months have 

put our city back on the provincial map. 

 

We hosted the first ever Alberta-Saskatchewan joint cabinet 

meeting which laid the groundwork for a lasting partnership. 

Lloydminster also hosted a meeting between health ministers 

which has been very well received and has some concrete 

results to prove it. Lloydminster women under the NDP’s 

government had to travel to Regina or Saskatoon to get a bone 

density test. We were sending our oldest, most frail women to 

those cities to get tests when Lloydminster had their own bone 

density clinic which we would not fund. As of this meeting, we 

can now allow our senior citizens to go and get a bone density 

test in their own city, walking across the street. 

 

Another area in Lloydminster which we have been very proud 

of is Lakeland College. When that government was in power, 

Lakeland College was viewed as a gateway for us to lose our 

young, trained people to Alberta. Why would we fund a college 

which is just going to lose us our young students? Mr. Speaker, 

that is not how this government views Lakeland College. 

Lakeland College is a tool that we will use to make 

Saskatchewan prosperous. It will be a gateway to bring people 

into this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk 

about a couple of the initiatives on the we-got-it-done list, not 

the we-were-going-to-get-to-it list. Now I think that it’s 

important that when you’re looking at next year country, it’s 

easy to say we were going to do it because we were going to do 

it next year. We’re now in this year country, Mr. Speaker, and 

we have a concrete document about what we got done. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly happy with the democratic 

changes that this government is going to make. The fact that we 

are going to look at electing a senator from Saskatchewan, that 

is a fundamental right and I am proud that our province is 

taking a lead on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that as I’m talking about democracy, it was 

interesting the member opposite was speaking about the past 

provincial election. I think a look in the mirror would do them 

well. Their party was able to elect a person in every province 

except one — this one, Mr. Speaker. I think that is telling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, better health care: $100 million into improving 

health facilities, 40 new physician undergrad seats, and 60 seats 

— 60 seats — Mr. Speaker, for residency positions. For too 

long under that government, Mr. Speaker, we were training 

doctors and losing them at the last possible moment. We spent 

all the money to train them, but when they needed to do their 

residencies, that wasn’t available here. They’d move away and 

they never came back. We have more residency seats, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is very positive. 

 

We are also making initiatives so that rural doctors have more 

supports. And coming from a rural area, Mr. Speaker, the 

doctor shortage is acute, and I am very proud to stand behind a 

document that points at it as a priority of this government this 



October 27, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — It’s this year country, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re looking at stronger Crowns. There’s going to be 

a report come out shortly that talks about the success of that 

government in their out-of-province Crown investments. And I 

think that that document is going to be a powerful read, and 

maybe another moment that they could look in the mirror, Mr. 

Speaker, because I don’t think that their record is all that great. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing that we’ve done this year is the 

pre-kindergarten spaces. We have a few pre-kindergarten spaces 

in my riding, and they are extremely well received. Any one 

who is involved with them says that they are going to do very 

good things for the young people that attend them and their 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up here fairly quickly, Mr. 

Speaker. But at the end of my budget speech I spoke about a 

person I know back home, Orval. And at that time Orval had 

come into a little bit of good luck. He bought a new truck. His 

road outside his house got paved. His son moved back from 

Alberta, if you would remember correctly. And they drilled four 

more oil wells on his land. Things went very well for Orval in 

that last time. I would just like to repeat to the Assembly that 

Orval is still doing fairly well, and that the prosperity of this 

province is certainly shining on Orval again. 

 

But I would like to point out Karen, a good friend of mine back 

home. She’s got two young girls that are in school. And her 

husband works in the oil field. Karen, she works out of the 

house. The tax changes we made are going to have a definite 

effect in her family, Mr. Speaker, right in her pocket. 

 

Also her girls go to a school which is overcrowded, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s been cramped for a long time. Lloydminster’s 

been a growing city, and up till this point there hasn’t been a lot 

of desire from the former government to do anything about it. 

This government is going to look at building more capacity in 

every realm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and now I’m sure Karen appreciates it — the debt 

repayment. That is something that her daughters and her 

granddaughters can look back at, you know. Why is 

Saskatchewan a rock, a solid foundation for us to build our lives 

in? You know, a generation ago people were fleeing it like there 

was a sinking ship. Now — a year from now, 10 years from 

now, 50 years from now — the foundation that is being laid 

today with this debt repayment is going to pay off tenfold, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, as we’re moving towards 5 

o’clock, I would like to say one last comment, that I will 

certainly be supporting this Throne Speech. It’s based on 

everything that makes Saskatchewan good. It is a bold vision 

for our province and is making a better life for everyone. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment as it 

represents a view of the past, a time of out-migration and 

decline by an NDP government with . . . So, Mr. Speaker, I will 

be supporting the Throne Speech, and I will not be supporting 

the amendment. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has moved to 

adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:56.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1365, 1367 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1365 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1366 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1366 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1366, 1377 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1367 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1367 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1368 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1368 

 Expression of Deep Concern 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1368 

 Nashi Fundraiser 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1369 

 Achievement in Business Excellence Awards Dinner 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1369 

 Saskatchewan Education Week 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1369 

 Women’s History Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 

 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Utility Rates 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1370 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1370 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1371 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1371 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1371 

 Ministerial Responsibility 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1373 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1374 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Technology Infrastructure Funding for Schools and Libraries 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1375 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1376 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1376 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1377 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1380 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1382 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1386 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1389 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1392 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1394 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


