




















































Hansard: March 12, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 11A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 12, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 271 

 March 12, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce 

through you and to you to all members of the House, a group 

from Moose Jaw. And this group of young people, there are 17 

youths from the ages of 8 to 16 years and they’re from the 

Victory Christian Academy in Moose Jaw. And the group today 

is accompanied by pastors Terry and Terri Murphy, by Jessica 

Towler, Joanne Grey, and Marilyn Daly. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

had a very good visit with the group over lunch and I would ask 

that all members please join me in welcoming them to the 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you and through you a group of senior citizens 

from Hague, Saskatchewan who is visiting us today. They were 

organized to come down here by Alma Neudorf and Ruth 

Fisher. And Justina and David Derksen are also seated on the 

floor of the Chamber. And I welcome them to our Chamber and 

I look forward to a good visit after question period today, and I 

ask that all members of the Chamber welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you in your 

gallery some good friends from Rosetown, representatives from 

the RM [rural municipality] of St. Andrews who are in town for 

the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention and broke away from the deliberations to join us in 

the Assembly today. 

 

We have Reeve Ken Ogle, councillors Jim Wickett, Geoff 

Legge, Garry Nisbet, Kirk Fensom, and Kelly McFaull. And the 

rose between the thorns is Joan Babecy, who I had the good 

fortune to work with for about 10 years, who is now the very 

competent and capable administrator for the RM of St. 

Andrews. 

 

So I’d ask all my colleagues to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 

gallery, I have four members that I would like to introduce to 

the House. They are from the Ahamdiyya Muslim Community 

in Saskatoon. Some of them are from my constituency of 

Saskatoon Southeast and some of them are from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

And I hope they will forgive me if I mispronounce the names. 

The first one is Musaddaq Hayqt. The second one, Munib 

Ahmed, Rafique Ahmed, and Fazal Ahmed. And I hope that’s 

correct. 

 

And I would ask that all members welcome them to their 

Assembly. They’ve come down for the day, and I hope to meet 

with them a little bit later on this afternoon. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon, 

along with my colleague opposite, it gives me great pleasure to 

also welcome the students of Victory Church in Moose Jaw, 

along with Pastor Terry and his wife, Pastor Terri, and the 

supervision members of the church into your Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Victory Church is an enthusiastic congregation who are 

looking to the future and are ready for growth, and sustaining 

the province’s economic momentum for the glory of God and 

for the people of Saskatchewan. I too would like you to 

welcome into your gallery the members of Victory Church. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

the welcoming announcements this afternoon by 

acknowledging the presence of three of my constituents in the 

west gallery. We’ve just been joined by Reeve Tim Geiger of 

Happyland RM;. Reeve Ed Feil from Big Stick; and the 

administrator for the Big Stick RM, Quinton Jacksteit. 

 

It’s a pleasure to see these gentlemen here. They’re in town for 

SARM, as you no doubt would surmise. But we don’t get 

visitors from that part of the country very often. They’re much 

closer to the Alberta border than they are to Regina. And we’re 

happy to have them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 

to you I’d like to introduce Michelle and Berlin Rideout and my 

wife, Ali, and our two daughters, Reilly and Grace. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I ask leave as well 

to join in the introductions. Thank you. 

 

I’d just like to also acknowledge Alma Neudorf in the 

Assembly this afternoon. Pleased to see you, Alma. Bill and I 

certainly had a lot of good times together and many of the 

members remember Bill’s presence in this Assembly. And also 

extend greetings from Eileen Larson. She was just wondering 

how you were doing. Welcome to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, during this time when the government has expressed 

the need and their commitment to infrastructure renewal in the 

province, I’m very pleased to present a petition on the funding 

of the Moose Jaw Hospital and that expanding and renovating 

that hospital will add to the health care services in our area, 

better health care delivery, and reduced wait times. Mr. 

Speaker, I would read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this petition on behalf of the citizens of 

Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today 

to stand and present a petition concerning high tuition fees at 

post-secondary institutions here in the province. The petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to addressing the burden placed by 

high post-secondary tuition fees on Saskatchewan students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are from throughout Saskatchewan 

and many of the signatures were collected at the University of 

Saskatchewan and the University of Regina with the assistance 

of the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to develop, announce, and implement a plan to 

address school closures. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition on behalf of some of the residents of Saskatchewan, 

given that the government’s proposal, Bill 5, constitutes an 

aggressive assault on the rights of Saskatchewan working 

people. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

That we respectfully request that your Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan urge the new democratic . . . 

the new government to withdraw both Bills and broad hold 

. . . 

 

I’m going to try that again. You know what? I’ll try that again 

so that we can all hear it properly. So that the prayer reads: 

 

That we respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly 

of Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw 

both Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

This petition is signed by the good residents of Regina and 

Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Valley View Centre Open House 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, over the past 50 years, Moose Jaw’s Valley View 

Centre has provided long-term care for people with intellectual 

disabilities. The centre opened its doors in 1955, and over the 

years staff have worked hard to provide the supports and 

services that residents need in a home-like setting. 

 

At its height Valley View cared for over 1,200 individuals, both 

young and old. And today Valley View is home to just under 

300 residents from across the province. Throughout the year 

many events are held at Valley View, from birthday parties to 

the annual family picnic, but this spring Valley View hosted its 

first ever public open house. 

 

The open house showcased the special services provided to 

meet the needs of residents. Staff and residents spent many 

hours putting together displays and were on hand to answer the 

many questions from visitors. Residents were a big part of the 

event and helped demonstrate the various services such as 

physiotherapy, occupation and music therapy, and dietary 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

maintenance. The definite highlight during the open house, Mr. 

Speaker, was when we were treated to musical selections 

performed by the residents’ band. 

 

I would like to thank the residents of Valley View Centre for 

opening their home to the public for the day and a thank you to 

the staff at Valley View for the important work they do each 

and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Business Honoured by Canada’s 

50 Best Managed Companies 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am proud to 

announce that a business located in my constituency of Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley has been named as Canada’s best managed 

company. This past February the Brandt Group of Companies 

were awarded platinum club member status with Canada’s 50 

best managed companies. 

 

Brandt has a proud history on the Prairies, and as they are 

celebrating their 75th year in business, over time they have 

grown to become the largest private corporation in 

Saskatchewan, along with having 22 dealerships across Canada 

and employing over 1,200 people that serve markets around the 

world. In fact, Brandt is the world’s largest John Deere 

construction and forestry implement dealership. 

 

As Saskatchewan takes its place as an economic leader, it will 

be led by dynamic and diverse companies such as this. It fills 

me with great pride to know that a local company can beat out 

hundreds of others across Canada to be awarded and named one 

of the top 50 best managed on that list. Brandt’s longevity and 

award-winning management are shining examples to budding 

entrepreneurship throughout this province. 

 

As a corporation located in my constituency, I am proud to note 

their tremendous achievement, and I hope that other members 

will join me in congratulating the Brandt group. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Showcase 2008 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

congratulate the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation for their 

very successful organization and delivery of Showcase 2008. 

Showcase 2008 — a series of two-day, multi-session 

presentations — offered Saskatchewan’s educators a place and 

process to come together, learn, share, collaborate, celebrate. I 

want to thank the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], 

educators across our province, and presenters for making this 

event such a valuable professional opportunity. 

 

As Education critic, I thank our professional educators for their 

commitment to our province’s youth. I ask my fellow members 

within this Assembly to join me in extending congratulations 

and thanks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Moose Jaw Salvation Army Anniversary 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure we’ll all 

agree that we are blessed to live in a land of remarkable 

abundance and opportunity. And now we’re also benefiting 

from the governing party who has a positive agenda for growth 

while securing the future for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

However, throughout our history and even today, there are 

those who are less fortunate, and their needs are being met 

through the ministry and volunteerism of the Salvation Army. 

In my own constituency of Moose Jaw, the Salvation Army was 

established just six years after the community was formed in 

1882. Their goal is simple: to provide a spiritual and practical 

support to the most vulnerable of our society. Perhaps they’re 

best known today for their Christmas hamper program, though 

they are dedicated workers 365 days of the year. 

 

This past Saturday, the Moose Jaw Salvation Army celebrated 

its 120th anniversary. The event was marked with an afternoon 

celebration and an evening concert featuring the Edmonton 

Temple brass ensemble which my wife and I had the pleasure of 

attending. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Moose Jaw Salvation Army continues to provide spiritual 

assistance through their church and their living necessities 

through their sorting centre and the thrift store in Moose Jaw. 

They also provide support in time of crisis and emergencies and 

are known to entertain the community from time to time with 

their musical talent. 

 

In the honour of their 120th anniversary, I ask the members of 

the House to recognize and to pay tribute to the Moose Jaw 

Salvation Army for the noble work that they do. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Provincial Day of Student Action 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, February 28 was the provincial 

day of student action. I want to congratulate the students’ 

unions at both the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina for organizing such successful student 

rallies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, students across the province are facing real 

challenges that are not being addressed by this government, so 

the U of R [University of Regina] students organized a freeze 

for the freeze. On the night of the 27th, the member from 

Regina Rosemont and I — along with many students — 

camped out on campus for the night. The students talked with 



274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

us about how rising tuition costs are a barrier to access and they 

asked us to petition the government to maintain the tuition 

freeze for at least another year. 

 

On the 28th at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], the 

members from Riversdale, Centre, Meewasin, and Nutana and I 

joined with students for the unveiling of a large snow fort to 

raise awareness about the student housing issues. The tight 

rental market has been very challenging for students seeking 

stable and affordable accommodation. With an increasingly hot 

housing market, students are concerned that it will be even 

more difficult to find housing this fall. Many students at this 

rally signed petitions calling on the government to aggressively 

work with stakeholders to increase the supply of both 

on-campus and off-campus housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since I didn’t meet any government members at 

either of these events, I assured the students’ unions that I 

would bring these important issues raised at these rallies to their 

attention and ask the government to act on them. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Solving the Nursing Shortage 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, when the member for The 

Battlefords was minister of Health, he didn’t think we had a 

nursing shortage. He also didn’t think we should set any targets 

because he was afraid we might not reach them. As a matter of 

fact, that member and his colleagues in the NDP have been in 

denial of a nursing shortage for quite some time. 

 

On March 24, 2006, the headline in the Leader-Post read, 

“Taylor refutes nursing crisis allegation.” The same month the 

member for The Battlefords was quoted as saying: 

 

I don’t think the province needs 600 more nurses. That’s 

what the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses wants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has only been in power for four 

months and already we have made significant progress towards 

meeting our promise of adding 800 more nurses. We are not 

afraid of setting targets, Mr. Speaker, because that is how 

success is measured. I can see why the members opposite would 

be afraid of numbers because they’ve been wrong on all their 

numbers thus far in the Assembly. 

 

But rest assured the Saskatchewan Party is not afraid of 

numbers. We’re not afraid to take steps towards seriously 

correcting our nursing shortage in this province. And we will 

continue taking those steps, Mr. Speaker, because solving the 

nursing shortage is a critical component to ensuring the safety 

of the Saskatchewan people now and into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

 

Provincial Heritage Property Designated in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, during Heritage Week in 

Saskatoon, February 17 to 23, Dr. Lyell Gustin House was 

formally designated a provincial heritage property. The house 

lies within Saskatoon Nutana constituency at 512 10th Street 

East and was home to Dr. Lyell Gustin, a well-known and much 

loved music teacher who gave music lessons to students in our 

province for almost 70 years. 

 

Dr. Gustin was also a founding member of the Saskatchewan 

Registered Music Teachers’ Association, and it’s in this spirit 

of Dr. Gustin that really makes this house such a treasure. As a 

nurturing music teacher, Dr. Gustin always cultivated the 

creative strength of each of his students. Musicians and 

audiences in our province are and were the beneficiaries. As an 

interactive museum, the house continues to host programs, 

recitals, master classes, and meetings of organizers, reminding 

audiences of the great contribution that Dr. Gustin made to 

Saskatchewan culture. 

 

This heritage designation also includes the Trounce House, 

located in the backyard of Gustin House. Erected in 1883 and 

now the oldest building in Saskatoon, Trounce House was 

moved to the Gustin property in 1920 to be used as a garage and 

storage shed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to live in a constituency, Saskatoon 

Nutana, to serve as the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for an area that is so rich in historical, architectural, 

and cultural integrity and treasure. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Labour Relations Board 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, once again the Minister of Labour claimed yesterday 

in this Assembly that members of the Labour Relations Board 

were notified that they could continue on with their current 

cases after being fired. He said this on Monday. He said it 

yesterday, and I quote him today. He said, “I can guarantee that 

communication was directed to those members.” Outside of the 

House the minister confirmed this guarantee, and we have 

learned that this guarantee isn’t worth a lot. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, he also, when pressed by reporters, he 

admitted that he had absolutely no clue as to whether such 

instructions had been delivered to all fired members on 

Monday. He has now had more time to check with his officials. 

And does the minister stand by his statement of Monday and 

yesterday that all officials from the fired Labour Relations 

Board have been told that they could in fact continue with their 

deliberations? 

 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

What I can confirm is that the Chair and the two Vice-Chairs 

were consulted about potential changes even before they were 

made. In fact the two Vice-Chairs then asked directly during 

that dialogue about the continuation of cases. So what I can say 

quite simply and clearly is in fact yes, that was made quite 

clear. There was no need for disruption. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well we’ll see about that. It’s been almost a 

week since the government decided that speeding up the Labour 

Relations Board process was so absolutely vital that they would 

fire the Chair and reduce the size of the board. The board has a 

meeting scheduled for tomorrow morning. I have a very simple 

question to the minister. Yes or no, can he promise this House 

that the Labour Relations Board hearing will occur? And if so, 

can he tell us is it the old Chair or the new Chair? Who is it, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Labour and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the House has 

been a little bit noisy in the last couple of days, so again I want 

to be very clear. You know, this member is not going to 

comment about LRB [Labour Relations Board] cases in this 

House. That is the task and the responsibility of the new Chair. 

And so what I can say is you’ll have to wait and see. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — . . . the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour, and I 

know he hasn’t been on the job very long, but he does seem to 

have a tad bit of arrogance attached to himself. But, Mr. 

Speaker, he is saying that this Labour Relations Board firings 

were both appropriate and routine for an incoming government, 

while admitting the obvious connections between the new Chair 

and the Saskatchewan Party government and caucus. 

 

I want to take the opportunity to remind members of the 

government of the words of the now Deputy Premier when he 

said, and I quote, “Every person should be concerned when 

there is a question of political interference with the independent 

body of government.” The problem is that the Premier admitted 

two days ago outside of this House that he expects the LRB — 

and keep in mind this is a quasi-judicial body — to quote, and I 

want to say this very clearly, quote: 

 

“. . . consider what the government has said publicly in 

opposition and in government that . . . we seek a balance” 

. . . 

 

Can the minister explain in what ways that government expects 

the members of a quasi-judicial body to take into account the 

ideological orientation of the government of the day? And does 

he find that entirely appropriate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Labour and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

Again, you know, one can only hope that the new Chair is 

attentive to what’s going on because the amendments to The 

Trade Union Act include that the cases before the LRB will 

now have to be completed in six months. Some go back as far 

as 2004. And in addition, in addition, as well there will be 

annual reports where details from cases heard and the timing of 

hearing applications, as well as issuing of the decision, will 

actually be put within the report. We’re going to try some 

transparency and accountability. 

 

And I won’t comment on some of the other comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we do know that the 

Deputy Premier and now the Premier have made it very clear 

that the new Labour Relations Board is to understand the Sask 

Party’s way of thinking. And we do know what the Deputy 

Premier used to say about political interference. But it seems 

that once again the Sask Party says something before the 

election and does something quite different after the election. 

 

A couple of months ago, the Provincial Ombudsman report 

entitled Hearing Back recommended, and I quote, “. . . a 

merit-based appointment system for all tribunal members [such 

as the Labour Relations Board] that includes a selection panel, a 

job description and an open competition.” 

 

To the minister: can you tell us who sat on your selection panel 

for Mr. Love, who wrote his job description, and who 

participated in the competition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the people of 

Saskatchewan need to know that we’re focusing and obviously 

expecting that we’re going to have an LRB that’s more robust, 

responsive, and productive; that we’re not going to have a lag in 

cases heard going all the way back to 2004. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see, through the amendments, that 

we’re going to have cases heard within six months, and then 

we’re going to have an annual report submitted to this House so 



276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

that there’s full accountability and transparency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a minister whose 

only criticism of the board that was fired is that some cases 

weren’t resolved quickly enough. What are they doing about 

that? And I want to review the facts. 

 

They fire the Labour Relations Board members who are in the 

middle of a hearing. They hired a Sask Party friend. They threw 

uncertainty into the entire process, and they’re replacing the two 

Vice-Chairs with a lone Vice-Chair. 

 

Well if you believe that’s going to quicken the Labour 

Relations Board process, I think that we have another thing to 

hear about. How on earth can this member say to us, three 

members of the Labour Relations Board fired; they’re replaced 

with two that are going to earn more money. How can they 

expect, with the legislation that’s pending before this 

legislature, that they are going to quicken the process and still 

give people a fair hearing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — . . . Minister Responsible for Employment and 

Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what I can say is the people 

of Saskatchewan made a change. They sent the then governing 

party over to the opposition. 

 

We’ve seen dramatic progress on a number of files. So we can 

only assume that this will set a precedent for increased progress 

on files that we’re now overseeing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see increased productivity out of 

the LRB. For example, it doesn’t have a computerized database, 

Mr. Speaker. Those are some small steps that can be taken to 

help enhance productivity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s another 

question that the minister hasn’t answered. When he spoke to 

the press last Friday and he was asked about who would 

become the new Vice-Chair, he said that the person needed to 

speak to the new Chair, Mr. Love. Well, it wasn’t the Chair 

who fired the Vice-Chair, so I don’t understand why he would 

defer to the new Chair. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to remind the members that a 

competition process was introduced in 1997, whereby the 

Vice-Chair positions would be subject to a competition process 

following established Public Service Commission procedures. 

Oh and in the Ombudsman’s report, John Solomon did go 

through a competition process. But anyway, check it out. 

Positions were advertised. Interviews were held. People were 

selected on the basis of merit and not political affiliation. 

 

Now will the minister at least promise this Assembly that the 

Vice-Chair that he will soon appoint will at least go through a 

competition process as the Chair and the two Vice-Chairs of the 

Labour Relations Board did? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Labour and Employment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what I’m happy to say on 

this issue is that obviously the person that fills the Vice-Chair 

position will have qualifications and be competent to serve the 

people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Recruitment and Retention of Nurses 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The recruitment and 

retention of health care professionals is an issue that all parties 

feel is important. 

 

[14:00] 

 

We all believe that more nurses, more doctors, more LPNs 

[licensed practical nurse], more technologists, and other 

professionals are needed to improve health care in 

Saskatchewan. The government recently signed an MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] with the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses with respect to the recruitment and retention of 

nurses. The plan includes a number of aggressive goals and 

actions as well as the creation of a recruitment and retention 

fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what was not included in the MOU was a price 

tag. In order for the public to judge the plan, taxpayers need to 

know the cost. My question is for the Minister of Health. Please 

tell the public today what is the projected total cost of the MOU 

signed by the minister and the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 

welcome the question on nurse recruitment and retention, an 

issue that that opposition failed miserably on when it was on 

this side of the House. In fact it was so afraid of recruitment and 

retention it wouldn’t set targets. 

 

I find it very interesting a question coming from that member 

who was former president of the Saskatchewan Union of 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

Nurses, who couldn’t strike a deal, couldn’t work with the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses over the last 16 years to deal 

with probably the most important issue facing health care in this 

province. 

 

Three months into our mandate, our government, under the 

leadership of our Premier, has signed a partnership agreement 

with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses that will work to 

recruit 600 nurses to fill the vacancies and 200 more to top that 

off, Mr. Speaker — a huge accomplishment in a short time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can rest assured that 

that MOU will have . . . we’ll be questioning that in detail at the 

appropriate time. But the question I asked him was, how much 

is the total cost? And I’m not surprised he doesn’t have an 

answer. 

 

Recently with the third quarter results, we saw the government 

put $60 million into a fund that is outlined in the MOU. Mr. 

Speaker, this 60 million was described by the minister as seed 

money. On April 1, in just a few weeks, Mr. Speaker, the MOU 

outlines that the government and health regions will contribute 

the salary and benefit costs of each RN [registered nurse] and 

RPN [registered practical nurse] vacancy that existed on 

November 1, 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, surely the minister has an idea of how much 

money will be transferred from his ministry to this fund in just a 

few short weeks, and surely he would not be afraid to tell the 

public what that amount is. 

 

To the Minister of Health: what is the total amount of the funds 

that will be transferred from the Ministry of Health on April 1, 

2008, to the SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] health 

region fund, and what is the amount expected to be transferred 

from the health regions to the same fund on that date? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we certainly know that there’s going to be a cost for 

recruitment and retention. We have set a bold and an aggressive 

goal of 800 more nurses into the province of Saskatchewan. 

We’ve signed a partnership to work with the union of nurses as 

opposed to against the union of nurses as that opposition did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — But Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, more 

importantly, more importantly we knew that there was going to 

be bumps in the road with this partnership, and that’s why we 

named the very competent and able Dr. Marlene Smadu to act 

as the mediator or the facilitator to make the partnership work. 

It will work; we’ll reach our goal. 

As far as the cost, now we have said that we’re going to 

increase the number of nurses over the next four years. Our 

mandate, if we fill the commitment that we’ve made, they’ll be 

no extra money going into the fund because the goal has been 

met. 

 

Unlike that government who wouldn’t set a goal, we’ve set a 

goal, and we plan on reaching that goal in partnership with all 

the health care professionals. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s all right to have goals, but the 

public expects them to be accountable with money attached to 

them. They have to have money attached to them. 

 

So the minister has yet to answer the initial first two questions. I 

have a third question. As I’ve noted, the fund already has $60 

million in it, and it seems millions more will be transferred 

there over the next few months by the health regions and the 

government. 

 

You see on May 1, 2008, the government and health regions 

will contribute 60 per cent and 40 per cent respectively of the 

salary and benefit costs of each RN and RPN vacancy that 

exists on April 1, 2008. I’d like to remind the Minister of 

Health that a Saskatchewan Union of Nurses news release from 

November suggests that in 2007 there were close to 800 nursing 

vacancies. So, Mr. Speaker, within a few months this fund 

could have over $100 million in it, and citizens still don’t know 

specifically what it will be used for. 

 

To the Minister of Health: health care dollars are precious in 

today’s health care system. Please outline specifically how this 

fund will be used and how it will ensure that there are more 

nurses working in Saskatchewan in four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

I’m proud to say that as of tomorrow there will be more nurses 

working in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say by the 

summer of ’08 there’ll be 300 more nurses coming from the 

Philippines that will be working in Saskatchewan. Never 

happened under that government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have named Dr. 

Marlene Smadu to work through the process because quite 

frankly, between the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the 

health organizations, determining the exact vacancy rate is an 



278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

issue. And that’s why we have a facilitator to allow that work to 

happen. The exact cost of $60 million that we’ve put in as seed 

money upfront is to show not only the health organizations but 

the people of Saskatchewan and the nurses on the floor that 

we’re serious about this partnership. And we’re willing to put 

more than words behind it; we’ll put our money behind it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

School Closures 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last night Regina Public 

Schools made the difficult decision to close three schools. The 

heartbreak felt by parents, students, and board members was 

evident. The Sask Party made a $350,000 promise to deal with 

the issue of school closures during the campaign. They offered 

hope to parents and students, or so we thought. But yesterday 

the Education minister finally explained that his plan to address 

school closures was not designed to help those families facing 

closures in Regina and Saskatoon. It turned out to be false hope 

that he was offering. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does the minister defend a plan that leaves so 

many families in and around our two largest urban centres out 

in the cold? Why is there one rule for the friends of the Sask 

Party and another rule for everyone else? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the 

member for that question. And as I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 

The Education Act and its provisions were in place during an 

NDP government that was in place for 16 years. The clause that 

I referred to yesterday is been put in place and has been 

endorsed by that group when they were in power. 

 

It’s very clear. I have never stated that there would be a revision 

to the Act that would involve cities. Very clearly cities are 

under the control of the Act. They are not listed under the 

section, and as I read yesterday, Mr. Speaker, powers of the 

board say this very clearly. It says that under 87(1) subsection 

(v), a school board may close: 

 

with respect to any school that is not situated in the school 

district, close the school and discontinue one or more 

grades or years taught in the school. 

 

It’s not just Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. That’s all 

cities in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not the point. The 

Sask Party said they’d do something about this. The minister 

was asked yesterday by reporters if he thought Regina parents 

were given false hope by his government, and the minister’s 

response, he tried to convince people that he had been clear. 

Well that’s a pretty bold claim since there’s nothing but 

confusion in the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Education: how is it that no one 

but the members opposite seem to know their plan was only for 

some schools and not others? Why did they not say during the 

campaign that they were only interested in helping some people 

and not others? Not mentioned in the platform, not mentioned 

in the Throne Speech. Why did the minister offer false hope? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the board of education 

here in Regina has undertaken a long and extensive review of 

whether or not schools will remain open, whether they will 

close. 

 

What is the renewal plan for the city of Regina? Mr. Speaker, I 

dare say that if you ask any of the board members in the Regina 

public board of education they understand, they understand 

along with all public boards . . . is that the six-month closure 

plan that is in place in The Education Act does not apply to 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has not applied to them in the decade of the 

’70s. It has not applied to them in the decade of the ’80s, the 

’90s, and now into this new millennium. So, Mr. Speaker, for 

that member to stand and say that I gave false hope, I have 

never said anything else but dealing with schools within school 

districts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I know that parents and teachers in 

Regina, in Saskatoon thought there would be some help coming 

from this minister for their schools. But instead the Sask Party 

has left those families, schools, and boards out of the plan. The 

only thing that is clear is the minister offered false hope. 

 

To the Minister of Education: will the minister tell the students 

and parents of Saskatchewan what help is coming for them 

today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, school boards, school 

boards take their responsibilities very seriously. They are not 

going to be looking at school closures unless there is a need for 

renewal, Mr. Speaker, unless there is a declining enrolment, 

unless there are problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For the member opposite who has been involved in education, I 

understand for a long time, he would understand that, Mr. 

Speaker. He would understand that the communities that are in 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask members to have 

respect for the member on their feet. I’ll invite the minister to 

close his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

boards of education across the entire province are dealing with a 

situation where we have 2,000 less students this year than we 

did last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we respect the autonomy of those boards. And 

I’ve stated very emphatically at the very beginning that there 

will be no school closure moratoriums. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Response to Premier’s Comments 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

recently addressed the SARM convention on the 11th, and he 

must have momentarily forgotten that he’s Premier of 

Saskatchewan and not a private citizen. As part of his speech to 

the delegates he made an interesting boast. I quote from the 

Premier’s speech, quote: 

 

I took my 14-year-old daughter driving on a grid road south 

of Swift Current. Should I say that? She was driving for a 

while. She did just fine. 

 

I’m sure she did do just fine, Mr. Speaker. But as we all know, 

in Saskatchewan, even with a parent in the vehicle, 14-year-olds 

are not . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please allow the member to place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — As we all know, even in Saskatchewan, even 

with parents in the vehicle, 14-year-olds are not allowed to 

drive in the province. My question is to the Minister of Justice. 

Will he be asking for any agency to investigate the Premier’s 

confessed unlawful activities, or does the Premier get a pass? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 

practiced law in this province for a goodly number of years. 

He’s well aware of the process. If he believes somebody is 

guilty of an offence, he’s perfectly at liberty to make whatever 

references he wants to whatever police force or other 

investigating body that he thinks is appropriate. 

 

He’s been around the practice of law a goodly long period of 

time, and it’s something he need not be looking for advice from 

this side of the House from. He’s fully aware of how to deal 

with this type of thing if he thinks it’s appropriate, and I leave it 

to him to make a decision whether it is in fact appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 

the minister’s answer. He obviously has two standards for 

questions about investigation: one standard for him and one 

standard for other people. 

 

But it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, even the Premier admitted that 

what he did was wrong. This is what he had to say to the media 

later that day about his speech, quote: 

 

I’ve already admitted to allowing a 14-year-old to drive on 

dirt roads. That’s enough illegalities for now. 

 

So the Premier knows what he did was wrong, Mr. Speaker. We 

all remember the example of the Premier of Newfoundland and 

Labrador, Danny Williams, who broke a provincial law by 

talking on a cell phone while he was driving and who admitted 

that he broke the law and who apologized. Premier Williams 

had the decency to apologize for breaking the law. 

 

My question to the government is: will the Premier, will the 

government agree that the law, breaking the law is wrong, that 

bragging about it is wrong, and that the Premier should 

apologize? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to leave it to the 

Premier to . . . I wasn’t there. I’ll leave it to the Premier to 

canvas his own remarks. If the member opposite thinks there’s a 

transgression, I leave it to him to decide whether he wants to do 

something with that or not. Perhaps the Premier had his tongue 

firmly planted in the cheek, was speaking figuratively, perhaps 

this took place in a field. It’s not something for me to comment 

on or speculate on. If the member opposite thinks there’s 

wrongdoing, he certainly has every right to proceed with this, as 

would any other citizen. And I leave it to him to do that. 

 

[14:15] 

 

And if the Premier chooses to comment, that’s up to the 

Premier as well. But the member opposite knows full well what 

his remedies are. And I find it a bit shabby and a bit tawdry that 

we’re dealing with it in the House today. This is Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Recruitment of Nurses 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure today to stand before my 

fellow members of the Assembly and extend a thank you to the 

Saskatchewan nurse recruitment delegation that went to the 



280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

Philippines. Most of them have been home since Saturday, and 

yesterday we shared in their success at a news conference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the good news is we have almost exactly 300, in 

total, nurses coming to Saskatchewan. They’ve been offered a 

job and it’s great to hear that they’ve accepted. We expect them 

to start arriving in early summer, and that’s a great time to 

begin a new life here in our province. 

 

The recruitment of nurses is highly competitive right across 

North America. We’re hearing of every jurisdiction who are 

looking for health care professionals — not just a few, but 

hundreds. Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to say that Saskatchewan is in 

the running and competitive because we realize it’s a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take this chance to recognize all the 

people who went to the Philippines and spent 12- to 14-hour 

days interviewing potential nurse candidates or meeting with 

various government or immigration and recruitment officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key players in this recruitment trip was the 

member from Regina Qu’Appelle, who is my Legislative 

Secretary for nurse recruitment and retention, along with the 

Saskatoon, Regina Qu’Appelle, Sunrise, Prairie North, and P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Parkland Health Region. It was really their trip. 

As I said at the news conference yesterday, it was the best of 

collaborations, and I think nothing speaks louder than success. I 

want to single out the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Authority for 

making all the arrangements for this trip. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased with the people within the 

ministry who worked hard to make this trip happen. The 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, SUN, SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], 

and the college of nurses all participated with their support and 

their diligence during the trip. It was vital. 

 

We know that filling our nursing needs with homegrown talent 

is important to achieve, but we also recognize that while we 

pursue a variety of other recruitment and retention initiatives 

and addressing the need for more training seats, we need to 

recruit outside of our province and outside of our country. 

 

It really is a wonderful thing — 300 nurses in total coming to 

our province. In fact to some of the media gathered yesterday, 

that number seemed unbelievable. It is so easy to recruit . . . 

This is what one of the news media had to say. If it’s so easy to 

recruit 300 nurses from the Philippines, they asked, why hasn’t 

it happened before? Mr. Speaker, I had to tell them, I don’t 

know. We’ve formed the government for three months, and 

we’ve accomplished it, I said. Why the previous government 

who held office for 16 years couldn’t do the same, I simply 

have no answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I did tell them and what I am telling my 

fellow members today is that our government is committed 

wholeheartedly and completely to nurse recruitment and 

retention. Working in partnership with the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses, combined with educators, to retain and recruit and 

retain nurses, Mr. Speaker, our goal is 800 over the next four 

years. And with the work of all these important groups, we’ll 

keep that promise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased that 

the hard work started by our government is paying off today for 

Saskatchewan’s health care system. In September 2006, the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana, as minister responsible for 

Immigration, visited the Philippines to begin the process of 

facilitating increased immigration of skilled workers from the 

Philippines to Saskatchewan. 

 

On December 18, 2006, the Government of Saskatchewan 

signed a memorandum of understanding with the Government 

of the Philippines to facilitate increased recruitment of Filipino 

workers to Saskatchewan under the Saskatchewan immigrant 

nominee program. The news release from the MOU signing 

specified, and I quote: 

 

This initiative will focus on meeting critical labour market 

needs in occupations such as welding, metal fabrication, 

long-haul trucking, and health care. 

 

This historic signing made Saskatchewan the first province in 

Canada, and indeed North America, to sign such an agreement 

with the Philippines, and other provinces such as BC [British 

Columbia] have followed. In fact, BC just put out a news 

release saying they’re the second jurisdiction in North America, 

after Saskatchewan, to form a partnership for recruiting skilled 

labour from the Philippines. And this was in January. 

 

Since the signing of the MOU, nurses from the Philippines have 

been arriving in Saskatchewan and have started work as early as 

January ’08. Today we are seeing the results of the work 

undertaken by the member from Saskatoon Nutana and our 

government and the health care stakeholders, specifically the 

SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association]. We 

look forward to seeing the nurses working in this system. 

 

And I do congratulate the health regions and the government for 

following through on these important initiatives. And I hope 

that when the minister mentioned in his comments, in 

answering questions, that the nurses will be working by this 

summer, I’m wondering — June? July? August? September? — 

which month this summer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 8, 

The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Environment that first reading of Bill No. 8, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the first time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 281 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

Bill No. 9, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that first reading of Bill No. 9, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 be now read 

the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the 

House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 — The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes 

(Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first 

reading of Bill No. 10, The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes 

(Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that first reading of Bill No. 10, The Miscellaneous Pensions 

Statutes (Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report that it has considered certain estimates and 

to present its second report. I move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today on a point of order to request that the Government House 

Leader, the member from Melfort, withdraw a comment that he 

made in question period yesterday and apologize to the House 

for his remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, at some points during question 

period yesterday the Chamber was quite noisy, and not all the 

remarks that were made by members in the Chamber yesterday 

were heard during that question period. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, last evening when I was in my office 

reviewing question period and the amount of time that people 

were spending on their questions and those things that we do in 

the normal course of business, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t help but 

notice that at one point, clearly on camera and audio on tape, 

the member from Melfort, the Government House Leader, made 

comments, Mr. Speaker, that simply appalled me. The member 

from Saskatoon Nutana had asked a question of the government 

directed at the Deputy Premier. There was a lot of noise when 

the Deputy Premier rose to reply and before the Deputy Premier 

made any comment at all, on the tape you can see the member 

from Melfort saying — and you can hear him say — oh, oh, 

now you’re going to get spanked. 

 

I find this remark, Mr. Speaker, to be quite offensive, not only 

to the member to whom it was addressed, but I find this also 

offensive to every member of this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, given 



282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

that we are hon. members, hon. members who do not take 

threats of any kind, Mr. Speaker, lightly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these remarks were made about 2:15 yesterday 

afternoon. I have asked the House to review that tape and, Mr. 

Speaker, therefore I ask, I ask the member from Melfort who 

knows exactly what he said, Mr. Speaker, I ask that the member 

rise, withdraw his remarks, and apologize to the Chamber. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to withdraw 

my inappropriate remarks and I would also like to apologize to 

the member and members of this House for any offence that 

was taken. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I would like to thank the member from The 

Battlefords for bringing this noticed point of order to my 

attention. I would also like to thank the Government House 

Leader for his response to the point of order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks today I will move second 

reading of An Act respecting Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

This Act outlines the purposes, powers, establishment of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and gives this new special operating 

agency the authority to operate and to carry out its mandate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s economy is on a roll, driven by 

the strength in our oil, gas, mining, manufacturing, agriculture, 

advanced technology, and service sectors. Our province leads 

the nation now in a number of key economic indicators. 

Saskatchewan people are confident and optimistic about their 

future in our province. 

 

Just last week we saw the headline, “Saskatchewan investment 

[Mr. Speaker] highest in Canada.” We lead the provinces with 

the largest percentage increases of 37.4 per cent increase in 

residential construction to $2.06 billion in investment in that 

sector, Mr. Speaker. Plus there is a huge spinoff effect from this 

industry. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will play a fundamental and vital role 

in creating and ensuring lasting and permanent economic 

growth for our province — growth that will mean security and a 

better future for all people in Saskatchewan. 

Enterprise Saskatchewan represents a new, different, and better 

way of approaching economic development in this province. It 

represents a co-operative and collaborative approach, one that 

will ensure all stakeholders in our economy have an opportunity 

to share ideas, identify opportunities and challenges, and build 

strong relationships between government and business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Enterprise Saskatchewan will be a unique 

public-private partnership. It will focus on developing 

collaborative recommendations from a broad mix of stakeholder 

communities and interests. In this way it will bring the 

economic development process closer to grassroots input and 

priorities of key partners in the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The response to the establishment of Enterprise Saskatchewan 

from people who I’ve talked to in my travels across this great 

province has been very positive, encouraging, and it has been 

gratifying. The message has been, you’re on the right track; 

keep moving forward. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will be governed by a 12-member 

board of directors. As minister, I will chair the new board when 

it is formed. As Chair, I will be the link between the board and 

cabinet. I will be responsible for taking the recommendations of 

the board to cabinet for its consideration. As Chair, I will not be 

voting except in a tie-vote situation. 

 

Before the board is officially formed, it will operate as an 

advisory committee so the groundwork for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan can begin. I’m very pleased that my cabinet 

colleague, First Nations and Métis Relations minister and the 

member for Kelvington-Wadena will join me as the other 

government member on this committee. 

 

In order to form the committee and our new board, more than 

300 invitations were sent to stakeholder organizations, inviting 

them to nominate representatives. In addition all people of 

Saskatchewan were asked to participate through a newspaper 

advertisement asking for applications for the member-at-large 

position. 

 

After a thorough and transparent review process, highly 

qualified, innovative, and forward-thinking individuals were 

selected to form the future Enterprise Saskatchewan board of 

directors. I announced the board appointments, Mr. Speaker, on 

February 29. I’m very pleased with the team that has been 

selected and with the process that led to that selection. 

 

Appointed to the board, Mr. Speaker: the future Deputy Chair 

representing the business sector, Mr. Gavin Semple, owner and 

president of Brandt Industries; Foam Lake farmer, representing 

agricultural sector, Mr. Bill Cooper; the vice-president of 

corporate social responsibility for Cameco Corporation, 

representing the Aboriginal sector of our economy, Mr. Gary 

Merasty. Mr. Merasty was nominated by the Prince Albert 

Grand Council, the largest in Canada, representing 12 bands 

and more than 30,000 people in 28 communities. The CEO 

[chief executive officer] and president of Concentra Financial 

Services, representing co-operatives, Ms. Myrna Bentley. In the 

labour category, we have Mr. Hugh Wagner, general secretary 

for the Grain Services Union. The president and CEO of 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

Cypress Hills Regional College and selected from the 

nominations as our representative for post-secondary education, 

Mr. Mark Frison, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the resources category, the president and CEO of Keystone 

Royalty Corp. and Villanova Energy Corp., Mr. Craig Lothian; 

Fife Lake area farmer and president of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities who will represent rural 

areas and the North, Mr. David Marit; the CEO of the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association and a Regina city 

councillor who will represent urban municipal government, Mr. 

Michael Fougere; and a lawyer with Robertson Stromberg 

Pedersen in Saskatoon, who is our member at large, Ms. Crystal 

McLeod. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have a broad representation of 

some of our strongest Saskatchewan people to form our 

advisory committee and, in the near future, the very first board 

of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Responses to the board appointments have been very positive. 

Comments such as these, and I quote, “These folks are truly 

quality people,” and, quote, “a well-rounded board with the 

brightest minds in the province.” 

 

In addition to participation on the board, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people will also have the opportunity to 

participate in Enterprise Saskatchewan through sector teams 

and strategic issues councils. These will be established to 

provide recommendations on the competitive position of our 

key economic sectors. They will also suggest coordinated 

growth policies in crucial areas such as labour force 

development, accelerated Aboriginal participation in the 

economy, immigration, youth entrepreneurship, and regulatory 

modernization and streamlining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will also establish a separate division within 

Enterprise Saskatchewan — Innovation Saskatchewan. Through 

an innovation council, this division will coordinate and focus 

efforts in innovation and commercialization, strategic 

management of research, spending and related infrastructure, 

technology transfer, and productivity improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through this new board of directors and through 

the sector teams, strategic issues councils, and innovation 

council, we will directly involve Saskatchewan people in 

coordinating and leading our province’s growth agenda. We 

will accomplish this through a commitment to three core 

principles: (1) Mr. Speaker, central coordination, clear focus, 

and disciplined alignment of policies to support economic 

growth with coordinated responsibility beyond any single 

ministry, agency, or Crown corporation; (2) Mr. Speaker, 

greater emphasis on economic benchmarking and monitoring, 

clear goals and targets, comprehensive measurement both 

economic and social indicators of strategic importance, and 

regular reporting of the balanced scorecard of Saskatchewan’s 

economy; and (3) Mr. Speaker, a shift in economic 

development responsibility, direction, and planning away from 

the backrooms and to open and collaborative forums for 

stakeholder representation and input. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will rely heavily on these stakeholders and our 

partner agencies to work with us in our efforts to attract 

investment, strengthen existing businesses, promote 

Saskatchewan’s advantages, and create more wealth and more 

jobs for the province and its people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new model represents a bold and innovative 

approach to securing the future for our province and its people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — With Enterprise Saskatchewan, we will 

include the people of Saskatchewan — those who create the 

jobs, invest the dollars, and build and provide the labour force 

— in setting the course for economic development into the 

future. This approach is about shared responsibility for 

economic development in Saskatchewan and about sharing in 

the wealth and success that such collaboration will create. 

 

This is a new day, Mr. Speaker, and we are ready and eager to 

continue our work on a new direction for Saskatchewan. 

Therefore I move that An Act respecting Enterprise 

Saskatchewan be read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has moved second reading of Bill No. 2, The 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? Recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be the 

first MLA from the official opposition to speak on Bill No. 2. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government inherited a strong economy when 

it was elected last fall. All of the economic indicators showed 

evidence of a booming economy. Job numbers were up, GDP 

[gross domestic product] was up, revenue from non-renewable 

resources was up, capital and private sector investment was up, 

as were manufacturing shipments, exports, retail trade, 

corporate profits, building permits, and disposable income. 

Thanks to good NDP stewardship and the hard work of 

Saskatchewan people, our economy is booming like never 

before. 

 

At a time like this, Mr. Speaker, it is questionable why the Sask 

Party government is so eager to hand over the keys of our 

economy to what the The StarPhoenix has referred to as a 

“highly nebulous entity.” Contrary to the Sask Party’s rhetoric, 

Bill 2 is not about securing the future. Rather, Mr. Speaker, 

what the government is doing with this legislation is simply 

obscuring the future. 

 

The Enterprise Saskatchewan model raises far more questions 

than the government has provided adequate answers for, and as 

such it delivers far more apprehension than it does clarity. 

Constituents of mine have asked me, how is this Enterprise 

Saskatchewan thing going to work? What control is the elected 

government giving up to this unelected body? Why are they 

giving up that control? Why do we need this new entity? What 

will it do? And how will we be able to hold it accountable? 

 

At a time of such unprecedented economic success, my 

constituents in Saskatoon Massey Place and people across 



284 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

Saskatchewan are wondering if our province can really afford 

the risk of handing the management of our economy over to an 

unelected and unaccountable body. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have read through The Enterprise 

Saskatchewan Act, a number of glaring concerns have become 

apparent to me. These observations can be grouped according to 

three main themes: firstly, the Bill has a murky and highly 

questionable rationale; secondly, the Bill has a destructive 

design; and thirdly, the Bill is based on a flawed model. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 

has referred to Enterprise Saskatchewan as a nebulous entity. 

And after reading this Bill and looking back to the Sask Party’s 

rhetoric, I have to agree — it is nebulous. So much about it is 

still unclear, and the rationale behind this Bill is murky and 

highly questionable. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill has been introduced 

for one of two reasons: either the Sask Party government has no 

ideas of their own on how to keep our economy growing and 

therefore they have decided to turn over a significant amount of 

decision making responsibility to a group of appointees, or, Mr. 

Speaker, the government simply intends to use these appointees 

for political cover, to make decisions that the cabinet members 

are too afraid to make on their own. 

 

The true . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cut Knife-Turtleford has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

introduce my reeve and my neighbour, Garry Taylor, who’s in 

the front row of the west gallery and our RM administrator, Mr. 

Ken Reiter. Ken is evidently the second most clever son of the 

Reiter family. Please welcome, please welcome them to our 

gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest on his feet? 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — With leave to do an introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce Mr. Ted Merriman, my friend and mentor, the past 

MLA from Saskatoon Northwest and who has taught me 

everything I know and most things that I had forgotten. And I 

would like everybody to give him a warm greeting. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The true motivation 

for introducing this new model is indeed nebulous. It is unclear, 

and many Saskatchewan people are wondering what exactly is 

the intent that lies behind the creation of this unelected and 

unaccountable body. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we go back to various documents about 

Enterprise Saskatchewan that were printed by the Sask Party, 

the rhetoric was always about divorcing politics from decision 

making. Even as far back as 2004, the current Premier’s on 

record as saying the Enterprise Saskatchewan model removes 

the politics from economic development. 

 

The StarPhoenix pointed out recently that when the Premier, 

and I quote, “. . . first trotted out the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

idea as opposition leader, he made it sound as if the agency 

would consist solely of representatives nominated by the key 

sectors of the economy.”  

 

Well that is clearly no longer the case, Mr. Speaker. Once 

elected as Premier, the member from Swift Current engaged in 

a pretty big flip-flop. Suddenly two cabinet ministers are to join 

the unelected and unaccountable appointees at Enterprise 

Saskatchewan table. If the government’s hope was to remove 

politics from the decision-making process — which is what 

they repeatedly said — why have they done such an about-face 

on political involvement? Why is the Premier now including 

two of his politicians at the table? Even more importantly, why 

has the minister appointed himself as the Chair if the whole 

point was to remove politics from decision making? 

 

So after listening to the Sask Party spout so much rhetoric over 

the years and then seeing them engage in some big flip-flopping 

as soon as they were elected, it’s no wonder that so many of us 

are left wondering what the true motives are behind the creation 

of Enterprise Saskatchewan. Perhaps the Sask Party 

government simply realized that after all these years of making 

promises to the contrary, that maybe they need their own 

politicians on the board to massage the direction, the 

decision-making process, and guarantee cabinet’s desired 

outcome. So now the Chair of what was previously pledged to 

be a politics-free entity is a Sask Party politician, and another 

Sask Party politician will sit with him at the board table. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Well if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, then if this legislation is 

passed, Enterprise Saskatchewan will be little more than an 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

expensive and convoluted puppet of the Premier and cabinet. Or 

perhaps they really don’t have any ideas of their own on how to 

keep our economy growing, and they really are turning over 

control of our economy to an unelected and unaccountable 

body. As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s rationale 

behind this Bill is murky and could appear to some as 

disingenuous. 

 

I would now like to move to my second theme of concerns, and 

that is the theme of how this Bill is destructive. The Enterprise 

Saskatchewan Act is destructive because it undercuts 

democracy. If the government really does have no ideas of their 

own on how to keep our economy growing and are just turning 

over decision-making responsibility to a group of appointees, 

that undercuts democracy. It undercuts democracy because it 

outsources some of the important decision-making 

responsibilities that belong with government and with 

legislatures. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, if the government simply 

intends to use this unelected body as political cover for difficult 

decision making, that too undercuts democracy because those 

decisions are not being made in a transparent manner and the 

decision makers cannot be held accountable for their actions. 

 

So let’s first look at the outsourcing of decision-making 

responsibility. Mr. Speaker, every member of this Chamber was 

elected by the voters within our constituencies to represent them 

here, to engage in vigorous debate and open debate, and to 

make decisions about the future direction of this great province. 

When decisions are made by elected MLAs, they’re done 

through a system that is steeped in the democratic values of 

transparency and accountability. Our debates and our votes in 

this Chamber and in committee are a matter of public record. 

 

As elected MLAs, we are directly accountable to the people 

who sent us here. Not only will we face our constituents 

through elections, but we interact with them regularly in our 

offices, on coffee row, and while out in the community. When 

decisions are made by elected MLAs, people know who to hold 

accountable and how to hold us accountable. Let me repeat that, 

Mr. Speaker, because it is a very important point for us all to 

remember. When decisions are made by elected MLAs, people 

know who to hold accountable and how to hold us accountable. 

 

By outsourcing important decision-making processes to 

unelected and unaccountable group, the Sask Party government 

members are abdicating the responsibility that the people of 

Saskatchewan gave them last fall. I can’t help but wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, if the Sask Party MLAs actually stood on the 

doorsteps of their constituents in the last election campaign and 

said, I’d like you to vote for me so that I can go to Regina and 

hand over my responsibility to make crucial decisions about our 

province’s future direction to an unelected and unaccountable 

board. I wonder what their constituents would’ve thought if 

that’s what Sask Party politicians had said on the doorstep? 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, throughout the year, all of us have 

the opportunity to welcome school groups to the legislature. 

When I engage in discussions with students I like to ask them, 

why do we have elections? The response that I most often 

receive is something along the lines of, well, elections are the 

way we choose the people that will make decisions and pass 

laws for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, students grasp the role of legislators. They 

understand that elections are held to select a group of people 

who are charged with the responsibility of decision making and 

governing. And students understand that these elected 

individuals are held accountable through the electoral process. 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, these students appear to have a better grasp 

of the role of elected representatives than the Sask Party 

government members do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if those members on that side of the House would 

take the time to crack the spine of any first year political science 

textbook, they will learn that there are generally two different 

models concerning how elected representatives conduct 

themselves in relation to the electorate. The first is as a 

delegate, and the other as a trustee. 

 

The delegate model is one in which the elected representative 

acts in such a way as to reflect the wants and needs of a 

majority of his or her constituents. With this approach the 

personal views of the elected representative would be 

considered secondary to the majority opinion of his or her 

constituency. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the trustee approach suggests 

that the electorate chooses a representative to act on their 

behalf. Those who ascribe to such an approach of elected 

representation would believe that it is difficult for constituents 

to have a solid understanding of all the issues, and therefore 

they believe that politicians are elected to exercise their 

judgment based on what they believe is best for their 

constituency. 

 

While these two views are dissimilar in many ways — and each 

of us may identify with different aspects — both of these 

models share at least one common trait. In either approach the 

electorate knows who is making the decisions and the electorate 

knows that they can hold the decision makers accountable for 

their actions. 

 

Back in 2004 the current Premier released his Promise of 

Saskatchewan paper, in which he admitted that, I quote: 

 

. . . for the first time in Saskatchewan, government will 

cede significant control over the formation and 

implementation of economic development strategies . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a new MLA, I spent a lot of time over the last 

several months contemplating and talking about the role of 

elected representatives. I take the responsibility that my 

constituents entrusted to me last November very seriously. I am 

deeply concerned to see the government ceding and abdicating 

its responsibility by outsourcing important decision-making 

power to an unaccountable body of appointees. But if, as it 

already explored, the government is not handing over control of 

anything any more and is now just using this elected body to 

provide it with the means to make difficult decisions that the 

government doesn’t want to take responsibility for, if Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is just the Premier’s expensive and convoluted 

puppet, that too is destructive, and that too undercuts 

democracy. 

 



286 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

Transparency and accountability are fundamental to democracy. 

They are among the core values of our democratic system. 

Adding a shroud of secrecy to decision making at the 

government level simply makes democracy dysfunctional. 

There are many examples to cite of how, as some have put it, 

governments have lost their way when they’ve compromised on 

the values of transparency and accountability. It is indeed a 

slippery slope. Whatever the real motives are, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

clear that this Enterprise Saskatchewan Act undercuts 

democracy. 

 

Having covered two of the three themes I would like to discuss 

and being cognizant of our time constraints today, this might be 

a good time to pause. Mr. Speaker, I would therefore request to 

resume speaking when we return to Bill 2, and I would move 

that we adjourn debate at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 5 — The Public 

Service Essential Services Act, be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to speak 

today on Bill No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act. 

I want to start out by just setting the stage a little by reading 

from the Minister of Labour’s appointment letter. And I quote: 

“In your capacity as Minister of Labour, establish a fair and 

balanced labour environment in Saskatchewan that respects the 

rights of workers and employers . . .” 

 

The second thing I want to read a little bit to set the stage is a 

quote from the Premier’s speech to the Saskatoon chamber of 

commerce in Saskatoon on February 19. The Premier said, and 

I quote: 

 

We need to ensure that our labour legislative environment 

in the province is competitive and our government is 

committed to that. 

 

We introduced legislation that creates a labour legislative 

environment in the province that is simply competitive. It is 

fair to employers, fair to employees, fair to unions, but 

competitive with other jurisdictions. 

 

I want to talk a bit about debunking that myth. I want to talk 

about how the myth is that this is fair and balanced, and also 

that it is even needed now. 

 

The definition of essential services is something else I want to 

talk about because currently in most sectors the determination 

of what services are deemed essential services is done by the 

union and the employer in the event of a strike. Essential is 

sometimes subjective. The employer would like to have as 

many employees on the job as possible, and the union knows its 

bargaining position is significantly weakened if there’s no 

effect of their action on the services delivered. 

 

The pressure of reduced services brings about a conclusion to 

the bargaining. No one gets everything they ask for in 

bargaining which is why it is called bargaining. There’s 

give-and-take, with the balance of power on the employer’s side 

until there is job action when each side has some power. 

 

Bargaining is a stressful situation, and there is a real need for 

cool heads and respectful dialogue at the bargaining table. 

Heavy-handed interference like this legislation is bound to 

result in very bad relationships. It’s a long way back from a 

bitter and acrimonious collective bargaining experience. 

 

We need workplaces, Mr. Speaker, where workers are respected 

and valued and fairly paid for their services. 

 

I can focus my remarks on bargaining from the perspective of 

being the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses president through two 

contract negotiations and as a SUN member through two more. 

During any negotiation when job action was required to come 

to an agreement, essential services were discussed with the 

employer and delivered by SUN members. SUN members 

worked, for example, in emergency units, intensive care units, 

coronary care units, neonatal intensive care units, and pediatric 

intensive care units, just as examples. The services provided 

were not 100 per cent coverage, rather only staffing for 

emergency-type situations. 

 

I find the term essential services misleading, as most would 

agree that health services in general are all essential to 

someone’s health at some time. As the Act is worded, it would 

allow the employer to designate virtually all employees as 

essential, and I could sure see this happening in bargaining with 

nurses. 

 

And I believe SUN also sees this coming because I’m going to 

quote from their submission to the minister on February 8. 

They’re talking about how: 

 

That process has led to the successful resolution of literally 

thousands of collective agreements in Saskatchewan over 

the last 100 years, without Government intervention. 

Nothing [in their opinion] has changed in the last 6 months 

that would suddenly warrant such a wholesale 

disassembling of the public sector collective bargaining 

landscape. 

 



March 12, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

They go on to say: 

 

If [this Bill] . . . is enacted, in its present form, there will be 

a significant effect on SUN members, amounting to a 

denial of the right to strike, as well as a violation of SUN’s 

rights to bargain collectively without governmental 

interference, restriction, or mandate. 

 

And they go on to say that “. . . no one has talked to SUN about 

its view of what constitutes emergency services, and how those 

can and should be provided.” 

 

They also go on to say that: 

 

Given the fact that SUN members have always protected 

public safety, how has public safety ever been put at risk? 

What possible justification is there, again, given SUN’s 

prior history of providing emergency services, to strip SUN 

members of their rights, including the right to strike. 

 

Premier Wall said to Rosalee Longmoore that he wants to 

emphasize, in his view — and this is his, it’s his quote: 

 

. . . the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, on their own 

volition, has been responsible for protecting public safety 

by agreeing to provide essential services during a strike. 

 

This is done basically by a: 

 

. . . “Local Emergency Services Committee” who are best 

able to determine which nursing functions are emergent, 

who can provide these services and whether a SUN 

member will provide the services. 

 

. . . In the past, Local Emergency Services Committees 

have directed SUN members to provide services in 

situations such as: 

 

— where [there was no] out-of-scope nursing staff [to and] 

have been unable to [take] . . . rest breaks; 

— where patients were . . . moved to another facility; 

— where out-of-scope nursing staff do not have the 

requisite skills to provide safe patient care. . . 

 

In essence, what’s going to happen with this legislation, the 

government will be seen as siding with the employer during the 

collective bargaining process because they will determine what 

is essential. 

 

To the best of SUN’s knowledge [they conclude], there is 

no evidence to establish that public safety has been 

jeopardized by job action in Saskatchewan. If the 

government is privy to such evidence . . . [they would like 

to see it shared]. 

 

One of the Sunspots, or the Sunspots from the winter of ’08 also 

goes on to talk to the members about how detrimental this will 

be to SUN members. They are talking about if they’re . . . 

Section 7(2) specifically states that: 

 

. . . the number of employees in each classification who 

must work during the work stoppage to maintain essential 

services [and this is bolded] is to be determined without 

regard to the availability of other persons to provide 

essential services. 

 

And they conclude that if passed, this legislation could amount 

to a denial of the right to strike for SUN members. 

 

My question is again, why now? There is a shortage of virtually 

every kind of worker in this province. There is non-stop talk 

from virtually every sector about the need to recruit and retain 

workers. So why now for essential services legislation? Why 

alienate the very workers you’re trying to retain? Why set up an 

adversarial, confrontational atmosphere in our workplaces? 

Who has asked for it? 

 

[15:00] 

 

It seems that this legislation is payback to some in the business 

community who worked hard to get the Sask Party elected and 

have for a long time tried to convince people in Saskatchewan 

that our labour laws and environment is what is holding us 

back. 

 

I have some comparisons from other provinces because the 

minister has talked about being competitive. There is a 

comparison from Alberta in person-days lost due to health care 

strikes and lockouts in Alberta and Saskatchewan. This is 

between 1988 and 2007. In Alberta where strikes were banned, 

they have lost 287,625 person-days, while in Saskatchewan 

where we have the right to strike, the loss totals just over 

200,000. 

 

You have to kind of ask yourself, you know, why bother with 

legislation in the first place if we can seem to settle it without 

that? 

 

The other comparison is that we have got comparisons between 

the private sector and the public sector for the same years — 

actually from ’87 to 2007 — comparing the percentage of 

private sector settlements reached without work stoppage and 

the percentage of public sector settlements reached without 

work stoppage. In every case, except 1995 when they were even 

at 100 per cent, the public sector settlements reached without 

work stoppage exceeded the private sector settlements reached 

without work stoppage. 

 

So you have to ask yourself, why now? This is a basically a Bill 

for public services, so it doesn’t seem to be there is any need for 

that. 

 

I do have some comments again that . . . I want to talk about a 

comment or a article written by Don Cameron, a lecturer at the 

Paul J. Hill School of Business in the University of Regina. He 

has talked about how destructive this will be and his views that 

there may be hidden consequences that come from using this 

legislation. 

 

And he does go on to say, “There is a tendency for employers to 

designate essential services in excess of the requirements” 

which I have mentioned. And “. . . the proposed legislation does 

not permit the Labour Relations Board to alter the essential 

services” or the classification, only the numbers. So again that’s 

something that’s very . . . It’s quite concerning for all unions. 

 



288 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2008 

There is a difficulty with the proposed legislation in “. . . that it 

requires every public service union and management subject to 

the Act to engage in a designation process . . . that is time 

consuming, complex and costly.” 

 

We’re going to have a whole run starting — well right now 

SUN’s at the bargaining table — of health sector union 

bargaining starting the end of March, and SUN’s already at the 

table. If we think that this is going to help settle these 

agreements in a timely manner and in a less costly manner, I 

don’t see who’s thinking that. 

 

There’s also some things that Mr. Cameron says, that he 

concludes by saying: 

 

It is unfortunate that the [public services] Essential 

Services Act has been introduced in acrimony, described in 

some circles as a settling of old scores with the labour 

movement and of favouring one collective bargaining party 

over another. The creation of a toxic relationship between 

government and labour is not a proper foundation for 

protecting the people of Saskatchewan from threats to their 

health [and] safety . . . 

 

In another article where he writes for the Canadian Centre for 

Policy Alternatives, he says that: 

 

Essential services legislation was not a key priority for the 

new government in the recent election. Nevertheless, the 

proposed Act was introduced in the first sitting. Given that 

essential services continue in most sectors, there’s less 

incentive for the parties to settle, with the result that strikes 

are longer. 

 

I also want to talk about public consultations. Consultation is 

defined as meeting with an expert in a particular field to obtain 

advice; the process of discussing something either with experts 

or with other participants and asking for their opinions or a 

discussion, especially in order to ascertain opinions or reach an 

agreement. This is the definition from Encarta World English 

Dictionary. The Sask Party has apparently written a new 

definition of consultation: nothing public, only by invitation, 

and only in private meetings. 

 

This legislation is a major change in labour relations in 

Saskatchewan. Surely in the name of the fair and balanced 

promises from the Premier and the minister, we and the public 

want, we want to see a public debate. And I know that our 

Health critic has called for this. He has asked that the 

government hold a series of public consultations on its proposed 

amendments to The Trade Union Act and its new public service 

essential services Act. The government should be openly 

encouraging a broad public debate on its hallmark legislation 

rather than hiding behind closed doors. He also continues to 

say, what we need is meaningful consultations, not meetings 

where the outcome is predetermined. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, as I conclude my remarks, 

that this Bill, as I have shown, is being introduced into a climate 

where nobody believes it’s fair. Nobody believes it’s balanced. 

It has come under scrutiny from all sides. I mean lecturers at the 

College of Business is pretty impartial and have said that it’s 

coming in an atmosphere of acrimony. And it’s hard for me to 

see how, in this labour environment, when we’re looking to 

recruit and retain people, that this would be the piece of 

legislation that would somehow do that. So, Mr. Speaker, I will 

not be supporting this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Adjourning debate, adjourning debate 

. . . Why is the member from Meewasin on his feet? 

 

Mr. Quennell: — To join in debate on the Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Okay. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will save the 

majority of my remarks for another day to accommodate other 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . unless members opposite insist 

otherwise. But I want to accommodate other business in the 

House. 

 

The only comment I would make today, Mr. Speaker, is that I 

think it’s, in my short experience in this legislature, a very 

remarkable incident, event that the government is speaking to 

amending its Bill within the second reading speech. 

 

And I think there’s an admission on the part of the government 

that the Bill was not well thought out, perhaps not drafted by 

Justice lawyers, drafted by Justice lawyers. And I think an 

admission that more broad public consultations on this Bill are 

necessary than those that have taken place. But to accommodate 

. . . but perhaps to allow other members to join the debate, but I 

think certainly to accommodate . . . Perhaps to allow other 

members to join the debate at some point, but actually just to 

accommodate other business in the House, I move that we 

adjourn debate on this Bill today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is motion 

carried? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Motion agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

order to accommodate the sitting of committees, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

made a motion for the House to adjourn. Is that carried? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. The House is now adjourned 

until 10 o’clock tomorrow morning so that the committees can 

carry on their good work of today. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:08.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 271 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 271 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 271 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 271 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 271 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 271 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 271 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 272 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................... 284 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 284 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 272 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 272 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 272 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 272 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Valley View Centre Open House 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 272 

 Regina Business Honoured by Canada’s 50 Best Managed Companies 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 273 

 Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation Showcase 2008 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 273 

 Moose Jaw Salvation Army Anniversary 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 273 

 Provincial Day of Student Action 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 273 

 Solving the Nursing Shortage 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 274 

 Provincial Heritage Property Designated in Saskatoon 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 274 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Labour Relations Board 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 274 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 275 

 Recruitment and Retention of Nurses 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 276 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 276 

 School Closures 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 278 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 278 

 Response to Premier’s Comments 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 279 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 279 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Recruitment of Nurses 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 279 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 280 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 8 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 280 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 281 

 Bill No. 10 — The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 281 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 281 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 281 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 282 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 282 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 2 — The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 282 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 283 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 286 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 288 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


