




















































Hansard: November 03, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 7B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2008, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1529 

 November 3, 2008 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It being 7 p.m., the debate will 

continue on the Throne Speech with the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

As I had previously stated, my great-grandfather came to what 

became Saskatchewan with dreams — dreams for his children 

and his grandchildren. And, Mr. Speaker, they did see a better 

life in Saskatchewan for their children and their grandchildren. 

Over the years, the family farm grew and provided for those 

dreams right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Allow me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to run the clock some almost 

100 years to the year 2002. For 25 years, Heather and I, with 

my mom and dad, had been operating Chisholm Farms. It was 

not without the same challenges as faced by our neighbours and 

in fact by all of Saskatchewan. 2002 was to be the worst 

drought, the worst crop we had ever experienced. The so-called 

safety nets in agriculture were simply not working. Crop 

insurance was telling us that we who had been net payers for 

years would have to take off a crop that would not result in 

proceeds that would even pay the fuel bills. It simply wasn‟t 

working. Neither were my great-grandfather‟s dreams for 

Saskatchewan, those dreams for our children and grandchildren. 

 

We were more fortunate than many. By combining grain 

farming and working off farm for these 25 years, Heather 

nursing and myself in accounting endeavours, we were able to 

provide for opportunities and education for our sons. But the 

dreams that my great-grandfather had, the dreams for our 

children and grandchildren in Saskatchewan, were not to be our 

reality. It became obvious that Saskatchewan would not be the 

home for our children, and Chisholm Farms would not be 

operating in the future as a fifth generation family farm. The 

opportunities and the future for our children were not in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It was about at this time that the reality of the future of our 

province was all too clear, not only to us as a family and as a 

community, but to the entire country, indeed the entire world. In 

the feature article of Macleans magazine, July 15, 2002, the 

cover of which shows an abandoned, run-down farm site, was 

captioned “Disappearing Saskatchewan: prairie towns are dying 

and taking with them a part of the country‟s heritage”. I would 

like to quote in part from the eight-page article about the 

situation of this province: 

 

But the sort of world that Mitchell . . . [referring to W.O. 

Mitchell, the Weyburn-born, renowned author] described 

so well is fast disappearing. The most recent census shows 

Saskatchewan‟s population was 979,000 people in 2001 

— a decline of 1.1 per cent since 1996 . . . Those who left, 

deserted rural Saskatchewan. In droves. 

 

The article goes on to say, “The road to success often leads to 

Alberta.” And I quote: 

 

If people are Saskatchewan‟s greatest export, Alberta is 

the biggest beneficiary. This is particularly true in 

Calgary, where even a former mayor hails from the 

province next door. “Calgary welcomes people,” says Al 

Duerr, a one-time city planner [for the city of] . . . 

Saskatoon . . . “If you come with good ideas and are 

willing to work to make things happen, you‟re embraced 

here.” So many have answered that siren call there‟s even 

a thriving Saskatchewan Social Club in Calgary. And 

whether they left home reluctantly, or rushed to hop 

aboard the Alberta juggernaut, many club members tell a 

similar story: they had to . . . move. 

 

Saskatoon native Jodi McNabb left soon after graduating 

from the University of Saskatchewan 12 years ago. “The 

opportunities for me seemed to be to sell life insurance or 

water softeners, neither of which had any appeal,” she 

recalls. So she packed up her car and drove to Calgary, 

sight unseen. She landed a job in just a few weeks. Today, 

McNabb, 34, is an associate with The Development 

Group, which provides fundraising services for non-profit 

organizations. 

 

Growing up in Moose Jaw, Sask., John McCaig never 

dreamt he too would end up in Calgary. But today, he is 

chairman of Trimac Corp., one of the largest trucking 

companies in North America . . . 

 

Since it became a province in 1905, Saskatchewan‟s 

fortunes have been closely . . . [related to those of] 

agriculture. These days, the sector is hard hit, battling 

drought, low grain prices and international trade subsidies. 

In contrast, Alberta‟s oil and gas industry is booming, as 

are its manufacturing sectors. “God was a little kinder to 

Alberta when he distributed the natural resources,” notes 

Marvin Romanow, CFO of Nexen Inc., one of the largest 

oil and gas companies in Canada. 

 

Romanow, who is originally from Canora, Sask., notes the 

province may have an even bigger problem. “It is 

difficult,” he explains, “to have a big commercial presence 

without running into government.” Former Yorkton, 

Sask., native Doug Baldwin, retired president and CEO of 

TransCanada PipeLines Ltd., adds that lower taxes would 

encourage more investment in Saskatchewan [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

. . . Whether they believe Saskatchewan‟s outlook has 

changed, many of those who left nevertheless credit their 

current success to the fact they once called the province 

home. “None of us grew up with a feeling of entitlement,” 

says Charlie Fischer, Nexen‟s Saskatoon-born president 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

and CEO. “We didn‟t start with an advantage. Everything 

we gained we earned ourselves and we‟re not afraid to 

chase opportunities.” It‟s Saskatchewan‟s misfortune that 

they saw those opportunities in Alberta. 

 

And I finished the quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Another notable 

name from the Saskatchewan socialist past would also abandon 

Saskatchewan and join Nexen in big, bad Alberta, and that was 

Dwain Lingenfelter. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was July 2002. It was at about 

that time that I became reacquainted with an old friend and a 

new client. This was an individual from very much my 

background, a grandson of a pioneer. This was an individual 

that, unlike myself, had had the opportunity to travel the world 

in various capacities, the most recent as the chief grain 

commissioner for Canada. This was an individual that I 

remembered well as a community builder when he had been in 

our community. And what impressed me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the most, was that this was an individual who made the 

conscious decision to return to Saskatchewan. I found someone 

who shared my great-grandfather‟s dreams. I thank Milt 

Wakefield, former member of this Assembly, and seatmate, for 

enkindling back in me that dream. And that as much as 

anything else brought me to this place. 

 

I would now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like to move the clock again, 

this time from 2002 to October 2008. And I thank you for your 

patience in allowing me to diverse from specifically this 2008 

Throne Speech. 

 

I came across another article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this time 

from October 26, 2008, from the Sunday edition of the 

Edmonton Sun. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, at the present time 

our provincial daily newspapers do not publish a Sunday 

edition. I believe that too will soon change. But in my town, the 

only Sunday paper available is the Edmonton Sun. Not that 

Alberta envy drives me to this publication on Sunday mornings; 

it‟s just the reality that it‟s the only paper in town. 

 

The article is entitled, “Now, it‟s called „Saskatcha-win.‟” And 

again I take the opportunity to quote in part from this article, 

and I can assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this does have direct 

relevance to this Throne Speech. The article refers to an 

individual who, like my former colleague, made the decision to 

return to Saskatchewan, the good times. And once again I will 

quote in part: 

 

A decade ago a close friend of mine decided to move from 

Edmonton, and I knew I‟d miss him . . . 

 

While I wished him well and knew he‟d succeed, I 

thought to myself: “Saskatchewan? Oh, my God! Why 

leave a bigger, more prosperous city and province to go to 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan?” 

 

I admit it. Like a lot of people, I looked down on that 

province that was often the butt of jokes. I‟m not even 

sure why I looked down on it. The people are friendly and 

rock solid . . . 

 

It‟s just that the province is so sparsely populated, so 

small-town, so cold and so very, very flat. 

Besides, it‟d . . . been a hotbed of socialism, which pretty 

much guaranteed it would never boom. 

 

I‟ll repeat that, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Besides, it‟d . . . been a hotbed of socialism, which pretty 

much guaranteed it would never boom. 

 

But that was then and this is now. Saskatchewanians are 

getting the last laugh. 

 

Since 2006 it‟s been a “have” province driven by rich 

resources, including oil and gas, uranium and potash. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — 

 

This week, Saskatchewan Party Premier Brad Wall 

announced an unbudgeted surplus projected at $3 billion 

— at a time when once-rich Ontario . . . [runs] a deficit. 

 

The business-friendly Saskatchewan Party, first elected 

last fall, announced the largest personal income tax cuts in 

the province‟s history. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — 

 

People with household incomes of $40,000 or less won‟t 

pay a cent in provincial . . . tax. 

 

Those earning around $50,000 will see their income taxes 

cut [by] 60%. 

 

“A working family with two children can now earn up to 

$41,300 before they start to pay any provincial income 

tax” . . . 

 

Albertans have long joked that, when driving to 

Saskatchewan you could always tell when you crossed the 

border: the roads were terrible. But Wall is doing 

something about that, too. 

 

Besides slashing taxes like some political version of 

Freddy Krueger, they‟re boosting infrastructure spending 

more than 50% to $1.5 billion — and the government will 

maintain a $2-billion rainy day fund. 

 

The one-time have-not province will lead the nation in 

economic growth, stealing bragging rights previously held 

by Alberta. Indeed, Saskatchewan is the only province 

that‟s predicted to have a higher economic growth . . . this 

year than last [year]. 

 

It still can‟t beat the tax rates in Alberta, but it‟s getting 

closer — and the way Alberta‟s Tories spend money, 

Saskatchewanians might have the last laugh on that front 

too. 

 

The article concludes: 

 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1531 

If nothing else, we won‟t be hearing nearly as many 

Saskatchewan jokes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that kind of summarizes what I 

wanted to say. I appreciate the kind attention of the members 

opposite. Thank you. I‟ll be voting against the amendment and 

for the motion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m happy to 

be back. I‟m happy to rise tonight to enter some comments on 

the Throne Speech into the record. As all of my colleagues have 

done before me, I‟d like to thank the people of Saskatoon 

Eastview, the constituency that I represent. And I have been 

their MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] since 1998, 

so four elections the people have seen fit to put me here. I am 

very proud to represent them and very humbled that they 

continue to trust me and trust in the things that I can do. 

 

I also want to thank the people in the executive in Eastview 

who worked so hard to get me here too, and who continue to 

support me through years of being in politics. I want to thank 

my constituency assistant, April Anderson, who does the front 

work in our constituency office. The people know and love her 

because she really works hard and she‟s committed to getting 

the best service she can for the people that live in our riding. 

 

I also want to thank my family, my husband and my children, 

who continue to support me; my daughter‟s family in Regina, 

who I rely heavily on for strength and keeping me on the right 

path. 

 

I also want to welcome our newest member, my colleague from 

Cumberland. I look forward to working with him in the years to 

come — many years to come — and I know he‟ll do a 

wonderful job for the good people of Cumberland. 

 

I want to talk about the money that‟s in the Throne Speech. I‟ve 

been on Treasury Board in my years in government. I‟ve been 

on Treasury Board, I‟ve been in cabinet. Many of the decisions 

we made as a government were made with oil at $16 a barrel. 

Many of the decisions we made and the choices we made were 

very hard. Many of the things we chose, we had to choose a 

little bit here and a little bit there. 

 

We still can look around the province and look at hospitals, new 

hospitals, including one in Swift Current and one in Moosomin. 

We can look at them in Ile-a-la-Crosse. There‟s hospitals and 

renovations. There‟s long-term care facilities. There‟s schools 

— three high schools in Saskatoon, new public schools, new 

separate schools. All these things happened with a government, 

an NDP government that had no money, that continued to 

struggle with $16-a-barrel oil — 25 was tops. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And the decisions we made were still made to do the best we 

could for highways, to do the best we could for utility bundle 

rebates, the best we could for keeping our licence plates 

affordable, the best we could for social assistance rates, for all 

the affordable housing investments that we‟ve made. And I can 

go on and on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We had a debt when we 

assumed government in 1991 that was around 14 or $15 billion. 

When we left government in ‟07 it was 7. Somebody paid down 

that $7 billion debt. Wasn‟t the tooth fairy. 

 

Now when I‟m looking at the Throne Speech now with all the 

money that the Sask Party government has to deal with and to 

spend, there‟s so many shortcomings that I see. My riding in 

Eastview is made up of a high percentage of seniors, and many 

of them are talking about, it‟s not affordable to live. Many of 

them are calling, talking about the problems that they‟re having 

with condo conversions, being put out of their apartments. 

They‟re being converted. They‟re not able to afford where 

they‟re living. Many of them are seeing rent increases. They‟re 

not able to stay in the apartments or the accommodations that 

they‟ve had for years and the friends they‟ve made and the 

neighbourhoods that they live in. 

 

They‟re also talking about utility costs. We have all this money 

in the province but our utilities are still going up. Seniors are 

going to be ones that are faced quickly with those hardships. 

 

I‟m starting to get a lot of comments and a lot of letters from 

seniors on the drug plan. There are still many, many things that 

are wrong with how we deliver our drug plan, and one of the 

things that seniors are finding is they can‟t afford it. The cut-off 

that we had, that we‟ve seen with the Sask Party government, 

isn‟t working for many seniors. We are looking at some of the 

things that seniors could use, that other people could use, in 

being covered under some of the drug plans. There‟s lots of 

people who are suffering, that aren‟t able to get coverage, that 

aren‟t able to get assistance. 

 

When I talk about affordable housing . . . I did the task force 

two summers ago so it‟s kind of strange to see the Sask Party 

talk about the task force that they put together this past summer 

being some sort of revelation. We did it the year before and I 

was on it. So the things that happened from that, we saw the 

things that were happening around the province. People were 

not able to afford the housing, the costs rising. There was 

substandard housing. We also heard from landlords who were 

talking about how tenants need to have some assistance on how 

to be good tenants. Because they also won‟t build new 

apartments if they don‟t have some assurance that they‟ll be 

able to get a return on their investment and have a safe 

environment that they can still afford to maintain. So there‟s a 

lot of work to be done. 

 

The hard-to-house are particularly hard hit now. Those are 

people who are on the street, who have no money, who have 

maybe a mental illness, who have drug addictions or other 

addictions. They are really finding it difficult to find a place to 

live, and some of the money that‟s being set aside for these 

things are not going to come until next year. It won‟t help the 

people this year, and they‟re going to certainly feel it this 

winter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Junor: — Another thing there is no mention at all about in 

the Throne Speech is students. There‟s no talk about student 



1532 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

housing, and in Saskatoon in particular students need a housing 

complex very badly. 

 

There‟s also no talk about tuition — none mentioned 

whatsoever. And I know students are particularly interested in 

how much it‟s going to cost them. They may be getting rebates 

on it if they stay in Saskatchewan, but they‟re still faced with 

huge debt when they come out of their different courses. 

 

We didn‟t hear anything about property tax reduction. When is 

that going to happen? The education portion of the property tax 

is something that everybody‟s talked about. It‟s been promised 

and promised. It‟s just dangling out there and there‟s no 

mention of when that‟s going to happen. 

 

Now many of the opposition I‟ve heard today, coming back 

today — listening to some of the speeches and some of my 

colleagues‟ speeches — the opposition seems to think that we 

should be cheerleaders for them. That‟s not the role of the 

opposition is to be cheerleaders for the Sask Party or for the 

government. Our role is to talk about things that are missing, 

things that we have criticisms of, things that people bring to our 

attention that are a concern to them that are maybe not being 

addressed by the government. So our role isn‟t to be a 

cheerleader. It isn‟t our role to say, good job, all the time. 

 

Some things are being done really well. Lots of the things are 

carried on — the things that we‟ve done, some of the housing 

things, some of the increase in education seats. Many of the 

things that we put in place are now we‟re reaping the benefits of 

those or we‟re seeing the government adding to them. So those 

were good programs and I‟m very happy to see that they‟re kept 

on and that they‟re added to as we can afford it, which we 

certainly can. 

 

I find it difficult, you know, after a year with the Sask Party in 

government, to continue to have them say, well you did this or 

you did that or you didn‟t do this. You can‟t hide behind us any 

more. I‟m not the Minister of Health. The Minister of Health 

has to be accountable for his own actions. And saying whether 

we did or didn‟t do something isn‟t going to cut it. People are 

watching and they know when you‟re government, you‟re 

responsible. It stops there with you. 

 

One of the things I really found disappointing is the treaties in 

the classroom. The previous treaty commissioner, Dave Arnot, 

worked very hard on treaties in the classroom with the teachers, 

the elders, the Education department, and he has got no credit 

when the government is talking about treaties in the classroom. 

It‟s as if they invented it and did it themselves. It‟s insulting to 

Dave Arnot and all the people who came before and worked 

with him that put treaties in the classroom, into the classrooms 

in our province. 

 

The only change now is that it‟s mandatory. When we did it, I 

was minister of Learning, we weren‟t ready to make it 

mandatory. We had to try it first to see if people were willing to 

do it. This was pretty innovative and creative, and a step 

forward in actually fighting racism. And I think it‟s a wonderful 

program. I‟m just disappointed that Dave Arnot doesn‟t get the 

credit that he deserves for having put this program in place. The 

treaties in the classroom really comes to mind because I was 

involved in that. So I‟m disappointed, and not only on my 

behalf, but on the treaty commissioner and all the people that 

worked with him. 

 

But there‟s things in housing that are being done. We‟re seeing 

that there‟s lots of housing complexes being opened. They 

didn‟t start November 7, ‟07. They were put in the works long 

before that and are coming now to have their doors opened and 

the people come into them. Child care spaces, all those things 

that were put in place — new schools, highway improvements, 

hospitals — they‟re all coming on stream because of work that 

was done by the NDP [New Democratic Party] government 

when we were in government. 

 

And history will be written, as my colleague from Lakeview 

said, history will be written by the historians, not by the 

speeches that the Sask Party has given — the fairy tales that 

they have told, and the things that they have missed or 

misrepresented. History will write the things that we did as a 

government over the last 16 years, and the people will know the 

truth. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will supporting the amendment and not be 

supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 

and honoured today to rise and speak in support of the 2008 

Speech from the Throne, “A Stronger Saskatchewan. A Better 

Life.” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this summer the Premier asked the MLAs 

to reach out to the residents of our constituencies and ask them 

what they felt what we should do with the benefits of growth. In 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, we went out and knocked on 

hundreds of doors. The residents were surprised to see us at 

their doorstep. It wasn‟t an election, and here we were at their 

homes consulting with them. Many of them told me that this 

was the first time that a government had ever asked them what 

they thought. 

 

I would like to thank the residents of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley 

for sharing their ideas, their suggestions on the issues that were 

the most important to them. The message we heard over and 

over again was pay down the debt, more money for 

infrastructure, and careful spending so that the people of 

Saskatchewan can benefit from the strong economy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan spoke and we 

listened. Since taking office, the Saskatchewan Party 

government has cut the province‟s debt by about 40 per cent 

from nearly 7 billion to about 4.2 billion, saving the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan millions of dollars in interest costs in the 

coming years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

spoke and we listened. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of our highways, schools, and 

hospitals are in bad shape due to years of neglect by the NDP 

government. The Saskatchewan Party will invest 1 billion this 

year and 1.5 billion next year. This record investment will 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1533 

ensure that our infrastructure contributes to our province‟s 

growth. The people of Saskatchewan spoke and we listened. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the residents of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley 

told us they wanted a compassionate government — a 

government that truly cared about Saskatchewan, not just 

paying lip service. As the Premier has said, everyone should 

share in this new prosperity. Our government has announced 

the largest income tax cut ever, saving a family of four $1,320 a 

year and removing 80,000 low-income earners from the tax 

roles. These tax cuts benefit the people that need it the most. 

The people of Saskatchewan spoke and we listened. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley 

told us they wanted a government that would be prudent with 

the benefits of growth. They wanted a government that would 

show leadership, responsible financial planning. In these 

uncertain economic times, strong leadership is more important 

than ever. Our Saskatchewan Party government will reserve 

nearly 2 billion in the Growth and Financial Security Fund to 

ensure we are able to protect our health, education, and social 

programs during this time of economic uncertainty. The people 

of Saskatchewan spoke and we listened. 

 

I would like to thank the residents of Saskatchewan who offered 

their suggestions on these issues. They were the most important 

to them. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech is their 

Throne Speech. People of Saskatchewan have found their voice. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are interesting times in 

Saskatchewan. While many places in the world teeter on 

economic collapse, Saskatchewan still remains strong. 

 

As Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health, nurse 

recruitment and retention, I have had the opportunity — with 

health care professionals from across our province and across 

Canada — this past year I‟ve attended health careers across 

Canada from Vancouver to Halifax. At these events it‟s my 

pleasure to represent our province at the career town halls. I get 

to share with everyone the good news about Saskatchewan. I 

get to tell them about our strong economy and the opportunities 

that our province has for them. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, health care professionals are looking at 

Saskatchewan in a new light. Health care funding is the 

responsibility of the provincial government. A strong 

government means that there will be consistent health care 

funding. This is a strong message to someone looking to start 

their career or advance it. They want to know that those jobs are 

going to be there and not be cut when a government faces 

financial troubles. 

 

People always want to know is there a plan. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that‟s why it‟s so important that the government 

undertake responsible financial planning. As I stated before, the 

Saskatchewan government will reserve nearly 2 billion in the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund to ensure we are able to 

protect health, education, and our social programs. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a plan. Saskatchewan‟s economy is strong. 

Career opportunities are good. Make the right choice, move to 

Saskatchewan where we have a wonderful lifestyle and plenty 

of sunshine — this is a message that we can proudly share with 

people across Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my role as Legislative Secretary to the 

Minister of Health, nurse recruitment and retention, I‟ve been 

asked to examine how the health care system in Saskatchewan 

addresses the shortage of nurses. I would to like to thank the 

Minister for his support over this past year. Leading this project 

has been a great honour. We have had the opportunity to meet 

with close to 1,000 nurses across this province. Consultations 

and meetings are taking place throughout the province to gather 

the input of nurses and health care leaders and other health care 

providers. 

 

[19:30] 

 

This project is examining how the health care system in 

Saskatchewan will need to evolve to address the shortage of 

nurses. This project will be developing a recruitment plan to fill 

nurse vacancies, a plan to retain our present nurses, a plan to 

engage our Aboriginal community in the nursing workforce, a 

plan to maximize the effective employment of our in-province 

trained graduates and review the present recruitment and 

retention initiatives and programs and recommendations of 

change, to recruit and retain strategies for our future needs. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we‟re inviting health care professionals to 

have their say. 

 

Our government is building a stronger Saskatchewan, a better 

life for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

Saskatchewan‟s economy is strong and growing. Saskatchewan 

has transitioned from a have-not to a have province. In the 

words of our Premier, “We have experienced a rebirth to 

become this year country . . .” This change in large is part due 

to the change in attitude and policies of our new government. 

Our province, with its strong presence in agriculture and food, 

energy and resources, is one of the best places in the world to 

invest. 

 

In my constituency of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, new 

businesses are opening, new homes are being built each and 

every day. Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley is the place to be. These 

are signs of a strong economy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to conclude by thanking my 

family, my friends, and constituents for their support over the 

past year. I would also like to thank our Premier for his strong 

leadership and the MLAs for their help and guidance. Last but 

not least, I would like to thank my constituency assistant, Kelly. 

She‟s extraordinary. She is one of the hardest working, most 

dedicated, caring people I know. I would like to thank her for 

her commitment to the constituents of Regina Qu‟Appelle 

Valley. Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to stand in support of my 

government‟s Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Appreciate 

the opportunity tonight to enter the debate on the government‟s 

Throne Speech and the opposition‟s amendment, an 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, that I know we will be voting on later 

tonight. And I look forward to all the opportunities to stand 

with the members of the New Democratic Party tonight in 



1534 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

support of that amendment. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Ross: — I ask leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked permission 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 

introduce my constituency assistant, Kelly. She is in the gallery 

today, and I feel quite honoured that she came to hear me 

present my Speech to the Throne. But also I‟d like to tell 

everyone that, you know, Kelly has been just wonderful in her 

support in the constituency office. When I go and meet people 

they say, we really like you but we love Kelly. 

 

So you know, it‟s support and help like that that makes my job 

easier. Thank you very much, Kelly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure tonight to join my colleagues here in commenting on 

the government‟s Throne Speech. The debate tonight is on that 

Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and on the amendment 

put forward by the opposition New Democratic Party. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I look forward later tonight to voting with my 

colleagues on the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Throne Speech introduced by the government actually 

earlier last week, Mr. Speaker, gives us an opportunity to think 

very seriously about the needs of the province, the people of the 

province, and the way in which government addressed the 

issues raised by the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that all members in this Chamber, 

regardless of how long they‟ve been here, understand and 

realize that government is about decision making. Government 

therefore is about priorities. And governments, Mr. Speaker, are 

judged on the basis of how they address those priorities with 

their policies and their decision making. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had the opportunity to speak to a number of 

classrooms around the province over the years. And people 

have often . . . students, primarily younger students have often 

asked me what is government all about. Mr. Speaker, I‟ve 

described it to young people in schools as being what I said 

earlier: government is about decision making. 

 

And I apply it in their own lives. When you get up in the 

morning and you choose Corn Flakes or Raisin Bran, Mr. 

Speaker, you‟re making a decision that will affect your thinking 

throughout the day, your health. It‟s a decision that you make, 

Mr. Speaker, in order to enjoy your day. Mr. Speaker, when you 

dress for school, if you put on a sweater or a shirt or a T-shirt, 

Mr. Speaker, you are making a decision that‟s going to 

influence how you are judged by people when they see you and 

talk to you. Mr. Speaker, those are decisions that individuals 

make every day. 

 

In government, decisions are also made every day, and the 

decisions that we take will therefore be judged by the people 

who are relying on government to support them in their times of 

need. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government in the Throne Speech has 

identified their priorities over the course of the next year. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ve been working with people in my community and 

communities that are adjacent to The Battlefords over the 

course of the summer and the fall months now, Mr. Speaker, as 

the fall is beginning. I‟ve been talking with these people, and I 

get the distinct impression, Mr. Speaker, that the decisions that 

the public want government to engage in are not the decisions 

that are being outlined by the government in their Throne 

Speech today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟ve been involved in the world of representing people to a level 

of government for 20 years now, Mr. Speaker. Not once, not 

once in those 20 years, Mr. Speaker, did I ever have to have 

someone tell me to go out and talk to my constituents, whether 

it was in the federal House of Commons, the municipality of 

The Battlefords, or in this House, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve never had 

anybody tell me I had to go and talk to people because, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s my job. My job is to understand, to listen, and to 

respond, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This summer this government had only one job to do. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it does appear that really the toughest job they‟ve had 

since they‟ve been elected is the one job they had to do this 

summer — decide how to spend all the money that they were 

left with after the 2007 election. The Premier was so concerned 

about this, Mr. Speaker, that he had to tell his members, cabinet 

and backbenchers alike, he had to tell them to go out and ask 

people how do we spend this money.  

 

How do we spend this money? That was their one big job this 

summer, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s interesting that at the same time 

that the Premier‟s reporting to the media that he‟s asked his 

members to go do what they‟re supposed to do anyway, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier said, and this government is working on 

plans to provide debt relief, to provide income tax reduction, 

and provide infrastructure support — interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely interesting. The Premier tells his members to go out 

and listen to the public, tells them what to listen for. And 

wouldn‟t you know it, when they come back, they say what 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1535 

they heard was debt reduction, income tax reduction, and 

infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well there‟s no doubt those are important matters. There‟s no 

doubt those are important matters, and it‟s nice to see that this 

government is addressing those things. But you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? The people in this province are talking about, thinking 

about, and addressing their MLAs when they ask the right 

questions, a number of different things, Mr. Speaker. And 

there‟s a recognition that this province‟s economic prosperity, 

Mr. Speaker, is causing some problems at the municipal level, 

at the individual level, at the provincial level — problems for 

vulnerable people. And governments have to address the issues, 

not only of those who have money, Mr. Speaker, but of those 

who don‟t. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government will be judged not only on 

this Throne Speech, but at the end of the day, at the end of this 

four-year mandate that they have, on how well they have 

managed this boom for this province‟s most vulnerable people. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is telling us that the 

vulnerable people in this province, Mr. Speaker, are just not the 

priority at this point in time. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen some 

program and policy that are addressing those on social services, 

Mr. Speaker. And we applaud some of the initiatives moving 

forward, because when you have $3 billion in the bank, Mr. 

Speaker, you can do certain things. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

should be doing those things. 

 

But what are we hearing from the people of our constituencies 

and our communities? Health care is still number one amongst 

the people in this province. Mr. Speaker, health care is still 

number one. Our waiting lists continue to be as long and in fact 

longer than they have been in the past, Mr. Speaker. And while 

progress has been made on the issue of waiting lists, Mr. 

Speaker, there is still a considerable amount of work to do. And 

the public is saying to this government — through me, my 

colleagues, and members opposite, Mr. Speaker — to keep 

health care number one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s not what we‟re hearing here. We‟ve got a $600 billion 

need for capital in the health care field. The Throne Speech tells 

us we got about 100 million. Mr. Speaker, that is a step in the 

right direction, but with $3 billion in the bank, Mr. Speaker, we 

should be doing a lot more than that. 

 

I‟ll give you a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. In my own 

community, of course, my own community, everybody in this 

House and around the province is aware of the need in The 

Battlefords, Mr. Speaker, for the replacement of the 

100-year-old Saskatchewan Hospital. A considerable amount of 

work has been done to identify the design needs for the 

Saskatchewan Hospital construction, Mr. Speaker. And what 

we‟re waiting for now is for the government to provide the okay 

for that to go to detailed drawings, Mr. Speaker, detailed 

drawings. 

 

The government is saying that we can‟t go there yet because the 

project costs are getting larger than we had originally 

anticipated. Well, Mr. Speaker, so it is with every other project 

in this province. Costs have risen, Mr. Speaker. So we take that 

into account, but let‟s send it off to design, Mr. Speaker, and 

use some of the money that‟s being earmarked and identified 

for health capital, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that this project can 

continue. But we‟re not alone, Mr. Speaker. This summer, in 

addition to speaking to the constituents in The Battlefords, Mr. 

Speaker, I spoke to community leaders in Lloydminster, in 

Turtleford, in Meadow Lake, in Shellbrook . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. And so on 

behalf of some of the people that I talked to this summer — 

because I‟ve heard nothing from members opposite in their 

speeches from these communities, Mr. Speaker, on some of the 

things the municipal leaders told me — I want to make some 

representation. For example, for the people of Lloydminster. I 

met with mayor and council in the city of Lloydminster, Mr. 

Speaker, and you know what they said their no. 1 issue was? 

The no. 1 issue of members of council and the mayor, Mr. 

Speaker, was health care. Yes, they‟ve got some concerns about 

revenue sharing and about education property tax and all of 

that, but the mayor says to me, health is the most critical thing 

in this community. We want an interprovincial hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s what the mayor says to me. He says, represent 

that to this government, he said, because I don‟t think they are 

hearing us on that issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Turtleford, Mr. Speaker, I met with members of 

the municipal government in Turtleford, Mr. Speaker. Their no. 

1 issue is health care, Mr. Speaker, and having doctors in rural 

Saskatchewan. On behalf of the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, I say to the government opposite — because I 

sat here and listened to his speech; not once did he mention this, 

Mr. Speaker — on behalf of the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, I say to the government opposite, for the 

people of Turtleford, Mr. Speaker, health care is very important, 

and deal with that particular issue — the doctors and the nurses. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Meadow Lake I met with the municipal 

leadership in Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker. I listened to the 

member‟s speech, the member from Meadow Lake‟s speech, 

Mr. Speaker. I didn‟t hear anything representing the issues that 

were discussed in Meadow Lake when I met with the municipal 

council. On behalf of the people of Meadow Lake, I say to the 

government, health care in particular, a dialysis machine in the 

Meadow Lake hospital, Mr. Speaker. That‟s one of the issues in 

Meadow Lake. The member opposite didn‟t mention it. I feel I 

have to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There‟s starting to be a few 

members starting to carry conversations across the floor and 

starting to get very vocal with it. I would ask that you respect 

the member that has the floor. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And one 

other community that I met with, I went and talked to the 

municipal leadership there in Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker. And the 

member from Shellbrook Rosthern didn‟t mention the need for 

the new hospital in Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker. They have been 

talking about the need for growth in that community for some 

time. Reviews have been done. The inventory has been done. 

Mr. Speaker, the government is sitting on $3 billion. There‟s 

$100 million set aside for capital. It‟s time to start work on the 



1536 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

hospital in Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the member 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook opposite, I say to the Minister of 

Health, let‟s do something for the people of Shellbrook and deal 

with their capital health issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these members also talked about issues. These 

people that I talked to also talked about issues that the people in 

The Battlefords are concerned about. They‟re interested in 

housing, Mr. Speaker. I did a collection of some newspaper 

clippings, Mr. Speaker, from different parts of the province, just 

thinking about the need for housing and the impact that the 

growth, this economic growth that we are experiencing, Mr. 

Speaker, the impact that that‟s having on individual people‟s 

lives in communities around this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Weyburn is one of those communities that is 

significantly affected by the oil boom in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re all excited and delighted for the economic 

activity that‟s taking place. But when a government is judged 

on its decision making, Mr. Speaker, they aren‟t judged on how 

they spend the money that they get for the benefit of a few, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re judged on what they do to help to manage the 

difficulties that exist from this boom. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in the Weyburn Review, quoted this 

summer, in the Weyburn Review, here‟s an editorial: 

 

The other side of the equation [meaning the oil boom] is 

that there are many jobs going unfulfilled in retail service 

and oil industries, in agriculture, both urban and rural. The 

growth is universal here in Saskatchewan, but it also 

means growing pains and challenges for how our towns, 

cities and rural areas will be able to handle this growth.  

 

Mr. Speaker, that editorial in the Weyburn Review goes on: 

 

Even with all the construction, for example, there‟s a 

shortage of housing available, and when homes do come 

up for sale, the prices are much higher than they were 

when they were even two years ago. Rental rates have 

shot up with the zero vacancy rate, and coupled with the 

high price of fuel, it has led to an upward spiral in the cost 

of living. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post goes to Weyburn and 

takes a look at what‟s happening in Weyburn. “Weyburn renters 

have no place to go,” says the Leader-Post in an editorial. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why are you so grumpy? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks about 

why am I so grumpy? Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to answer that 

question, unlike members opposite who were asked questions 

earlier today and wouldn‟t answer them. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

happy to answer the question in this very important way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m here to point out to the government that they 

have a job to do. That is what they said prior to the general 

election. That election campaign was largely fought on the basis 

of who can best manage the growth that‟s going to take place in 

this province. The people knew that the groundwork had been 

laid for growth, Mr. Speaker, and they were looking for 

individuals in a government collectively who could best 

manage the growth. It was a message that the Saskatchewan 

Party opposite put out in their material, we can best manage the 

growth. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, you manage the growth in this 

province by managing the problems that come with that growth. 

If you ignore the problems, Mr. Speaker, you ignore your 

ability to manage growth. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the minister opposite says to me, why 

am I so grumpy, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not grumpy. I‟m not grumpy 

in the sense that, oh my goodness the sky is falling. I‟m grumpy 

in the sense that people are telling me this government is not 

doing their job. They are not managing in the interests of the 

ordinary people of Saskatchewan, those who are experiencing 

difficulties in managing the growth of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s not just individuals as I pointed out earlier. 

That‟s also municipal governments. And this government has 

got one big task ahead of themselves, Mr. Speaker, in managing 

that file. That file, Mr. Speaker, is almost a year overdue, Mr. 

Speaker. The municipalities are aware of how close we were to 

coming to an agreement on revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. They 

were at the table with us. The members opposite can laugh and 

guffaw all they want. The trouble is the municipal sector 

knows. They‟re not trying to fool anybody over there except 

some people, Mr. Speaker, that are willing to be influenced. 

The municipal sector knows how close we were. 

 

Almost one full year later, Mr. Speaker, and there‟s still no 

announced progress on the revenue sharing file. And what are 

the municipalities hearing now, Mr. Speaker, about a downturn 

in the economy on a national scale, Mr. Speaker? We‟re not 

immune to that in the long term here in Saskatchewan. We‟re 

benefiting now from a couple of years of very sustained and 

strong growth in the resource sector. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, 

this will continue for some time. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the biggest growth, the substantial growth in 

the resource sector, Mr. Speaker, has taken place. It will be 

sustained and it will continue, but municipalities now are 

dealing with the need for additional infrastructure within their 

own borders. They‟re dealing with additional fuel costs for their 

equipment. Every grader that goes on our streets, roads, and 

municipal roads, Mr. Speaker, uses fuel at the expense of the 

municipal taxpayer. Mr. Speaker, that increase in price is a 

direct result of the increase in the cost of living in here. 

 

Revenue sharing is important for municipalities. And, Mr. 

Speaker, municipalities are still, are still having to collect the 

school tax that this government has said, Mr. Speaker, they are 

going to reduce significantly. We are not yet seeing any positive 

results on the education property tax reduction front, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s still speeches over there, Mr. Speaker. Nothing has 

gone forward as far as the average municipality is concerned. 

We have to deal with those issues, Mr. Speaker. We have to 

deal with those issues, and we can‟t continue to just leave 

things the way they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The school divisions are also incurring additional costs. Think 

of all those school buses we‟re running on rural roads, Mr. 

Speaker. Every one of those school buses is using fuel that two 

years ago was about half the cost of what it is today, even with 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1537 

the reduced costs, the price of the fuel today, Mr. Speaker. And 

those school divisions have to pay for those costs. The costs of 

education, providing education, and the infrastructure to support 

education is also increasing, Mr. Speaker. We need to be sure 

that we‟re dealing with the big picture. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of Saskatchewan are 

looking for the plan — the grand plan. They thought that with 

the Throne Speech there‟d be some recognition that in the 

course of this four-year mandate that this government has, that 

there would be some plan that would acknowledge that their 

role is to understand what people need and provide a way of 

delivering it. And instead, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got a reiteration 

of the lines that the leader of the government, the Premier, put 

out prior to sending out his troops across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to do more than tax reductions next year. 

We need to do more than say that we‟re going to put more 

money into infrastructure. We need to identify for example, Mr. 

Speaker, what that infrastructure is. Is infrastructure just roads 

and bridges or is it also our community airports? Is it our 

community recreational facilities? Mr. Speaker, what has 

happened to the recreation fund that this government started 

with revenues received from the resource sector? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when my government under my premier identified 

additional resource revenues, what did we do with it, Mr. 

Speaker? We put it into community planning. We put it into 

community planning for recreation, cultural facilities — $100 

million, Mr. Speaker, in some of the first monies that we 

received. What‟s happened to that, Mr. Speaker? And where is 

this government‟s commitment to helping provide recreational 

opportunities for vulnerable families and communities where, 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of living is costing them considerable 

challenges? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one other quotation that I wanted to put on 

the record, Mr. Speaker, and I just read this this morning. This 

is a article, again in the Leader Post . And the headline, Mr. 

Speaker, interested me because it‟s happening in my local area 

as well. The headline in the paper reads “Stoughton adjusting to 

booming economy.” It‟s a great little article, Mr. Speaker, and I 

recommend it to everybody in the Leader-Post today. But I did 

get this interesting paragraph right in the middle, right in the 

middle, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Housing is a municipal priority. Homes that sold for 

$60,000 a couple of years ago now list for more than 

$200,000 [Leader-Post article goes on to say], a 

meaningless figure if the potential seller‟s plan is to 

remain in Stoughton and to live indoors. 

 

Interesting point, Mr. Speaker. The community is booming, Mr. 

Speaker, community is booming but if somebody wants to 

benefit from that boom locally they may find themselves living 

in a tent outdoors. Further, Mr. Speaker, how is it their fault or 

how is it their responsibility? The article goes on: 

 

Council [Stoughton council] intends to annex a 

quarter-section for new residential and commercial 

development . . . 

 

Good for them. They clap for it. But, Mr. Speaker: 

. . . but the proposed rezoning is held up in Regina, where 

provincial government approval runs much slower than 

the oil business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re trying to build communities. We‟re trying 

to build communities with all the component points. The most 

important part of the community, Mr. Speaker, is shelter — 

shelter for individuals who are going to go to work. They‟ve got 

to afford to buy the house, and, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve got to 

have the land available. 

 

This government has a lot of responsibility. They have to stand 

up. They have to take that responsibility. And they have to 

move forward. That‟s what a Throne Speech is all about, Mr. 

Speaker, and we heard none of that. There‟s no vision. There‟s 

no plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There‟s absolutely no hope that the people of Saskatchewan 

have that this is a government that can spend their money 

wisely — the people‟s money, Mr. Speaker. The only real 

decision they have to make, Mr. Speaker, is to spend all this 

money. Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re here to ensure that they 

understand what the people need that money spent on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I will be supporting the amendment tonight, Mr. Speaker. I will 

be opposing the government‟s motion in support of the Throne 

Speech. And, Mr. Speaker, I am hoping that there are members 

opposite who realize that the people they talked to this summer, 

who talked about the need for health care and housing and 

education and not just tax reductions, Mr. Speaker, that some of 

those people will be able to stand up and vote with the 

opposition tonight in support of the amendment. Mr. Speaker, I 

challenge them to think. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

First of all as many of my colleagues on this side have done, I‟d 

like to welcome the newest member to the Assembly. Well I 

don‟t know the gentleman very well. We did run into each other 

in the hall last week, and we did have a chance to chat for a 

minute. And I expressed to him privately what I‟d like to 

express to him publicly today. I very much enjoyed the last, 

almost a year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Hard to believe a year‟s 

flown by that fast, and I very much enjoyed it. 

 

And I certainly hope the member from Cumberland will enjoy 

his three years in the House. And at the end of that, I certainly 

hope he enjoys his return to private life. I‟d like to mention I do 

feel sorry for him actually with the choice of seatmates, but rest 

assured . . . I‟d like to assure him that with rookies we don‟t get 

to pick our seatmate. Oh let me rephrase that: I have a 

wonderful seatmate, but I do sit across from the member from 

Carrot River Valley. So I‟ve been punished as well. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the last several months have been very 

interesting for me. I‟ve had the opportunity to travel around the 



1538 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

Rosetown-Elrose constituency, both just travelling around and 

talking to constituents and also going to a number of 

community events. I want to tell you about some of the things 

I‟ve heard from some of my constituents, but before I do that 

I‟d like to tell you about some of the events I attended. 

 

I‟ve been to many things. I‟ve been to fowl suppers — too 

many to count, and I‟ve got the waistline to prove it. I‟ve 

attended grand openings. I‟ve been in parades. I‟ve even been in 

golf tournaments, Mr. Speaker, not near as many golf 

tournaments as my good friend and colleague from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy who golfs a lot more than any of us. But 

I‟ve played golf with him, Mr. Speaker, and he certainly needs 

the work on his game. So that‟s okay. 

 

I‟ve enjoyed attending those events, and I‟d like to tell you 

about just a few of them. I mentioned that I‟ve attended some 

parades. One of them was in Outlook in July. And it was for 

their centennial; it was 100 years for the town of Outlook. They 

had a huge crowd for the entire weekend. It was a massive 

turnout. The organizers were thrilled and they deserve a pat on 

the back. And for the parade itself, there was many, many 

people lining the streets. It was just heartwarming to see all the 

young kids in that community, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And Outlook is a thriving community, and there are many, 

many exciting developments in that area. One of those exciting 

developments is a new residential development. It‟s done by a 

gentleman by the name of Murray Silljer, who‟s put a lot of 

time and effort into it. And it‟s just out of town along the river 

to the north. It‟s a beautiful, scenic development. And I was 

very pleased to be able to attend the sod-turning ceremony. 

 

The Minister of Environment was at that ceremony in 

recognition of some of the leading edge, 

environmentally-friendly initiatives that are in that project. It 

was great to have her there, and the citizens of the community 

really appreciated her attendance. After the sod-turning 

ceremony, the mayor of Outlook, Bob Stephenson, took the 

minister and I on a quick tour of some of the new developments 

around the town. 

 

I also spent a very enjoyable evening in Outlook a while ago, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was honoured to be their guest speaker at 

their annual Citizen of the Year banquet. The Citizen of the 

Year for 2008 was a gentleman by the name of David Alm who 

is a very worthy recipient. And he received his aware at a 

wonderful event put on by the Outlook and District Chamber of 

Commerce. The Chamber is led by a good friend of mine, Lyle 

Rankin, and the Chamber in Outlook is doing a wonderful job, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

While I‟m speaking about Outlook, just a few weeks ago I had 

the good fortune to attend the official opening of the Outlook 

campus of the Great Plains regional college. Great Plains 

regional college is the amalgamation of Prairie West Regional 

College and Cypress Hills Regional College. Another big event 

for Outlook this year, I had the good fortune to attend the 

opening of a brand new hospital with the Minister of Health. 

 

Great things are happening in Outlook and great things are 

happening all over the constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 

attended numerous events in my hometown of Rosetown. One 

in particular stands out, and I‟d like to tell you a little bit about 

it. A couple of months ago the brand-new Rosetown golf course 

club house was officially opened. The project‟s been in the 

works for a couple of years, with the construction starting in 

September of 2007. It‟s a very functional, practical, 

well-designed building, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the most 

impressive part of this project is that it was funded completely 

by donations. 

 

In 2007 the golf course was not able to acquire any grant money 

to assist them, so President Jim Duffus and the members of the 

golf course executive tackled it on their own. They worked hard 

to get donations large and small from many, many people, and 

it‟s my understanding that the entire project was completed 

without borrowing any money. The building cost is 

approximately a quarter of a million dollars. I‟d like to 

commend all the volunteers who donated both time and money 

to the project. Those type of projects can‟t be done without all 

the volunteer labour, and I take my hat off to those people. 

 

Speaking of community volunteers, Mr. Speaker, the next 

community event I want to tell you a little bit about is a classic 

example of the volunteerism in small-town Saskatchewan. The 

event, which is sponsored by SaskTel, was sending donations to 

Uganda to help AIDS-ravaged and poverty-stricken Uganda 

citizens, and it‟s from the good people in Eston. 

 

This two-day event started on Saturday, September 20 with 

more than 100 volunteers from the Eston area at the old hospital 

to sort and box the donations. Now I say the old hospital, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because that building is no longer used as a 

hospital because it was closed in the 1990s by the NDP 

government. Not only were the volunteers from the Eston 

community, the donations were all from there as well. Example 

of donations were medical and school supplies and clothes for 

the men, women, and children of northern Uganda who have 

been living in war-torn displacement camps. 

 

The event continued on Sunday, September 21, which is World 

Peace Day. There were so many donations — in fact too many 

for the container. The container is 10 feet high, 8 feet wide, and 

40 feet long. The donations were so great that a newspaper 

reported that they exceeded what SaskTel would normally 

receive for a container project in Saskatchewan‟s largest centres 

like Saskatoon and Regina. All this from small town Eston. The 

excess donations were given to the needy through another 

container project. 

 

You know, I learned a lesson at that event as well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Eston is the hometown of our Minister of Energy and 

Resources and he was at the event as I was, and the president of 

SaskTel, and they had a podium and they had a brief 

presentation. The minister spoke and when he left the podium 

he went down and all the volunteers at the event were wearing 

jerseys made out of a T-shirt type material and so they could be 

identified. When the minister left the podium, they presented 

him with a jersey as I was speaking. And as he was putting the 

jersey on I couldn‟t help but make a comment that it was fitting 

a little snug and he must have put on a few pounds since his 

playing days. 

 

Got a bit of a chuckle. The minister has got a great sense of 

humour. He laughed about it. I, as I mentioned earlier at the 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1539 

fowl suppers, I have put quite a few pounds on since election 

time. When I left the podium they gave me a jersey as well. 

Now you have to put this in perspective, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

The minister is very highly regarded and deservedly so in his 

hometown. When I left the podium they presented me with a 

jersey so I started to put it on, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was 

tough. I had to wiggle into that thing. But after the comments I 

had made about the minister, I couldn‟t stop. 

 

So I put it on. It wasn‟t good, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I looked like 

a pig in a blanket. Once I got it on, let‟s just say it wasn‟t pretty. 

Now it wasn‟t as bad as . . . I remember an infamous speech 

from a few months ago about possibly the member from 

Cannington in a Speedo. It wasn‟t that bad, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it was bad. So as soon as I had it on, I wiggled 

back out of it much to the delight of the people who had given it 

to me. And then I looked at the label. It was a small, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So I learned a valuable lesson there. When you 

are in Eston, even in fun you don‟t poke fun at the Minster of 

Energy and Resources. The people there are not only proud of 

him, they are very protective of him as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to mention in particular two of the 

volunteers who were involved in that project in Eston. This 

project was spearheaded by Glenys Getz and Marie Knutson. 

They both had worked on a similar charitable project and they 

wanted to involve the wonderful community of Eston in 

something similar. 

 

I also want to acknowledge the town council. They passed a 

resolution to help with the collection and storage of the 

donations and they provided storage space for the project. And 

finally I also want to mention some wonderful young people 

who also helped by volunteering, and those were the student 

volunteers from Eston Composite School and also from Eston 

College. Eston is a wonderful, charitable community, Mr. 

Speaker, and I feel so privileged to represent them in this 

legislature. 

 

In my home area, a gentleman by the name of Ken Ogle, 

long-term reeve for the RM [rural municipality] of St. Andrews 

stepped down as reeve, is being replaced by another fine 

gentleman by the name of Garry Nisbet. I had the opportunity 

to get together at a small gathering for Ken Ogle to recognize 

his years of service to the RM, and I just want to publicly thank 

him for all the work he did. 

 

Also, another person, a very good friend of mine near and dear 

to my heart who was very active in my election campaign and 

also in my nomination, the reeve of the RM of Pleasant Valley 

— one of the RMs that I worked for before going into politics 

— Jerry Spence, long-term reeve there is also leaving. They had 

a get-together for him, and I was very pleased to be invited, and 

he‟s being very ably replaced by Blake Jeffries. I just want to 

acknowledge all those people and all the work they‟ve done for 

that community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I met with my constituents at these community 

events and just touring around the constituency talking to 

people, it was gratifying to see how optimistic the citizens of 

this great province really are. And when we discussed what the 

financial priorities of this government should be, many people 

talked about debt reduction. Saskatchewan people tend to be 

level-headed, practical people. They realize that too much debt 

is a burden that stifles growth, and they realize that debt 

reduction will save millions of dollars in interest — millions of 

dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that can be used towards 

increasing the quality of life for all our citizens. 

 

Already, thanks to our Growth and Financial Security Act, the 

debt has been reduced dramatically. Several of my colleagues 

have referred to the rate of debt reduction as $5,000 per minute. 

Just during the speech from the member from North Battleford, 

massive amounts of money will have been paid off. 

 

Another topic I heard many, many times from the good people 

of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency was the infrastructure 

problem. Under the previous government, highways were left to 

deteriorate, schools were left to deteriorate, and hospitals were 

left to deteriorate — the ones that weren‟t closed. Highways in 

particular are a huge issue in my constituency as the former 

NDP government turned their back on rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Last spring our government announced a $1 billion 

infrastructure fund. And I‟m thrilled, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

this amount will be increased by 50 per cent to a total of $1.5 

billion. We have a long way to go to recover from years of NDP 

rule, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we‟re well on our way. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the good people of Rosetown-Elrose 

are also concerned about high taxes. Our government is 

implementing the largest income tax cut in Saskatchewan 

history. We‟re raising personal income tax exemptions to the 

point that a family of four in Saskatchewan will now have the 

highest level of personal tax exemptions of any province in 

Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — And the greatest impact will be for low-income 

people — people who need it the most. And 80,000 

Saskatchewan people will no longer pay income tax at all. 

 

And speaking of lower taxes, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you 

about education tax on property. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite like to claim that our government hasn‟t moved fast 

enough on this issue. And yet what did they do during 16 years 

in power? Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has kept our 

campaign promise to increase the property tax credit — promise 

made, promise kept. Our election platform also called for a 

long-term solution, and that‟s exactly what we‟ll do, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

On the other hand, what did the previous government do? In 

2003 the then premier, now the Leader of the Opposition, he 

announced at the SARM convention — the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities annual convention — he 

announced, and I quote: “The status quo is not on.” And then 

what happened? Nothing, for a year. 

 

At the 2004 SARM convention, he again announced, the status 

quo is not on. Mr. Speaker, that seemed to be typical of the 

previous government. In fact I want to read a quote to you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. This is a quote. 

 

We are pledged to do away with the education tax as soon 



1540 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

as we get the new sources of revenue to take the place of 

the revenue now realized from that tax. When we develop 

new sources of revenue sufficient to supplant the revenue 

now raised from the tax, we shall do away with the tax 

because we consider it regressive legislation. 

 

You know where that quote was from, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It 

was from August 31, 1944, and it was none other than then 

premier, Tommy Douglas. 

 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during debate just the other day 

in this House, the member from Regina Dewdney said that we 

should show — get this — he said we should show bravery and 

take education tax off property. That‟s what he said, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and yet they didn‟t do it when they were in 

power. That member from Regina Dewdney was talking about 

leadership and bravery. Those are his words. I guess he has a 

much different interpretation of those words than I do. I guess 

to him they mean criticizing your colleagues and calling them 

out in the media and undermining your leader. Well to that, Mr. 

Speaker, I say no thank you. Mr. Speaker, I prefer the 

leadership on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Reiter: — A brilliant, articulate man who is not only 

leading this caucus but also the citizens of this province, who 

not only see the outstanding potential in our Premier, but also 

finally, the outstanding potential in this great province. 

 

I‟ll take that kind of leadership, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ll be voting against the 

amendment and will be very, very proud to vote for the original 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I‟m certainly pleased to be able to enter into the reply 

to the Throne Speech. 

 

One of the hazards of entering late into the debate is that a lot of 

good things have been said about this Throne Speech. And there 

isn‟t a lot more that one can add. However, this speech . . . 

there‟s many good things that is in the speech, and I think I will 

just reiterate some of those. I will also try to perhaps bring a 

unique dimension to the debate this evening. 

 

But before I do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to first of all, 

as other members have done, thank those who help us in 

performing our duties as elected members. I‟d like to thank my 

family, my wife Marlene, my son Kristen, who looks after the 

farm whilst I‟m away attending to the duties as a member of 

this legislature. 

And as all members in the legislature, in this Assembly know, 

we certainly cannot get along and could not perform our duties 

and serve our constituents without the very able help of our 

constituency assistants. And I have two of the very best, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And I would certainly like to at this time thank 

both Carol and Sandra for all the support and all the good work 

that they do in my constituency office. They look after the 

inquiries and the needs of the constituents, they keep me on 

track and are certainly a great help to myself and a great service 

to the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to, along with other 

members from this side of the House, extend my welcome to 

the new member from Cumberland. I listened closely to his 

maiden speech last week. I must say that I was very impressed 

with his comments, and I‟m sure he will be a very able 

representative of the constituents and the people of 

Cumberland. 

 

I would offer a word of caution or perhaps, if I may be 

permitted, a word of advice. Those of us who have entered this 

life as a mid-life career change, perhaps we can bring a 

somewhat different perspective to this House, but we have to be 

careful that we are not drawn in, which is very easy and we 

often do that — get drawn in to the very partisan nature of the 

House. 

 

There is certainly place for partisan remarks and partisan 

conduct, but we have to, I think, all of us need to remember that 

we are serving the people of this province. And even though our 

style of government is an adversarial framework that we operate 

under, I think we have to occasionally step back and remember 

who we are representing and who we are working for. However, 

as I said, that doesn‟t rule out some spirited debate which can 

be of a partisan nature at times. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the ninth Throne Speech that I‟ve 

had the privilege of replying to and I have to say — and I 

probably am a bit partisan at this point in time — but it is one of 

the best throne speeches that we‟ve had in this House. It is 

forward-thinking. It has meat to it. It is, as throne speeches are, 

they are generally of a nature that are quite broad-based and so 

on, but this Throne Speech refers to specific initiatives. It 

demonstrates a new energy. And I think the people of the 

province will be well served when all the initiatives that are 

contained in this Throne Speech are implemented. And I have 

no doubt that they will be implemented. 

 

Some of the highlights, as members of this side of the House 

and members opposite have mentioned, are the fiscal initiatives, 

tax cuts, debt reduction, the commitment to increased 

infrastructure spending, and also a provision for fiscal security. 

And these are important things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but in my 

mind they are not the most important things. 

 

The most important things are the fiscal initiatives give this 

government the ability to implement a number of social 

initiatives that are outlined in the Throne Speech. Things like 

increased daycare spaces, more pre-kindergarten programs, a 

whole host of initiatives that have been announced by the 

Minister of Social Services and the Minister of Health for 

people with disabilities, seniors, and the disadvantaged in our 

province. Those are the people that we need to . . . and the 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1541 

reason why we need to have a good balance sheet in the 

province so that we can look after the most disadvantaged, and 

we can lay the groundwork for future financial and social 

security in our province. And that‟s what this Throne Speech 

does, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As the philosophers tell us, it‟s financial security and financial 

responsibility are the means to provide the good life for all 

people of the province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am sure all members of this Assembly 

and people of our province are certainly aware of the recent 

turmoil in the financial markets, in the commodity markets 

around the world. We‟ve seen a historic meltdown in financial 

markets across the world, wide swings in the various indices, 

whether it be the TSX in Canada or the Dow Jones in the US 

[United States] — unprecedented downturns. And then the next 

day we‟ll see, at least in the last couple of weeks, some run-up 

in stock prices. It all presents a great deal of uncertainty in the 

world markets, and not only in the financial markets but also in 

the commodity markets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We‟ve seen the price of oil drop dramatically. We‟ve seen 

banks, investment banks in particularly in the US, declare 

bankruptcy. We‟ve seen governments around the world having 

to step up with huge support for the banking system to ensure 

that we don‟t have a repeat of 1929. In Canada we have been 

fairly fortune in that our banking system seems to be one of the 

most stable around the world. But even so, the federal Finance 

minister has put some measures in place to ensure that we don‟t 

suffer the same fate as some of the other countries. 

 

As I mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something that this 

government and members of this province keep a very close eye 

is the price of oil. And we‟ve seen, as I‟ve said, very wide 

swings or great changes in the price of crude oil. And from a 

high in July of $147 a barrel where today — I have to admit I 

check the cable station BNN [Business News Network] which 

I‟ve only done in the last month or so — I never really paid 

much attention to it, but the price of oil closed just under $64 a 

barrel today, a dramatic change from the most recent highs. 

 

But oil and gas and gold and copper and silver aren‟t the only 

commodities that have had dramatic price decreases. Our 

agricultural commodities have seen similar decreases from their 

most recent highs, again in July. In fact if you take charts of the 

price swings in the oil and gas markets and overlay them with 

charts that show the changes in the ag commodity prices, they 

mirror each other. For an example, we‟ve seen canola, which 

put in a high again in early July of about $725 a tonne. It closed 

today at approximately $425 a metric tonne or a change of 

about $6.80 a bushel in a matter of a few months. That‟s 

dramatic to our producers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Other agricultural commodities have seen similar declines in 

price. And yet the cost of inputs and things such as fuels and 

other inputs that our agriculture producers require to produce 

next year‟s crop, we‟ve seen a bit of a backing off of prices but 

nowhere near to the extent that the commodity prices have. And 

unless some things change, we‟re going to see some challenges 

in the upcoming year in our agricultural sector. 

 

There‟s a couple of sayings in the commodity markets. I‟ve 

been an observer and a participant in the commodity markets in 

one fashion or another for many years, and there‟s a couple of 

sayings that I think at least used to hold some truths. I‟m not so 

sure under current conditions whether they apply completely 

now. But one of the sayings is that high commodity prices are 

like airplanes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, and we‟ve never 

left one up there yet. And that‟s been very evident here in the 

last couple of months. 

 

And another saying is that there‟s no better cure for low prices 

than low prices and that refers to eventually commodities. The 

reason why commodities are a low price is because there‟s an 

oversupply. And a low price will discourage production and 

therefore the market will correct itself. As I said, I‟m not so 

sure whether they apply completely now because of the changes 

in dynamics in the markets around the world. 

 

But the reason I mention this is to demonstrate the impact of 

what has happened in the last few months. And this is a period 

where those . . . That brings me to another catchphrase, I guess, 

that is often heard in markets, and that is that cash is king. And 

this is a time where I think that does hold true. This is a time 

where prudent investors, prudent producers are putting aside 

sums of cash because of the uncertainty. And that‟s I think what 

we saw in this Speech from the Throne. And we will see that in 

the budget where it‟s necessary to insure the future prosperity 

of this province, in that we can continue to see the economic 

growth in this province. 

 

We need to have a larger than normal amount of cash in the 

bank. And that‟s why we‟ve seen the Premier and the Minister 

of Finance tell the people of this province that we need to have 

that $2 billion in the bank. And even though the members 

opposite sometimes criticize us for having that amount of 

money in the bank, I think the people in the province see that as 

a very prudent move, and it will insure future prosperity for all 

citizens in this province in the upcoming years. 

 

Some of the other initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that caught 

my attention in the Throne Speech, and I‟m very proud to be 

supporting that Throne Speech, is the creation of Innovation 

Saskatchewan. What Innovation Saskatchewan will do will help 

those developing sectors of our economy to participate and 

become established entities within the new economy. And 

things like information technology and those other areas of our 

economy that are struggling or have struggled in the past are 

growing. They need perhaps some help and expertise and 

advice and those sorts of things. And Innovation Saskatchewan 

will address some of those things. 

 

And why is that important, you might ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

Well if you look at Saskatchewan‟s economy, a large part of 

our economy is resource-based, and we‟ve obviously seen the 

benefits of that in the last few years where there was a large 

demand throughout the world for resources. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Now with all the uncertainty down there, with the slowdown in 

worldwide economies, will that demand continue? We hope it 

will, but it‟ll probably be at a reduced rate. So therefore what 

we need to do in this province is develop other sectors of our 

economy that will pick up the slack when we see a bit of a 



1542 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

downturn in the main sectors of our economy. And so that‟s 

why I‟m so pleased to see that Innovation Saskatchewan will be 

put in place and will work towards securing financial security 

for this province for many years to come. 

 

A third area that I would like to talk about in this reply to the 

Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that area in education, 

and particularly the points made and the part that talked about 

making treaty education a required part of our curriculum in our 

schools. It‟s something that has been long overdue. I listened to 

the member from Saskatoon speak about it earlier today, and 

when she said that the former NDP government started it and 

they didn‟t think that it was the proper time to make it 

mandatory, that may or may not be so. Perhaps we could have 

moved on it a little earlier, but I think now is certainly the time 

where we need to move forward with that. 

 

And also the Minister of Education mentioned earlier today that 

Saskatchewan will be hosting the Aboriginal education summit 

in 2009. And I commend the minister for taking that initiative. 

It is again something that we need to do because, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in the area of education, particularly as it pertains to 

our First Nation people, there are some huge problems. And 

there are problems that were brought home and highlighted last 

week in a report by the C.D. Howe Institute. It was authored by 

John Richards and it was entitled A Disastrous Gap — How 

High Schools Have Failed Canada’s Aboriginal Students. 

 

And that report highlighted the fact that the number of high 

school graduates in the Aboriginal communities is way below 

the number of high school graduates in the non-Aboriginal 

community, and particularly when you look at the graduation 

rate on First Nations schools on the reserves. The overall 

graduation rate in non-Aboriginal students in Saskatchewan is 

around 90 per cent. Yet the graduation rate on First Nations 

schools on reserves is 38 per cent in Saskatchewan, which is 

totally unacceptable. Manitoba and Alberta‟s rates are even 

lower. And this is a problem that we must address, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

There are issues and reasons why the graduation rate is low, and 

it‟s an issue that must be addressed by all levels of government: 

the federal government, the provincial government, and First 

Nations governments, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When I was first 

elected, I was given the critic duties of post-secondary 

education, and through those duties I attended a number of 

meetings and forums where First Nations leaders spoke about 

the importance of education. They said that education was the 

First Nations new buffalo, and I absolutely agree with them. 

But we‟re not getting the job done. We must do better. 

 

We‟ve got to solve those roadblocks that are preventing us from 

doing that better job. We‟ve got to work together. We‟ve got to 

put aside the jurisdictional issues. It‟s all too easy for the 

province to say, well it‟s a federal issue, for First Nations 

leaders to say, well it‟s in our area of jurisdiction and we will 

decide. We all have to work together to get the job done 

because without a proper education, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

only leads to poverty. In fact there‟s a quote in the report that I 

would like to read into the record. And I quote from the report: 

 

It is almost universally the case that low education levels 

condemn people to fail in the modern industrial economy. 

No truer words have been said, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

have seven First Nations in my constituency. Through our 

family we have witnessed some of the barriers that are there in 

place and the results of not solving those barriers. So as I said, 

we must work together, and I know that through the leadership 

of the Minister of Education — I talked to him earlier today and 

on a number of occasions about this issue — I know that this 

government will be working hard to find the solutions. The 

minister for First Nations and Métis affairs is certainly on board 

with this, and I invite all members of this Assembly to work 

towards solving these issues so that all citizens of our province 

can benefit and participate in the economy. 

 

I think probably another quotation from the report probably 

sums it up more aptly than what I can. And it talks about what 

will happen if we don‟t solve these problems, and I quote: 

 

Without an intense pursuit of better education outcomes, 

Canadian governments — Aboriginal as well as 

non-Aboriginal — will serve the next generation of 

Aboriginal students as inadequately as they have the 

current one. 

 

It‟s a major challenge to us. Now the report doesn‟t have the 

answers, and I‟m guessing why it doesn‟t have the answers is 

because there aren‟t any easy answers to this problem. But what 

I‟m asking and what I‟m saying today is that we need to have a 

commitment to work on this issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

we can do that in this province. We have the resources to do 

that, and I believe we have the leadership. And if we have the 

co-operation from both sides of the House, we certainly can 

move a long ways into serving and solving those problems. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will conclude my remarks 

by saying that I will certainly be supporting the main motion. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure for me to stand here today and represent the 

constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook. This is my 10th year in 

the legislature. I am not a seasoned veteran by a long shot, but 

anyway I just want to say to the people of the 

Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency that I thanked them a year 

ago for allowing me to serve as their voice in the legislature for 

the problems that they have in that constituency. 

 

Before I get into the Throne Speech I‟d like to mention some 

thank yous. First of all I want to start with my wife, Sheila, of 

34 years, and my kids — my three boys and their families — 

Newton, Tanya, Courtney, and Shayln, my two granddaughters; 

my second son, Deny; and my third son, Micky, and Meagen, 

who in a couple weeks will be expecting their first child. And as 

grandparents third time around, we‟re anxiously waiting for that 

to happen. 

 

I also want to say a special thanks to the rock in my life, and 

that‟s my mom. My mom is the one that encourages me to press 

forward with this and do the right things for the right reasons. If 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1543 

it‟s worth fighting for, she says, then stand up and fight for it. 

And that‟s what has encouraged me to get into politics in the 

first place, and that is what continued me to go on forward in 

this political life. 

 

I also want to take the time to thank my two CAs [constituency 

assistant] in Spiritwood, Jody Henderson and Patty Heisler. 

Both are excellent ladies that serve my constituency well, that 

serve my office well. And one of the things that is nice about 

my office is the first time you open the door, you get a warm 

greeting from these two ladies. They do a fine job, and I 

couldn‟t be here and doing the job I do if it wasn‟t for them. 

 

I also would like to thank my constituency president, Mr. Les 

Anderson. Les Anderson has been my constituency president 

for the 10 years that I‟ve been an MLA. He is very resourceful. 

He is the eyes and ears from my executive that keeps me on the 

straight and narrow, and sometimes that‟s a little difficult — my 

wife complains about that also — but he does a great job. And 

with the constituency people that I have on my executive, they 

do a great job helping me, and I want to thank each and every 

one of them and especially Les Anderson, my president. 

 

I also want to thank or say thank you to the people from the 

Shellbrook constituency, especially my hometown of 

Spiritwood who, when I go in the morning for coffee, they‟re 

always bugging me about what‟s new in the world of politics. 

They are probably my biggest criticizers because it seems like 

nothing I do is right, but I know jokingly they mean well and 

they‟re just giving me extra support. 

 

I also would like to welcome to the legislature, as everybody 

has, the newest member to this legislature, the member from 

Cumberland. I want to say to him that the other day he gave his 

first maiden speech, and I think he did a marvellous job. I 

remember all too well some 10 years ago when I did my first 

speech to the throne, my knees were banging so hard you 

couldn‟t probably hear me. You did an excellent job. And also 

today in question period, I want to say, you did an excellent job 

asking questions. I can say to that member that having 

somebody from the North, that has lived in the North, 

understands the problems of the North. So we welcome here in 

the legislature his expertise and his knowledge of the issues in 

the North, and we will listen. 

 

Now for the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there‟s 

many things to be thankful and happy about this Throne 

Speech. 

 

This is the second Throne Speech that I participated in from the 

government side. As eight years of being in opposition, now — 

in 2007 — the majority of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan have given us an overwhelming mandate to serve 

the people of the province, and we are doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — And I remember in 2007 the Throne Speech 

that was given then. And you know, that was just like a breath 

of fresh air. The people said, finally after 16 years of social 

government, we finally get a breath of fresh air and hopefully 

some relief to the problems we have in this problem. And that‟s 

what happened. In 2007 that was a great Throne Speech. 

To top it off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 2008 went beyond. I 

can‟t imagine anybody in the province of Saskatchewan not 

agreeing with this Throne Speech. It gives everything that 

everybody wants in this province, except maybe the 20 

members on that side of the House. But there‟s a reason that 

they‟re on that side of the House. Their job as opposition is to 

disagree, and they will do that. But it‟s ironic, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. In many of the comments from the speeches that we 

have heard from the members opposite, a lot of them do say that 

the speech was good. But the main thing is a lot in that speech 

was good. 

 

There are some problems that have to be adjusted, but we‟ll 

work on that. But I can guarantee you it‟s not like them, 

members over there who said, we‟re just going to get around to 

it. Well for 16 years they were still getting around to it. In 2007 

they gave us the mandate to serve, and we are doing that. 

 

I want to start off, Mr. Speaker, regarding the Throne Speech, 

with comments made by the member from Athabasca. And that 

was quite a speech to say the least. But in his comments he said, 

and I quote, “And you‟ll notice, Mr. Speaker, that they have 

never ever spoke of pre-1991 [years].” Well just in regards to 

that, I can see why he doesn‟t want to talk about the pre-1991 

years is because he was talking about the debt. When they took 

over he said that there was a 15, maybe a 16 million debt. In 

fact I‟m going to read his comment just to make sure, and I 

quote, “. . . the people that have a progressive mind, number 

one is that when we assumed power from those guys, we had 

fifteen and a half, if not $16 billion, debt left by them, left by 

them.” 

 

[20:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe the figure that I remember, 

according to the auditor‟s report, was 15 billion. Now 

everybody knows that it was probably 1 billion a year for the 

eight years that the Conservative government served. Well 

that‟s 8 billion. So you take 8 from 15, what happened to the 7 

billion? Did we accumulate that debt? Absolutely not because 

that was pre-1991. And who was in power before pre-1991? 

Well it was them. They had 7 billion debt, but they won‟t assure 

themselves that they were that debt.  

 

Now pre-1991, I can guarantee many of those members were 

not serving in this House at that time. But remember, but 

remember in 1991 when the Conservative government was in 

power, many of us were not in this House either, but we‟re 

looking after our debt. But those members never ever will say 

that they were responsible for $7 billion debt. Never. 

 

In fact in years previous up to we serving as government, when 

there came a problem — whether it was with agriculture or 

whether it was with health care — they always said, well it‟s a 

federal government problem. Every time that there was an 

issue, it was a federal government problem. It‟s just like them 

— getting out the blame thrower and giving it to somebody else 

because they would not take ownership of the fact that they 

were in power, they were the government, and they should look 

after the issues. 

 

I also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, want to talk about how we are 

looking after the debt. And first of all, the population is growing 



1544 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

— and the population growing will also service that debt — but 

our debt is growing smaller. As you know, like I said, it was 7 

billion to start off with. And this year alone we‟re dropping that 

debt by some 40 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Forty per cent, Mr. Speaker. The revenues 

have tremendous growth, and they will exceed $3 billion. We 

are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, looking after our debt because if you 

run government like a business, the first thing you would do is 

look after your debt. That‟s something the previous 

administration never ever looked at, but we are because we‟re 

responsible. We are a responsible government. 

 

And as many of the members have said, we had a mandate for 

our Premier to go out. The Premier told us to go out and talk to 

our residents, talk to our constituencies on what we‟re going to 

do with this big surplus. Well we did that. And number one on 

the list was servicing our debt, and we are doing that. 

 

The second thing I‟d like to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and that is in regards to health care. And you know, I wasn‟t 

going to say a whole lot about health care till the member from 

North Battleford got on his feet and went on a tirade about what 

he did this summer to constituencies around North Battleford. 

Now I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he didn‟t go out 

on his own. I can guarantee you that the ex-premier, the Leader 

of the Opposition, probably told him to go out and do that. 

 

Well he was in Meadow Lake. He was in Maidstone. He was in 

Spiritwood. I know he was. I wanted to go over to welcome him 

and to have a coffee with him, but I didn‟t. I was out of town. 

But after he was in Spiritwood and left, I talked to some of the 

councillors and the people who were at that meeting. And I 

said, so what did the former minister of Health want? And they 

said, well first of all, after the election a new government 

formed government, gives us a breath of fresh air, and we are 

happy with the status quo — time to move on. 

 

Well he did and he moved on to Shellbrook. Now I know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that there are problems in Shellbrook. It‟s all 

to do with the hospital and the health care. I went through that 

in the election, and I knew that when members from the 

opposition would go there, it would be number one issue to talk 

about. 

 

Now I know, and I think most people around that area know, 

that something has to be done to Shellbrook with the health care 

facilities they have. As you know, in Shellbrook they have two 

facilities. They have a hospital which is somewhat old, and they 

have the long-term care facility. Their focus is to attach the two 

together to become a health care facility, and I think that‟s a 

great idea. That‟s what the governments of today look at now in 

order to get better services out of both facilities. 

 

It‟s ironic that the problems in Shellbrook and all facilities in 

the province of Saskatchewan only come to light after the 

election of 2007. When the former minister of Health, the 

member from North Battleford was the minister, there was no 

problems. It‟s ironic. And I can guarantee you the people from 

Shellbrook are working extremely hard to raise money for 

capital for this project. They‟re doing a great job of raising 

money. 

 

But Shellbrook‟s not the only facility that has a problem like 

they have. There are many facilities in the province of 

Saskatchewan that have the same kind of issues — a lot to do 

with health. The Minister of Health is right by saying health is 

the number one issue, and that is exactly right. 

 

Speaking of health, this summer when many of my colleagues 

were out doing parades and special events in the summertime, 

unfortunately July 15 I decided to take two weeks off and take a 

two-week holiday. So I decided to do an internal audit of our 

health care system from Spiritwood to Prince Albert, and I 

ended up in the hospital in Prince Albert in ICU [intensive care 

unit] in a coma. 

 

So the Minister of Health asked me how it was, what kind of 

audit I did, and I politely told him I was in a coma and I don‟t 

remember. But I know that the facility in Shellbrook is old and 

it needs some updates. And I know that our Ministry of Health 

will be looking at that and addressing it as time goes on. 

 

To the people of Shellbrook, they do need something. And they 

are working hard to do it and I hope in the years, very short 

term, that something will happen in that regards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue I want to talk about is in regards to 

the population growth. I‟ve mentioned that our population has 

grown extensively; in fact just in one year we stopped the 

bleeding of people moving out of the province into other parts 

of Canada, and our growth is 16,000 people. 

 

If we can continue to do that every year, we‟ll bring this 

province up to what it should be. The issue around that is the 

fact that the longer we stay as a Sask Party government, this 

will happen. We do not ever want to let the NDP back in power 

again to destroy the work that we have done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to the Throne Speech, which I say was 

an awesome Throne Speech, and I‟m glad to participate in the 

debate regarding it, I just want to give a couple mentions of 

some people that endorse the Throne Speech. And I quote: 

 

We like this emphasis on investing in infrastructure. 

They‟re [the Sask Party government are] starting to think 

two, and three and five and 10 years ahead down the road, 

and that‟s what infrastructure dollars do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the person that made that comment was Steve 

McLellan, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. The second one is, and I 

quote: 

 

Tax relief, debt reduction, infrastructure spending, all of 

those are priorities . . . [in our government]. So they‟re 

listening to small business. 

 

. . . Our members have always said Crowns shouldn‟t be 

risking millions of taxpayer dollars on these risky 

ventures. The track record hasn‟t been that great. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the person that mentioned that was Marilyn 

Braun-Pollon from the Saskatchewan CFIB [Canadian 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1545 

Federation of Independent Business]. 

 

The next one is, I quote: 

 

There is reason to believe the government has been 

prudent and taken a very positive step (to cut taxes and 

reduce the debt). 

 

The person saying that was Lee Harding from the Canadian 

taxpayers association. 

 

And the last one I want to mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is: 

 

The political risks associated with out-of-province 

investments — which are by nature commercial 

investments, that can go sour — there‟s no real upside for 

a government. 

 

And this is from Ken Rasmussen with the graduate school of 

public policy. 

 

Those are all comments, Mr. Speaker, of the positive that 

people had on this Throne Speech. And those are only a few. 

Many, many people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

thrilled with this Throne Speech. And that‟s why many of the 

colleagues here have said what a great thing this is for each one 

of their constituencies, that this Throne Speech has given life, 

new breath to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I can‟t for the life of me understand why the members 

opposite can‟t see what a great Throne Speech it is and vote for 

it. I mean amendment to it means nothing to the content of this 

Throne Speech. And a vote for this Throne Speech is what I 

would believe the right thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another point that I want to bring up. But it just so 

happens that most mornings, especially on a Saturday morning, 

I go to the coffee shop in Spiritwood or the surrounding 

communities and I talk to the people in the restaurant. And 

many of them are seniors. 

 

And I just want to point out some of the things we are doing for 

the seniors in the province of Saskatchewan, which there has 

never been nothing done in this province since 1992. And who 

was in power in 1992 but the social democrats — the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, when you look at the letters N-D-P, to 

me that stands for no darn plan. And that‟s what‟s happened to 

this government for years and years. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. As members are speaking in the 

Assembly, I would ask them to consider the rules and the 

decorum of the Assembly and word their comments in the 

manner that would be appropriate to members of the Assembly. 

Member from Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In regards to the 

seniors of this province, the Saskatchewan Party government 

made changes that will no doubt benefit a number of 

low-income seniors who qualify for funding and programs. The 

Saskatchewan government will more than double the seniors‟ 

income plan, SIP benefit, formerly known as the Saskatchewan 

Income Plan, from $90 to $190 per month for senior citizens . . . 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — And from 72.50 to 155 each per month per 

couple. Now isn‟t that a great thing for our seniors who have 

worked and toiled for this province for years and years and 

years? I can guarantee there isn‟t one senior out there that isn‟t 

in favour of this. They finally see and realize that a change of 

government will bring prosperity to them as seniors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — This investment will improve quality of life 

provided for Saskatchewan seniors with a much-needed $1,200 

per year, which is roughly $100 a month. The new maximum 

income eligibility to receive benefits will be 18,593.64 instead 

of the previous amount of 15,953.64 — a well-deserved 

increase to our senior citizens of this province. This will double 

the number of seniors eligible for SIP from approximately 

10,000 seniors to about 20,000 seniors. These benefits will now 

be available to about 10,000 more seniors in Saskatchewan and 

changes will take place effective January 1, 2009. Mr. Speaker, 

I can guarantee you the seniors are pleased with this Throne 

Speech — every one of them is thrilled. 

 

When we look at, Mr. Speaker, the highways and infrastructure 

program that was put forth, we look at a government that made 

a monumental commitment to this province in infrastructure in 

last year‟s budget and Throne Speech. And now we‟ve 

increased that percentage from another 50 per cent so now that 

we‟re giving out close to $1.5 billion, a 50 per cent increase to 

our highway infrastructure. And I can guarantee you, Mr. 

Speaker, that when we‟re out talking to our constituents, health 

care was number one, debt, and then also the highways and 

infrastructure. And when we look at infrastructure, we need 

infrastructure dollars that‟s been so drastically needed in this 

province for years that our previous administration, the NDP, 

wouldn‟t look at. We need that for hospitals; we need that for 

schools; we need that for our highways. And the Ministry of 

Highways is doing a great job of looking after the highways in 

this province. We have done some 1400 kilometres of work this 

year alone on highways. 

 

[21:00] 

 

The ministry will also be introducing a five-year rolling plan, a 

rolling plan for highway construction and expansion of primary 

weight highway network. This plan will use clearly defined 

criteria to establish a method of determining in order in which 

highways should be repaired. And I think that is something 

desperately needed in this province. We have probably the 

province that has the most highways but we need to prioritize 

where the highways should be and what highways needed to be 

done on a first-come, first-served basis. And I know the 

ministry is looking at that. 

 

In ag, and I‟d be remorse if I didn‟t talk a little bit about ag for a 

simple reason — my constituency is basically ag. Just north of 

me is a lot of forestry and stuff but my constituency is ag. I am 

so glad that our government will finally take the initiative to 

fully fund and participate in federal programs such as 

AgriStability that will benefit farm families. 

 

As a farmer myself, and I enjoy farming, but as a farmer myself 



1546 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

you can‟t go to the bank without some kind of a guarantee. And 

this province is learning or listening to the farmers and coming 

out with some real programs that benefit the province of 

Saskatchewan in the farming sector. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — I am also so glad that this government and 

the Ministry of Ag is looking at the crop insurance program and 

doing some updates to it. One of the things I think that we need 

to look at, and I‟ve mentioned this to the Ag minister many 

times, and that‟s in the wildlife damage done to farmers in my 

area. We have a lot of wildlife and the previous administration 

would not change the 80 per cent coverage to 100 per cent 

coverage as it is in Manitoba and in Alberta. And I‟m hoping 

that with letters from constituents all across Saskatchewan to 

our Ag minister he will look at that as part of changing the 

agricultural problems in Saskatchewan and which falls under 

crop insurance. 

 

Also our government, our Ag minister is also looking to expand 

extension services in rural communities to support rural 

Saskatchewan. I believe some years ago it was the NDP that 

closed them all. The reason probably for closing them all is 

back then there was hardly any members, if any, that were from 

rural Saskatchewan. There were only urban members which 

they still are today. 

 

We on this side of the House have the biggest majority of rural 

MLAs. We know what it‟s like. We‟ve lived through it; we 

know what it‟s like. And our Ag minister is listening to us as 

MLAs, to the problems we have in rural Saskatchewan. And to 

expand the extension services in rural Saskatchewan is a 

positive for the people of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I‟d like to just touch on something that 

was in the Throne Speech that is kind of near and dear to me, 

simply because I knew this family and I knew this gentleman 

very well. And that is in the Throne Speech: “A Tribute.” And I 

want to quote: 

 

Today, the people of Saskatchewan and my government 

say thank you. 

 

Thank you to all who serve our country. 

 

And thank you to Sergeant Prescott Shipway, Corporal 

Dustin Wasden, and Master Corporal Josh Roberts, all of 

whom made the supreme sacrifice this past year while 

serving our country in Afghanistan. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s history is replete with examples of men 

and women who have sacrificed everything for the 

betterment of others . . . 

 

We honour them today and pray that their remaining 

loved ones [and family] find comfort in years ahead, by 

knowing this sacrifice was not in vain. 

 

I say this to the family of Dustin — Corporal Wasden — who 

grew up in Spiritwood. My son actually played ball with him, 

worked with him on road construction, was a close friend of his. 

We know the family, Ken and Bonnie Wasden, very well. And 

on the 11th of this week, Remembrance Day, there‟s a special 

honour for Dustin Wasden at Spiritwood, and I will be 

attending that. And my heart, my thoughts, and my prayers go 

out to the Dustin family, as all the other families that have lost 

members in Afghanistan. 

 

On that, Mr. Speaker, I definitely will be supporting this Throne 

Speech. I think it‟s an excellent Throne Speech. And I will not 

be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

privilege to stand and enter into the debate on the 2008 Throne 

Speech. I believe this is about the tenth, ninth or tenth Throne 

Speech that I‟ve entered into the debate, and there‟s never been 

a Throne Speech I‟ve been more proud of to support. 

 

There are a few things that I want to say before I get into the 

thrust of the Throne Speech and a number of thank yous, 

starting with the people from Indian Head-Milestone. I had a 

great summer around the constituency. One thing that I‟ve 

noticed, and I think other members have mentioned that our 

having the privilege of serving in cabinet right now, it‟s 

certainly tougher to get out to your constituency, maybe a little 

tougher than it was before. But I had a summer that I was able 

to be around an awful lot, a couple of parades and a number of 

events that I was able to attend. 

 

And once again I had the opportunity of meeting some of my 

favourite people in the whole province — obviously the people 

from Indian Head-Milestone. And certainly they‟ve had a busy 

year again — got through harvest, as it‟s mainly an agriculture 

constituency, save for the area around the Fort Qu‟Appelle area 

which certainly is tourism. But it‟s interesting to see the 

development in that area too, where there‟s growth up and 

down the lakes. It‟s unbelievable. Lakes that the shores were 

lined with cottages are now lined with homes as people are 

upgrading and tearing down those cottages and building homes. 

So it was a very productive and a very enjoyable summer 

around the constituency of Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

I want to thank first of all my constituency assistant, Nicole, 

who looks after the office out in Balgonie and does an 

absolutely marvellous job. I think most of us that would talk 

about how our life is as an MLA would have to say that a huge 

portion of our life and a huge benefit to us — as far as 

conducting our business as an MLA — is certainly the 

constituency assistant because they‟re the first line of contact, I 

think, for most all of us MLAs. And they do an absolutely 

marvellous job. And Nicole is doing a great job for myself and 

the people of Indian Head-Milestone, as I‟m probably not in the 

constituency as much as I was before, as I mentioned earlier. 

 

The other people I‟d like to talk a little bit about are the staff 

members in the ministry, in my minister‟s office. Perry, my 

chief of staff; Susan, Kim, Jennifer, Angie, and Sophie all do a 

marvellous job, whether it‟s dealing with the calendar which 

can be very stressful, dealing with communications, dealing 

with the day-to-day business of the Ministry of Health. When 

it‟s 43 per cent of the budget, it‟s obviously a large file, and 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1547 

these people do a wonderful job within my office here in the 

building, the Legislative Building. 

 

The other people that I want to talk about just briefly, but thank 

them very, very much, are the staff within the ministry, from 

my deputy minister, the new deputy minister, Dan Florizone, all 

the way through the associate deputy ministers, assistant deputy 

ministers, down through the whole department or the Ministry 

of Health. They do an absolutely marvellous job, and I really 

want to thank them for doing the work that they do and dealing 

with the issues that they deal with. Some of them are not very 

easy, and they deal with them in a very professional manner. So 

I want to thank them very much. 

 

It was interesting — I do have to say, just in a brief moment 

here — is that I had been the critic in health care for about three 

years. And I‟ve said an awful lot of times that I had enough to 

say when I was in opposition, when the opportunity came I 

better step up to the plate if I had the opportunity to be the 

Minister of Health. 

 

But I want to thank them because they have been so 

professional and they have treated me so well, when I think I 

probably didn‟t make their life the easiest over the last three 

years as we are raising issues almost daily regarding health 

care. And a lot of the people that were working on those files 

over the last two or three years are still within the ministry. And 

I want to thank them for their loyalty and professionalism that 

they‟ve shown me. It has been great. 

 

The other welcome and most of the members — I think all of 

the members — have welcomed the new member from 

Cumberland. I wish him a long and relatively successful career 

in opposition, and I think that‟s certainly where it will be spent 

for the most part. I would advise him — and you know, if 

history teaches us anything — stick with the horse that brought 

you here. Don‟t be jumping around. The last member from 

Cumberland that thought there was greener grass on the other 

side of the fence didn‟t do so well. So I think I would stick with 

who got you here. 

 

And you know, I think probably if there‟s one thing that you 

could learn about history is that don‟t run as a Liberal 

provincially in Saskatchewan, but don‟t run as an NDP 

federally in Saskatchewan. I think it‟s been three elections in a 

row that there hasn‟t been a seat won by the NDP in this 

province of 14 seats. One person mentioned to me, he said, well 

I mean, they‟re all your cousins, all those Conservative cousins. 

But I said, for our party, which is a combination of Liberal and 

Conservative, we are 14 for 14 in the last federal election, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the Speech from the Throne as I said was a very positive 

Speech from the Throne. You know, if there‟s one thing that I 

can honestly say that I have noticed as I‟ve toured the province 

in the last year, 11 months as the Minister of Health— be it 

around the province as the Minister of Health or within my own 

constituency as the MLA for Indian Head-Milestone — is the 

absolute positive attitude that you see in every corner of this 

province. It‟s a positive attitude that I can honestly say, whether 

it‟s politics aside, was not there three years ago; it wasn‟t there 

six years ago. But it is absolutely there right now. It‟s palpable. 

You can feel it when you‟re out around this province. People 

are positive about the future. They feel positive about the 

future. 

 

But what I find very interesting is speech after speech on that 

side of the House — and there have been 19, I believe, speeches 

from that side of the House — they haven‟t really ever talked 

about the positive attitude that they‟re feeling. They like to talk 

about the two or three issues that may be negative. They‟ll 

maybe give the odd compliment. But for the most part it has 

been a very negative bunch on that side of the House. 

 

And I often wonder how they can conduct themselves as they 

travel around the province, as they talk to people — as the 

member from North Battleford has talked to more people, I 

swear, in the last six months than he did in all his years as the 

Health minister, because he sure seems to know an awful lot 

more now than he ever did when he was sitting on this side of 

the House. But I guess that‟s what happens when you consult 

widely, Mr. Speaker. But how they can go around and they‟re 

talking to people — and I‟m sure they‟re getting the positive 

message, the positive vibe from people — and how do they try 

and turn that around and twist it to say, yes but things really 

aren‟t that good, are they? I mean, they can‟t be that good. 

 

Because it only benefits their party if they try and make it 

negative; if they try and be very negative about the economy, 

very negative about growth. That will try and I guess feed their 

political interests. But it must be very interesting. I‟d love to . . . 

Oh no I wouldn‟t. I was going to say I‟d love to follow them 

around. But no, not really. But, you know, I would love to have 

a recorder and tape some of their conversations as to how that 

conversation would go. I mean there must be a select few they 

can find that thinks it‟s all very negative. But for the most part, 

by far the most part, the people that I‟ve talked to — the people 

I think members on our side of the House have talked to — are 

all very, very positive about the here and now and what‟s going 

to happen into the future. 

 

Yes, there‟s some issues right now with the stock markets. 

There‟s some issues with oil and gas prices. There‟s some 

issues with the dollar sinking. But the optimism is from corner 

to corner of this province, all four corners of this province — 

whether it‟s oil and gas, whether it‟s potash, whether it‟s 

agriculture. 

 

And as a farmer I can say it was probably one of the more 

enjoyable campaigns I had in 2007, as you‟d stop at a farm and 

guys were positive, the farmers were positive. Save for some 

livestock and some hog issues, overall, agriculture is very 

positive. 

 

And all you‟ve got to do is go to a few dealerships. And I can 

think of the one dealership in my constituency — Nelson 

Motors, the John Deere dealership down in Avonlea and 

spreading across southern Saskatchewan — is that they can‟t 

keep new equipment on the lot practically. You know, their 

sales are as good as they ever have been in the history of the 

province, and that speaks to one thing. It speaks to a positive 

attitude of the agriculture community. And I think that‟s 

reflective a little bit of the government that they see in front of 

them for the next four years and even further, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, we were out and about in the province, 



1548 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

and certainly we had a pretty good idea that there was a large 

surplus, and the members opposite knew there was a large 

surplus. They went out into their constituencies and other 

constituencies, and no doubt talked about what should happen 

with the surplus. I think all of our members pretty much did that 

and certainly got a lot of feedback, a lot of positive feedback as 

to what should happen with the surplus. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And I think, you know, the best analogy, and I don‟t know if it 

has been used by other members, but the best analogy that I can 

follow through on — and I‟ve heard other members, if it wasn‟t 

in the House here, speak about — it‟s like a house. And you 

have a mortgage on your house — a fairly hefty mortgage, and I 

know all about that — a hefty mortgage on your house and you 

have a windfall of cash. And it‟s a windfall of cash that may not 

be there next year or the year after or the year after. So what are 

the wise decisions to make when you have a windfall of cash? 

 

And I believe people really looked at their own situation. And 

they have a house with a mortgage on it. So what would they 

do? They would make a down payment on that mortgage. If 

they could pay off 40 per cent of their mortgage, that would be 

pretty significant. In fact I believe, and I‟ve said this to a few 

people, that, you know, the Speech from the Throne had so 

many good ideas, it‟s a shame when you pay 40 per cent of the 

provincial debt down in one payment that that isn‟t the major 

story. 

 

But it wasn‟t the major story. There were so many good 

different pieces of the Speech from the Throne that a 40 per 

cent reduction in the debt was almost a sideline. For most 

governments in a four-year term, if they could pay 40 per cent 

of the debt down that would be a defining moment for a 

government —let alone to do it in one term, in one year. I 

mean, in the first year of government alongside a whole bunch 

of other initiatives — that is significant. 

 

They also said if they had a house that was certainly . . . that 

maybe they were struggling with finances, and they weren‟t 

able to repair the roof or they weren‟t able to put on new 

eavestroughs or siding or windows or doors, they would repair 

their house. And so, Mr. Speaker, $1.5 billion worth of 

infrastructure investment is starting to repair the house. 

Unfortunately, I think most of us would think if we put $1.5 

billion towards repairs and fixing up the house, that should do 

it. Not if you let the house decay and deteriorate as much as the 

former NDP government did. Because quite frankly I‟ve had 

the opportunity of travelling around the province and visiting 

many, many hospitals. 

 

You know, it was interesting. I heard the member from North 

Battleford talk about all the communities he‟s been at. He 

talked about Lloydminster and he talked about Meadow Lake 

and he talked about Shellbrook, and I‟ll be glad to tell that 

member that I was in Lloydminster, I‟ve been in Lloydminster 

in two formal meetings, been there probably three times in 11 

months. I‟ve been to Shellbrook and I‟ve been to Big River. 

I‟ve been to many of these communities. But the one thing that 

I did hear and I thought was very striking that he would bring 

up the example, that that member would bring up the example 

of Lloydminster. The first time we sat down and he was . . . 

And the member‟s right. They want to have a, you know, a 

newer facility in Lloydminster. It needs to expand with the 

growth. 

 

But after I sat and talked to them for a while, they said, well — 

when I was leaving — thank you very much because it‟s the 

first time the Minister of Health has ever been here to listen to 

. . . 

 

Now it‟s interesting that he can stand and say that, oh, we 

should be out and listen to what the communities are saying. 

Had he had that thought a little bit more when he was the 

minister of Health, maybe . . . No, no, never mind. I won‟t 

continue on with that thought. 

 

But I will say that, you know, we are talking about $1.5 billion 

worth of investment into infrastructure. And as all of us around 

the table — whether it‟s municipal affairs, whether it‟s 

highways, whether it‟s education, whether it‟s health care — 

we‟re going to be debating hard. We‟re going to be going 

through the list of priorities. And believe you me, I am quite 

confident — and if it doesn‟t, then it will be my fault — that 

health care will get a good share of that $1.5 billion. Because if 

there is anything in our province that needs upgrading, it‟s some 

of our health care facilities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — When almost half of our health care 

facilities were built prior to 1955, you know, when we had the 

oldest equipment in Canada according to CIHI [Canadian 

Institute of Health Information], it is a deficiency that is 

unbelievable when you start touring around. When you tour 

some of the long-term care facilities that I‟ve had the 

opportunity to follow through and tour, it really does tell you 

that we need a major injection into the infrastructure into health 

care. 

 

I was very proud to stand in the House after the budget speech 

and talk about $100 million we put into repair of a $4.4 billion 

asset. Our health care assets are $4.4 billion and this year we 

put in $100 million that will go to repairing some of that $4.4 

billion asset. 

 

And I got thinking now, do people really understand a $4.4 

billion asset and what $100 million means to that asset? And I 

don‟t think people will. I couldn‟t understand it until I broke it 

down for my own mind, and I said $4.4 billion is like a 

$440,000 home. You can imagine a $440,000 home. 

 

The previous government had put $5 million into that $4.4 

billion asset. It‟s like $500 on a $440,000 home. You got a 

$440,000 home that‟s being used 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 

365 days a year, some of the roughest traffic going through that 

house you could ever imagine, and they put $500 to repair it. 

That doesn‟t even paint a bedroom in that house. In the budget 

we put $100 million into that asset — which is the equivalent of 

about $10,000 towards that $440,000 home — and it‟s not 

enough. And I‟ll tell you it‟s not enough but at least it‟s a start. 

And certainly when you go through the Speech from the Throne 

and it talks about a $1.5 billion infrastructure investment, it‟s 

huge. 

 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1549 

Back to the house — my family or any family‟s analogy — we 

talked about the mortgage. Almost half of the mortgage paid 

off, 40 per cent, one and a half billion dollars towards asset. 

We‟ve been struggling over the last number of years, so what 

do you do? You know, we haven‟t had the money to go out for 

a meal because we just didn‟t have the money in the pocket. 

Maybe we should give people a little bit more money in their 

jeans so that they can enjoy, you know, what we have to offer in 

the province. The largest tax cut ever in the history of this 

province was in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 80,000 people taken off the tax roll. In 

other words, instead of giving money to the government for 

taxes, they can keep it themselves and spend it the way they 

want. The hugest tax cut in the history of this province. And I 

heard the one criticism. I can‟t believe the one criticism the 

opposition had was they didn‟t consult. Well you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to tell the members opposite that through the 

summer and through the last number of years the consultation 

was done. People like to have their own money back. I don‟t 

think you need to consult on that front. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

we gave something back to every citizen in this province, 

money that was theirs, that they deserve to keep, that they can 

certainly enjoy what we have to offer in this province. 

 

The fourth piece of our Throne Speech that really is significant, 

and I know it drives the members nuts, but it is a bit of a nest 

egg; it‟s bit of a rock to build on the future. We talked about the 

reduction of oil prices right now and perhaps grain prices could 

drop down. That‟s why I said it is so important because this is 

one-time money. It could be one-me money. I don‟t think it will 

be, but it could be and if that‟s the case we have a buffer with 

money in the account as opposed to a line of credit, with money 

in the account that if the downturn continues on that we will be 

cushioned. In other words, Mr. Speaker, I think we are 

positioned better than any province in Canada right now with 

the initiatives that we‟ve taken regardless of what happens in 

the economy as we move forward. I think we‟re positioned 

very, very well. 

 

But I do want to also just look at the Speech from the Throne a 

little bit. You know, I talked about the analogy of the family. 

But every member on that side . . . And you know they have an 

opportunity to stand tonight and show their true colours, which 

I think I know what it is. But they‟ll have an opportunity tonight 

to show their true colours. 

 

Everyone so far, 19 members, have said they‟re going to vote 

for the amendment and they‟re not going to vote for the Speech 

from the Throne. In other words, they‟re not going to vote for 

the largest tax cut; they‟re not going to vote for the most money 

for infrastructure; they‟re not going to vote for a kind of a bit of 

a guarantee into the future; and they‟re not going to vote for 

debt reduction. 

 

But not only that, Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is 

“A Stronger Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” And you know, I‟ve 

heard it from many people that have said that this Speech from 

the Throne doesn‟t just talk about things, it doesn‟t just talk 

about a better life through workforce training, but it actually has 

doables and initiatives that will be followed through on. Many 

of those in social services we‟re hearing about day after day 

after day. 

I spent eight years on the opposition benches. I can‟t imagine 

what it would be like every day when you stand up and you say, 

well you better do this, and then a ministerial statement comes, 

like five minutes later, and they‟re doing that. That must be 

very, very frustrating. I think they‟re probably to the point 

saying, let‟s not ask for them to do anything more because 

they‟re probably going to. You know, Mr. Speaker, it must be 

very, very deflating. It must be very frustrating from their side 

of the benches. 

 

But you know, it will be very interesting if the members on that 

side actually stand up and vote for a better life for seniors. Are 

they going to vote for a better life for seniors? Are they going 

vote for a better life for people with disabilities? It would be 

very interesting. Are they going to vote against a better life for 

children at risk? I ask the member from Athabasca, is that what 

he‟s going to do? Is he going to stand in his place tomorrow and 

vote against the Speech from the Throne when it talks about a 

better life for children? 

 

Mr. Deputy, Mr. Speaker, you can go on and on. You know, a 

better health care system. The member from North Battleford 

talked about the number one issue in most people‟s minds is 

health care, and I couldn‟t agree more. That definitely is — 

when you start with a system that really quite frankly in places 

was left to languish. 

 

You know, what people are talking about out in rural 

Saskatchewan is recruitment of doctors. It was interesting in 

this House last year or two years ago when we named 

community after community whose hospitals were closing. He 

said, I don‟t think that‟s unusual. News flash — that was 

unusual. He finally had to go out and correct his words. Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re going be addressing that. It says in the Speech 

from the Throne and we will be addressing it as we move 

forward because recruitment of physicians, both urban and 

rural, are extremely important. 

 

The one thing I will say is I won‟t say, that‟s not our problem; 

that‟s only the health region or the community‟s problem. Mr. 

Speaker, it is our problem. We are the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and we‟re going to be taking steps to address the 

problems that we see in health care around this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are so many 

different aspects of this Speech from the Throne that a person 

could probably go on and on until the time is up, but, Mr. 

Speaker, we do have a bell that will be ringing here soon. 

 

But a couple things that I do want to say though, one last thing. 

And certainly the member from Kindersley talked about it a 

little bit earlier today. The whole issue around Murdoch 

Carriere, I think, absolutely has stunned the public. And it really 

has really taken me aback. You know, I don‟t expect somebody 

to stand in this House and say 29 times that we fired somebody, 

and a year and a half later, a year later, we found out that he 

never was fired. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and it wasn‟t even bad enough that he wasn‟t 

fired, but he was kept on long enough so his pension was 

topped up, so his pension was topped up, and he was paid on 



1550 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

pain and suffering that he felt — not the victim — that he felt. 

The issue about pain and suffering, he didn‟t have to pay any 

tax on that. It was unbelievable that they would stand in this 

House, say 29 times that the person was fired, and he never 

was. 

 

And I would really call on the member from Dewdney, from 

Regina Dewdney to stand in his place. Was he fired or did he 

resign or did you give him a golden handshake? And I‟d ask the 

former premier if he can stand behind his words that Murdoch 

Carriere was fired, or was he given a golden handshake. Or the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana, who had more than enough to 

say about the fact that he was fired when he was never fired. 

 

He was given a golden handshake. Why? Because I think he 

knew those members. In fact the member from Athabasca, his 

picture was on Murdoch Carriere‟s wall. Now there was some 

pretty deep political connections, and that‟s why he was given a 

golden handshake, which is absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very glad to support the Speech from the 

Throne. And I would call on those members, if they have toured 

the province like the member from North Battleford has said he 

has done . . . If he‟s done that he would know most of the things 

that the people are saying in all of Saskatchewan are enclosed in 

this Speech from the Throne. So if he‟s true to what those 

people are telling him, he‟ll support the Speech from the 

Throne, as I will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

getting the opportunity to reply to the Speech to the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember back — I think this is my 13th Throne 

Speech, 14th Throne Speech — and I remember the first one or 

two that the NDP did when I was new and somewhat very, very 

green in this House, and I stayed awake for the whole Throne 

Speech. But for the next 10 or 12 throne speeches I actually 

went to sleep because all they were was recycled — we‟re 

going to get to it next year; we‟re going to get to it next year. 

And isn‟t it amazing from the members opposite now, in their 

first year in opposition, every issue that comes up, whether it‟s 

in Throne Speech or whatever the issue they bring up and we 

reply to them, how come for 16 years you didn‟t fix that 

problem, they keep coming back and saying, we were going to 

get to it — in our 17th year we were going to address that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join with my colleagues in welcoming 

the member for Cumberland. I listened to his maiden speech the 

other day, and did a great job. I really appreciated his Throne 

Speech. My colleague from Rosthern-Shellbrook had said when 

he had done his Throne Speech, his knees were shaking. And I 

noticed the member was very confident and did a good job. 

 

Today in question period, the member got up and did another 

very good job in question period. And I noticed the member for 

Indian Head-Milestone had given some advice and a number of 

the members on both sides have given you a lot of advice, and 

I‟ll follow that. I‟ll give you a little advice because the part you 

had to play in question period today, I would get used to that. 

Because there‟s a number of members on that side I don‟t think 

want to get up in question period again this session because of 

the Murdoch Carriere situation and what‟s gone on in the past. 

 

I think the member for Nutana certainly doesn‟t want to get up 

again, the Leader of the Opposition certainly doesn‟t want to 

get up again, and the member for Dewdney, we know after 

today really didn‟t want to even be up today. So all the advice I 

can give you is, you did a good job today. I think you‟re going 

to be up for the rest of the week for sure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to talk a little 

bit, and all my colleagues have talked about how they 

appreciate the Throne Speech this year and the input we‟ve had 

for the province of Saskatchewan. I‟d like to tie that a little bit 

more to rural Saskatchewan and agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member for Indian Head-Milestone talked about the largest 

single-year income tax reduction in the province‟s history. And 

I think the members opposite would think, well oh yes well 

that‟s just great; that only affects urban people. That actually 

has as much to do with rural Saskatchewan, small town 

Saskatchewan, and for that matter, Mr. Speaker, for every 

farmer in this province from time to time. That income tax 

break is going to help every family in rural Saskatchewan 

weather the hard times and weather the times when their 

incomes aren‟t so great. And I know the members opposite 

probably — the way they abandoned rural Saskatchewan for 16 

years — probably feel that rural Saskatchewan doesn‟t pay tax, 

but I will enlighten them today that there‟s an awful lot of tax 

comes out of rural Saskatchewan as we‟re finding out right 

now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, debt reduction is very important to people of rural 

Saskatchewan and the farming community out there because 

nobody knows better than the farming community what it‟s like 

to have to carry a large debt and try and function and make your 

business go, carrying that large debt. So I think they appreciate 

that very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, infrastructure dollars, the reason that I actually ran 

in 1995, Mr. Speaker, was because of what the NDP 

government were doing to the infrastructure dollars for 

municipalities and towns all across this province. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve been here one short year, and the total budget for 

infrastructure will be increased to $1.5 billion. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is good for all of Saskatchewan. For Pat Fiacco as 

mayor of Regina; Don Atchison, mayor of Saskatoon; every 

mayor of every town and village in this province, it‟s good for. 

Because what it does is replaces some of the cuts that come 

through the ‟90s by the NDP government and return and 

backfills those dollars. But on top of that, Mr. Speaker, starts to 

fix our highways that have been run down for 16 years. Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s important to people of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I was one of the ones and a number of my 

colleagues were, when the fund called the rainy day fund was 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1551 

brought to life by the NDP. And they rode that thing and said 

oh, look at all the good things we‟re doing. The problem being 

with the rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker, it was on paper and there 

was no actual dollars in the fund. It was like an operating fund, 

and every time they had to dip into it, they had to go borrow 

more money. And that was their operating fund. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not what we‟ve done. Mr. Speaker, 

we have the growth and security fund that has — how much 

now? — $1.9 billion. And, Mr. Speaker, $1.9 billion of actual 

dollars in that fund, Mr. Speaker, along with paying the debt 

down and all the other things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to touch a little bit on agriculture. Seeing 

that I am the Minister of Agriculture, I would be remiss if I left 

that out. And I want to go through all the things . . . We aren‟t 

solving all the problems out there, Mr. Speaker. The cattle 

industry, the hog industry have a lot of stress on them right now 

out there. And a lot of those problems are ongoing. But we are 

doing things. We‟re trying to help that sector, along with the 

grain sector, to get through these tough times. The grain sector, 

as I think many of my colleagues have said in this House, 

there‟s some optimism for a change out there. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to think it‟s only because of 

higher grain prices. But I think you can also say the November 

7 election last year, for rural Saskatchewan, is a sign of 

optimism for rural people. I think it made every coffee row out 

there buzz the morning after November 7, because they finally 

got what they wanted for 16 years. They got a government that 

will pay attention to rural Saskatchewan and to the agriculture 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fully funding of all the ag programs in the 

province. I remember my former colleagues over there — the 

ministers in succession, Mr. Serby, Mr. Wartman. I believe, in 

fact the recycling program we‟re having in the NDP leadership 

race, Mr. Lingenfelter, well also he was an ag minister. And 

what did they do for agriculture in this problem? Actually they 

could have done worse I guess, but they ignored it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they would not fully fund the programs, and I 

found out as soon as I went to the federal table that we really 

weren‟t looked at with any credibility at that table because of 

we would not fully fund the programs when they came out. We 

don‟t have to fully agree with them, but, Mr. Speaker, we have 

to be to that table with credibility to stick up for our farm 

families in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the education tax. And I think 

it was the member for Battleford was chastising us on this side 

of the House for not dealing with that. And the member for 

Rosetown dealt with it and I thought explained it very clearly, 

but I‟m going to follow up a little bit with that. If you remember 

back, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m sure you do, and that member I 

think would remember back, that the NDP did adjust the 

education tax on property. When I was elected it was 60/40. 

The Government of Saskatchewan paid 60, and the producers 

out there with ag land paid the 40. 

 

So their adjustment and how they dealt with it was to flip-flop 

that, and here let the farmers pay 60 per cent, and we the NDP 

government will pay 40. Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not good 

enough for the Saskatchewan Party government. We are already 

up to 48 per cent in our rebate program, and as the member for 

Rosthern said — and he‟s trying to find new ways that we can 

even speed up that process — we‟ll be even doing more, not 

just for farmers of this province but for every property tax payer 

in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We‟re going to 

deal with the issue, and, Mr. Speaker, it‟s happening very 

quickly under our watch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, crop insurance: this is a program after 2002 that 

the NDP saw fit to download on producers, raise every farmer‟s 

premium in this province, and cut the coverage for every 

producer in this province. Mr. Speaker, that‟s not good enough 

for the producers under a Saskatchewan Party government. 

We‟re having a crop insurance review, and we‟re going to start 

to repair the crop insurance program so it actually works for 

farm families in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Southwest has had a drought going on until 

this year for the past four years. And what was the NDP‟s 

response to that? The Minister of Agriculture would not even 

go down there and visit with them and see how bad it was. Mr. 

Speaker, we brought the water program in for the Southwest. 

Again, it doesn‟t solve all their problems, but it‟s a small piece 

of the puzzle in helping them safeguard their farms and their 

ranches for when the next drought comes around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the gopher rebate program, and we 

brought this in because that‟s a tremendous problem, especially 

in the Southwest but other areas in the province. And what 

we‟ve committed to do is pick up half the cost for strychnine 

and other baits, Mr. Speaker, and we will pick up that and try 

and help producers, especially in the Southwest, deal with the 

problems they have out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that we‟re talking about and dealing 

with out there is working with farm groups, and we did that, 

Mr. Speaker. If you remember back, Mr. Speaker, very early 

under our watch, we had the cattlemen and the hog producers 

come and explain to us just how bad things are in the cattle 

industry and the hog industry. And, Mr. Speaker, the first thing 

they asked for was a hog and cattle loan. Mr. Speaker, we did 

that. And why they wanted the loan, because they were worried 

about an ad hoc causing a countervail from the US. So they 

asked for a cattle and hog loan, and we put $90 million into 

that, Mr. Speaker. Did that solve the problems completely? Not 

for a minute, Mr. Speaker, and we understand that as well as 

every producer in this province, but we hoped it would help 

them get from that point till maybe prices will start to improve, 

Mr. Speaker. And maybe we‟re going to see that. The dollar‟s 

dropping, Mr. Speaker, and that was one of the main problems 

for what‟s happening in the cattle industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to go on. I have probably enough for 

another hour right now, but seeing the clock, I‟ll let you know 

that I will be not supporting the amendment and certainly will 

be supporting the Throne Speech. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



1552 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2008 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment to the motion presented by the Leader of the 

Opposition, seconded by the member from Regina Rosemont: 

 

That the following words be added after the word session: 

 

and that this government no longer enjoys the confidence 

of the Assembly because their spending choices ignore 

their major responsibility to address the immediate needs 

of the Saskatchewan people such as high utility rates, high 

gas prices, high property taxes, and lack of affordable 

housing and child care. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 21:41 until 21:43.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before I call the vote I just 

want to remind members that it would be greatly appreciated if 

members would allow the vote to proceed without any 

interference. Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas  19] 

 

Calvert Harper Junor 

Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Nilson Yates Higgins 

Belanger Furber Iwanchuk 

Forbes Taylor Quennell 

Broten McCall Wotherspoon 

Vermette   

 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays  37] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Cheveldayoff 

Heppner Tell Gantefoer 

Harpauer Norris Morgan 

Hutchinson Huyghebaert Brkich 

Hart Kirsch Schriemer 

Allchurch Weekes Chisholm 

Wilson Duncan Michelson 

LeClerc Ottenbreit Ross 

Reiter Bradshaw Harrison 

McMillan   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 19; those 

opposed, 37. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[21:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The motion has . . . Order. The motion has 

been defeated. Debate will continue on the main motion. I 

recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s truly an 

honour to stand up to speak to the Throne Speech; I believe a 

Throne Speech that is the best that this province has heard for 

many, many years. It‟s a Throne Speech that is filled with 

action, just not words. It‟s a Throne Speech that addresses 

something for everyone within our province. It‟s a Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker, that discusses how we‟re going to share 

the province‟s prosperity with all people within Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an unprecedented tax cut that this province 

has now seen. It will take 80,000 people off of the tax roll. I 

have listened to the members opposite talk repeatedly of how 

we‟re not helping those most vulnerable in society, and I have 

to wonder, Mr. Speaker, where have they been. I don‟t 

understand where they have been. We have made so many 

announcements over the last year of how we‟re going to help 

those that are most vulnerable within our society. And let‟s talk 

about announcements that we‟ve had, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s begin with announcements we‟ve had in housing. We 

addressed housing very quickly in our mandate as a new 

government, and we had a task force that came forward with a 

number of recommendations. The first recommendation, Mr. 

Speaker, was to address those that are the most vulnerable. So 

what did we do, Mr. Speaker? Within a few weeks, we 

responded to those recommendations. We met those 

recommendations and we went beyond those recommendations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We increased the shelter rates for the clients that we have 

within my ministry, Mr. Speaker, and we indexed it to the 

market costs within the regions in which the housing lies. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we committed to revisit it every six months. 

 

In addition we also indexed the Saskatchewan rental 

supplement, Mr. Speaker. We indexed it to the market price 

within each region. And we will revisit that every six months. 

Mr. Speaker, that is unprecedented in our country for any 

province to make that bold of a move. And we did it because 

we knew that it would help those most in need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what else did we do very quickly? Well we 

increased the emergency shelter rates by 20 per cent, and that 

was to ensure the fiscal viability of our existing shelters. We 

know that they are needed, and so we wanted to make sure that 

they were sustainable while we looked at adding to the shelters 

that were within our province. 



November 3, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1553 

Also, Mr. Speaker, we went above and beyond the 

recommendations by increasing the PTA [provincial training 

allowance] living allowance and the shelter amounts for the 

Canada-Saskatchewan integrated student loan program, Mr. 

Speaker. So we‟ve addressed a number of issues, as well as the 

number of dollars that we‟ve committed to the construction of 

additional housing units. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s talk a little bit about the organizations that 

work so diligently within our province to help those most 

vulnerable. And what have we done to make sure that those 

organizations, the community-based organizations within our 

province can remain viable and strong as they give services to 

those most vulnerable? Well, Mr. Speaker, we held five 

summits around the province to listen to what they had to say. 

And we‟ve addressed — within weeks again, Mr. Speaker — a 

number of the things that we heard from within those summits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have increased the wages and the non-salary 

expenses to address compensation, recruitment, and retention 

challenges that the community-based organizations are 

experiencing. We gave them an unprecedented increase of 9.3 

per cent, Mr. Speaker, year-over-year funding. That is an 

increase they have never seen before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we gave 1.4 million additional dollars to the 

CBOs [community-based organizations] that provided mobile 

crisis services within our province. Mr. Speaker, that was a 90 

per cent increase from what they had before. Mr. Speaker, we 

gave incremental funding increases for CBOs that were 

providing family support services of $1.3 million. That again 

was a huge increase to those that are helping our most 

vulnerable families within our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on. We made a number of 

announcements again today of ways that we have committed to 

helping strengthen our CBO sector. One of those is funding to 

help develop a 211 Saskatchewan directory within our province. 

It‟s a partnership between the Saskatoon Food Bank and the 

United Way. And it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, that one of 

the gentlemen said, you know, we brought this proposal 

forward for six years, and for six years we‟ve been ignored. 

And at last we‟ve been listened to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what we‟ve done for seniors. 

I‟ve heard a number of members talk about, you know, the 

people that we‟re not helping, those most vulnerable. And what 

falls into that category would be the low-income seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to read into record something that was said 

some time ago. I‟m reading it from a fact sheet, Mr. Speaker, 

and it says, and I quote: 

 

We are fortunate in this province to have one of the 

highest proportions of older persons in Canada. One of 

every seven people is over the age of 65. We owe a great 

deal to seniors and thank them for their part in making 

Saskatchewan the place we are proud to call home. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that statement was printed by the former 

government, the NDP. So what did they do for the seniors to 

show their commitment and their value of the seniors in our 

province? Well, Mr. Speaker, let‟s go on. They gave them free 

park entry, Mr. Speaker. They gave them free fishing licences. 

They gave them a 30 per cent discount for the STC 

[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] buses. They gave 

them a free non-driver photo ID [identification], Mr. Speaker. 

And they gave them a pin — gave them a pin, Mr. Speaker. 

Well I‟ll tell you what. Those seniors that are low income, that 

are seeing stress in the rising costs, we decided we could do a 

little better than a pin, Mr. Speaker. We decided to give them a 

110 per cent increase. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, they had received a zero 

increase for 16 years. For 16 years, Mr. Speaker, they had not 

received one dime in an increase to the supplement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, considering the hour, I‟m looking forward to 

going on further on how we have addressed issues with those 

most vulnerable within our society. But since it‟s getting rather 

late, I would like to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Humboldt has moved to 

adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House 

do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the agreement of the 

Assembly for the adjournment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:55.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1529 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1531 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1532 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1533 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1537 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1540 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1542 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1546 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1550 

 Recorded Division (Amendment) .............................................................................................................................................. 1552 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1552 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1534 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


