




















































Hansard: April 01, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 18B  TUESDAY, APRIL 1, 2008, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 499 

 April 1, 2008 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Debate will resume on the budget 

debate, and I recognize the member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

agriculture is a key economic driver in the Rosetown-Elrose 

constituency, and the Sask Party government is committed to 

our agriculture producers. We’re delivering on our promise to 

fully fund the agriculture risk management programs, crop 

insurance in the AgriStability and AgriInvest programs. Over 

$220 million are committed to fully fund these programs, which 

includes a $25 million increase to the crop insurance program. 

 

We’re delivering on our promise to introduce five-year 

interest-free loans to municipalities to help them with the 

increasing demand for both commercial and residential lots. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re finally seeing growth in this province in 

municipalities of all sizes, large and small, and this will be an 

effective way to help those municipalities deal with that growth. 

Municipal work has been my career, Mr. Speaker, and I know 

that the municipal sector is very pleased with this program. 

 

We’re also delivering on our promise to increase municipal 

revenue sharing by 7 per cent. We’re also delivering on our 

promise to double tourism funding, doubling it to $16 million. 

Saskatchewan is a great place to live, but it’s also a great place 

to visit, and we need to get that message out. 

 

We’re delivering on our promise to include $250 million in our 

first budget for debt reduction, Mr. Speaker. This is the first 

budget of many, many budgets to come from a Sask Party 

government, and included is $250 million for debt reduction, as 

promised — another promise kept. 

 

We’re delivering on our promise to reduce the burden of 

education tax on property. Now I want to talk about that 

initiative now, Mr. Speaker. This has been a long-time problem 

in our province. For many years, Saskatchewan governments 

have been criticized for relying too much on the property tax 

base to fund education. 

 

In 1944 then Premier Tommy Douglas promised to do away 

with the education tax when funding allowed because he 

considered it to be too regressive. Way back in 1969 . . . 1969 

was a long, long time ago, Mr. Speaker. I was just a kid. The 

member from Meadow Lake wasn’t even born yet in 1969, Mr. 

Speaker. Then Premier Thatcher called a provincial local 

government conference, and at that conference, the inequity of 

education tax on property was seriously questioned. That’s how 

long, Mr. Speaker, that this has been a contentious issue. 

Among all the provinces, Saskatchewan is the most reliant on 

property tax to fund education. 

 

Concern about this issue has been most pronounced in the 

agricultural sector. As the years went by, people have gotten 

more angry and demanded action. In 1999 tax revolt meetings 

were held in over 100 rural municipalities in this province. A 

few years later, in 2005, over 100 rural municipalities withheld 

the education portion of property tax from school divisions. 

Also in 2005, five organizations — PARCS, the Provincial 

Association of Resort Communities [of Saskatchewan]; SARM, 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities; the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce; the SSBA, the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association; and SUMA, the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association — those five 

organizations formed a coalition to lobby the provincial 

government to take action. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this issue has gone on far too long. This budget 

clearly addresses the issue. This year, residential property 

owners will be getting a 12 per cent rebate on their education 

property tax bill. Also, Mr. Speaker, agricultural property 

owners will receive a 47 per cent rebate on their education 

property tax bill. This means that an average farm land owner 

will save over $2,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is spending nearly $160 million 

on property tax relief. And Mr. Speaker, what this budget does 

is it keeps our promise. Mr. Speaker, this budget includes $1 

billion in capital investment. That is $1 billion in infrastructure 

investment for our great province. That’s the largest capital 

investment in this province’s history and, Mr. Speaker, that 

investment is desperately needed. It’s needed for capital 

spending plans for our municipalities. It’s desperately needed 

for our roads and for our highways. It’s desperately needed for 

repairs and upgrades on schools all over this province. It’s 

needed for improvements for universities and training centres. 

It’s desperately needed for repairing and upgrading hospitals 

and health centres all over Saskatchewan. And it’s needed to 

buy medical and safety equipment for those very same hospitals 

and health facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these investments are needed to prepare this 

province for growth. Growth is something that many people 

thought wasn’t possible for Saskatchewan, but it’s happening, 

Mr. Speaker. Growth is happening and will continue to happen. 

 

We have people moving into towns and villages all over this 

province. In many communities it’s difficult to even find a 

house for sale. I was speaking to a real estate office in 

Rosetown this morning, Mr. Speaker. They told me that three 

years ago there was about 80 houses for sale in Rosetown; 

today there’s two or three. Today there’s virtually nothing for 

rent in Rosetown. 

 

Our small towns are beginning to boom, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 



500 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

great to see. People are actually moving from Alberta to 

Saskatchewan instead of the other way around. New people are 

moving here, and Saskatchewan kids are starting to come home, 

come home to small-town Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are exciting times for our province. We need 

to continue this economic growth. We need to continue the 

momentum we’re now enjoying, and we need to make sure this 

growth improves the quality of life for all our citizens. Mr. 

Speaker, this budget is an extremely important step in that 

direction. 

 

I will be voting against the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

pleased to tell you that I will be supporting the budget. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I 

give my response to the budget, I just wanted to first of all 

thank the constituents of Athabasca who’ve again seen fit to 

give me the opportunity — and I’ll always use the phrase seen 

fit — to give me the opportunity to stand and represent the 

northwest part of Saskatchewan, in particular Athabasca. 

 

I want to also point out, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my wife, 

Beckie; and my three daughters Michelle, Kellie, and Taylor; 

and the new additions to our family over the past several years, 

Brodey who is my grandson and Michelle’s boy, and Meika 

who is Kellie’s daughter. And they’re my two new additions to 

our family. And if anything’s any indication by their ability and 

their strength and their good looks, then the Belanger clan have 

a lot to look forward to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I certainly hope, again, as the member from Moose Jaw 

pointed out, we all hope they all look like their grandmother. 

And I would second that motion, Mr. Speaker. There’s no 

question that most of my children, thank goodness, get their 

looks from their mother. And I think the whole community of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse is pretty happy with that, in fact the whole 

constituency of Athabasca. So I’m pretty happy with that too, 

Mr. Speaker. But I want to thank her for her tireless work. 

 

And for the record, Mr. Speaker, in front of the government and 

all 58 MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] here, I 

promised my wife when I married her in 1985 that I would 

build her a nice, big beautiful house by the lake. I haven’t 

delivered that yet, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell her today that I am 

promising on building her that big, beautiful house, and that’s 

going to be done within the next two years. Now that is on 

record, Mr. Speaker, and if we don’t begin that process very 

soon, then the MLA for Athabasca is going have to find another 

career because that’s one promise that I would not have kept if I 

didn’t deliver as I said I would. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the budget today, I 

want to do an impersonation of the Sask Party on election night. 

And there’s a big celebration because they got 38 seats and we 

got 20. And they’re bouncing around in their room, their 

election headquarters you know, just holding hands you know, 

and singing “Kumbaya”, and the whole bit you know. Just oh, 

they’re really on a roll, Mr. Speaker. They’re really happy. And 

of course on the opposite side, at the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] headquarters, we’re disappointed to lose. And obviously 

we learned many, many valuable lessons. 

 

But there they were with their leader and their supposed cabinet 

candidates, just prancing around and saying, we won, we won, 

we won. And they celebrated and chanted this, we won, for 

about three or four hours, and somebody said to them, hold it 

you guys. Let’s all stop dancing here. Let’s all stop dancing 

here. Well why are we not celebrating, asked another Sask Party 

member. We won, didn’t we? But the bright guy in the 

Saskatchewan Party said, what do we do now? What do we do 

now? 

 

You know, they’re sitting there saying, well hold it. We’re 

going to celebrate for another couple of hours, and we’ll answer 

that question later. So they danced some more, Mr. Speaker, 

and they pranced around. They celebrated, and they said, we 

won, we won. And then again that wise old Sask Party guy said 

. . . well he’s not really wise. He wouldn’t have been around 10 

years. It’s actually a conservative, Mr. Speaker, that said, hold it 

guys. We won. What do we do now? 

 

And all of a sudden they started thinking. They started thinking. 

And they said, they —the Saskatchewan Party — said well let’s 

follow the NDP plan. That’s what we’ll do. We’ll follow the 

NDP plan because, Mr. Speaker, they got a lot of money in the 

bank. The NDP left a whole whack of money in the bank, and 

they had a good plan that people liked. So let’s follow that plan. 

 

And what’s more, what’s more, Mr. Speaker, they said, okay, 

we’ll follow the NDP plan because they know how to govern. 

They’ve been governing for many years. Even despite the mess 

we left them, they still recaptured the glory that Saskatchewan 

sought. 

 

 But we’ll follow their plan, Mr. Speaker, and then, why don’t 

we sell some assets? Sell some assets, you know. I don’t know, 

maybe an upgrader here and there. We’ll use the money to 

balance the budget, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they said they’ll 

do. Okay what else should we do? Okay let’s talk about, let’s 

talk about a fiscal stabilization plan. That’s part of the NDP 

plan, isn’t it? Let’s adopt that as well. So they got that done up, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hey another great idea, let’s pay down some debt. People like 

that in Saskatchewan. Let’s pay down some debt; that’s what 

the NDP would have done. So you guys, these Sask Party guys 

were really cooking now, Mr. Speaker. They are really going. 

 

Instead of scrapping everything, let’s just keep all the programs 

we have, the social programs, and then we’ll add some money 

to it, the money left behind by the NDP. So we’ll use their plan, 

and then we will pay down debt. We’ll have a Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund. And what else? Oh we’ll invest in social 

programs. Now what else should we do? Okay we can say 

we’re a caring new government looking forward to a brand new 

agenda. That’s what we’ll say. So they got this all figured out. 

Their celebration, we won we won — what do we do now? 

Let’s follow the NDP plan. Let’s enhance what they’ve done 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

based on the buildings they left us behind. 

 

But, but, Mr. Speaker, there was a bright young guy that got up 

in the Sask Party, and he said, but we’ll tell everybody it was us 

doing it. That’s what we’ll do. We’ll tell the media and we’ll 

tell the cities. We’ll tell the Aboriginal people, oh we’re doing 

this, you guys. And you know what? They’re starting that 

process, Mr. Speaker. They’ll say it was us that developed the 

economy. 

 

No, no, not even four months, you can’t do nothing in four 

months, Mr. Speaker. You can’t reverse the population trend in 

four months. You can’t have a booming economy in four 

months. You can’t have buildings in the bank in four months. 

 

So when you guys say, it was us that are doing all these 

wonderful things, this new government’s investing billions in 

this or five billion in that, whatever the case may be, Mr. 

Speaker, they insult the people of Saskatchewan’s intelligence 

when they do that. And the vast majority of people in 

Saskatchewan are saying, come on, Sask Party, give it up. 

You’re not going to fool us. You’re not going to fool us, you 

know. 

 

And then furthermore when you say, okay after we won we’ll 

adopt the NDP plan; we’ll say . . . [inaudible] . . . all these 

wonderful things and maybe one-third of the gullible people are 

saying, well maybe they are good. But one-third is quickly 

diminishing, Mr. Speaker. Because they’re forgetting a whole 

whack of other things that the NDP would have done, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’ve made reference to that, Mr. Speaker, over 

the past several weeks. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And I want to point out as well, after they won, after they 

adopted the NDP plan, they said, okay, what do we need to do 

now? Well let’s see —they got record royalties, record revenue, 

they got a booming economy. For crying out loud, the NDP 

made a plan on the economy. They made a plan for highways. 

They made a plan for education. They made a plan for health. 

They made a plan for the environment. They made a plan for 

housing. They made a plan for training. Mr. Speaker, they had 

all these plans. So what this guy said, well how about if we 

adopt their plan? All the plans they have except for critical 

areas that we speak about in this amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So their little celebration. They’re holding hands, dancing in a 

circle, chanting we won, we won. Better follow the NDP plan. 

And their first opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to develop a budget, 

what did they do? They followed the NDP plan. They followed 

the NDP plan. And if I never speak in this Assembly again, Mr. 

Speaker, I can say to all those hard-liners, those right wingers 

out there that thought they had a champion over there, we have 

NDP-ized them, Mr. Speaker. If there’s ever a word that we 

could use, we can say throughout the process of time this was 

such an effective government that we NDP-ized the opposition 

who are supposed to be hard right wingers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the job is done. Now they’re trying to say oh 

no, no, no, no, you guys forgot certain areas. And then the 

fourth part of their plan, Mr. Speaker, is we will get two or 

three of our members to yell across, you know. We’ll get them. 

No you guys are bad, you know. You guys don’t know what 

you’re doing over there in the opposition. And you’ll get them 

to yell, oh NDP is to blame. So now we hear three or four of 

them ranting and raving and almost blowing a gasket trying to 

explain to us why the NDP is bad, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going 

to point out to those individuals that try that — nice try, nice 

try. Water off a duck’s back. But we look at that as foolish 

antics that the people of Saskatchewan are going to make you 

pay for, Mr. Speaker, and I’m talking about the opposition. So I 

want to point out as you look at some of the situations, Mr. 

Speaker, again I’ll point out, don’t insult the people of 

Saskatchewan’s intelligence, folks, because what happens when 

you claim credit for something that you have not done and you 

had nothing to do with, that makes you guys look absolutely 

foolish. 

 

Instead of wasting your time blaming the NDP for the past 16 

years, why don’t you get a political life, and you can figure out 

the strategy on your own to take Saskatchewan into the 21st 

century? And if you can’t figure it out, well resign. Step aside. 

We’ll take over again and show you how it’s done, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the bottom line. And as much as you want to 

yell and get your so-called . . . I could use the word goons, but 

for lack of a better word, I want to give the goons too much 

intellectual ability in the terms of the response that those guys 

might have. 

 

I want to make these points, Mr. Speaker. First of all, for the 

great social crusaders over there, you’re firing social workers. 

Guess what? You have money. You’re firing Saskatchewan 

Environment support staff. Guess what? You have money. 

You’re not putting social housing as a priority. Guess what? 

You guys have money. You know, you did not increase the 

social assistance rates to the lowest-income people in this 

province. Guess what, you guys? You have money. You did not 

commit to the Prince Albert mill. Guess what, you guys? You 

have money. You didn’t put effort into the First Nations and 

Métis people. Look at their budget. Zero. A big fat zero. Guess 

what, you guys? You have money. You know it’s Station 20 has 

no plans now. Look, you guys. You have money. 

 

Your first opportunity, the first opportunity to do something, 

you guys failed miserably. A big fat F. A big fat F. And I want 

to point out, Mr. Speaker, after they were having their little 

dancing and celebrating that they won and what do we do, 

follow the NDP, and they . . . [inaudible] . . . can’t do that right, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to point out that when I served as a cabinet minister 

under my premier’s government, former government — and 

I’m not going to say former premier because I’m too proud to 

say that — but under my premier’s former government, we 

knew that development of the economy wouldn’t get us a lot of 

votes from the right wingers. We knew that. But we still did it. 

Why? Because it was good for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Why? Because we governed for everybody. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, we know that spending major 

money on Highway No. 1, Trans-Canada Highway, major 

dollars, millions of dollars, we knew it may not result in us 



502 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

getting extra votes in that area, but guess what, Mr. Speaker? 

We invested in there, in that particular region, because it was 

good for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the investment into the sequestration project in 

Weyburn, that was a lot of effort, a lot of money in Weyburn, 

and we did that because we believed that this was good for 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So before we have anybody talking 

to us about certain areas not being recognized — like the 

working people, like the cities, like the North, the First Nations, 

Aboriginal people — I tell them, all throughout Saskatchewan 

the NDP served everyone in every region, not because of 

politics but because it was the right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. It 

was the right thing to do. 

 

And I want to point out, and I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, if 

we look at what they ignored . . . What did they ignore? 

Property tax relief. Property tax relief. And you drive through 

some of our cities, and I think some of these cities are, in my 

opinion, are very noble cities, they’re very proud cities with a 

lot of history to them. And you see some of their roads and 

some of the conditions of their recreation sites and some of their 

infrastructure, whether it’s water and sewer, whatever the case 

may be — these cities need money. 

 

And that minister of municipal services that’s bellowing from 

his chair again, you turned your back on the cities. And now 

every, every taxpayer, land taxpayer in Regina, in Saskatoon, in 

Prince Albert, throughout all the land — in the north, west, east, 

south — every taxpayer that pays municipal taxes will 

remember that minister turned his back on them and we said 7 

per cent. 

 

So as we hit, as we hit the cities, as we hit the cities and we see 

the potholes and we see some of the conditions of some of the 

public places that people use for recreation, or we see some of 

the cutbacks in services that the cities are forced to do or raise 

the taxes, I will tell them one thing: remember it was the Sask 

Party that put that plan into place. And you guys have money, 

for crying out loud. You have money, you guys. Why don’t you 

guys spend it like drunken sailors and give everybody money? 

You can do it. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, they — with all due respect to sailors — they 

had the money and they did not make the commitment that they 

should have and ought to have put, for the cities. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the cities, as I mentioned they are the noblest, in my 

opinion, of the entities that are out there because they’re the hub 

of activity, they’re centres of excellence, and they do so much 

to make Saskatchewan great. And you guys turned your back on 

them and you give them a paltry 7 per cent. 

 

So every bump that I hit on the Saskatoon streets, on the roads, 

or every dilapidated building I see somewhere, I’m going to 

remember the minister of municipal services and that 

government who refused to help those cities and those larger 

centres. When the time came and when they had the money, 

they turned their backs on them, Mr. Speaker. They turned their 

backs on them. 

 

And let’s talk about the skills training, Mr. Speaker, skills 

training. What’d they do? They slashed that as well. So there 

you go again, Mr. Speaker. A lot of young people, a lot of 

young people want to make Saskatchewan their home. They 

heard of this booming economy. They show up. Hey, we want 

to get trained. And guess what? Skills training, whether it’s for 

as a plumber, electrician, or whatever the case may be, these 

guys said, well let’s cut that. NDP was putting way too much 

money in this skills training stuff here. Let’s take that money 

and put it in somewhere else. 

 

Well that decision’s going to hurt the economy. It’s going to not 

help us attract young people, Mr. Speaker. Young people are 

not going to come here. They know they aren’t going to have 

that kind of support mechanism in place. So that’s one of the 

seven things that they did that I think really, really ought to be 

exposed to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the third area, Mr. Speaker, is the environment, the 

environment. And how many times, how many times have we 

been told there’s global warming? Evidence is there. And what 

do these guys do? They stick their heads in the sand, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s actually the oil sands that they stuck their head 

into, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to be very clear. We support oil and gas 

development. I support oil and gas development. But my 

goodness, put your thinking hats on or thinking caps on and 

think. Okay, if we’re going to support oil and gas sector . . . If 

we’re really smart as a party, we’re going to support the oil and 

gas sector. We’ll give them the right royalties, give them the 

right royalties. Then we’ll turn around and we’ll do something 

on the environmental front to counteract and to better the 

challenges we face overall on the environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And isn’t that make sense? Doesn’t that make sense as you 

invest in the oil and gas sector that may be creating some 

problems? And then you turn around and you invest in the 

environment. But these guys didn’t, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t. 

What they did was they invested into more aircraft, Mr. 

Speaker, and more conservation officers. There was no effort on 

their part to talk about the environment. 

 

And the Minister of the Environment says, well I’m bored 

sitting here. Well I’d be bored too if I was broke, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d be bored if I had no money to do any planning. And that’s 

why we’re not asking her any questions, because there was no 

investment in the environment, Mr. Speaker. None in this 

budget. 

 

And yet the young people, the old people, industry, and 

everybody that really enjoys Saskatchewan’s beautiful scenery 

and nature in general, the scientists, everybody’s saying the 

environmental issue has got to be dealt with. How many more 

times do they have to say that, Mr. Speaker? The environment 

is being threatened. You have global warming. You got major 

problems. Why aren’t you listening to that call, Mr. Speaker? 

 

That’s what they’re telling the Saskatchewan Party government. 

And guess what? They have the money. They have the money, 

Mr. Speaker. And I point out as well that there’s many, many 

people from all quarters that say exactly what I’m saying. For 

crying out loud, listen to what we’re saying and spend some 

major money into the environment so we can at least, at least 

tell our grandchildren we tried. And these guys never did, Mr. 

Speaker. These guys never did. 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

And that’s why over the session we’re not going to ask the 

Minister of the Environment any questions. Not because she 

can talk about blaming us for 16 years, because there’s really no 

plan over there, no plan over there. 

 

Now on the social housing, Mr. Speaker, on the fourth point of 

social housing. My goodness, you know, you sit there and you 

talk about the calls that we had over the years to talk about 

social housing. And what do these guys say when you have the 

money? They say, we’re going to study it. We’re going to get 

this Merriman guy and this Pringle guy together and they’re 

going to figure out a solution for us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish both those gentlemen good luck in 

finding the solution, because there’s 10,000 books on solutions. 

The people of Saskatchewan, those that are living on the street, 

guess what, they’re tired of . . . [inaudible] . . . on the problem. 

They want clarity on the solution. And these guys never 

provided one iota of any evidence whatsoever of any kind of 

support, support towards social housing. 

 

Again what happened? It was the old NDP plan that they put 

money into. It was the old NDP plan, and today now when I 

watch them at these grand openings, cutting ribbons, saying oh 

this is for low-income people and medium-income people, you 

know, I kind of smile. Because the rest of Saskatchewan smiles 

too because the first thing that comes to my mind, well you 

guys had nothing to do with that. 

 

You shouldn’t be on the front page cutting ribbons. What’s 

wrong with you guys? You should be giving credit where 

credit’s due by saying, it was the NDP plan so maybe we should 

get one of them to cut the ribbon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Belanger: — But that smart guy in the Sask Party said, no, 

no, no, no. Don’t start that, you guys. You’re going to tell 

everybody it was us that did this. Oh, oh, oh, okay. Back to plan 

B now. Oh, no that was . . . no, no, that was plan A. No, no, that 

was . . . Whatever the plan might be, they’re confused over 

there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to point out, I want to point out that when you guys, 

when the Sask Party makes comments about their investment, 

their plan, the whole part of Saskatchewan, we all have a 

collective laugh. We all smile and we all say, okay, whatever, 

you know. And then they do it again a month later. And I want 

to tell them, you know, it’s kind of funny, you guys. You know, 

it’s almost like The Gong Show, because people know, people 

know you didn’t do it. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And then the other . . . last session, they’re talking about the 

Roughriders, you know, how they never won a cup under the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they claimed their claim to 

fame was. A month after they came in, yes, we won the Grey 

Cup because you guys are gone. Yes, okay. And then I opened 

the paper and Joseph is gone. They couldn’t even hang on to 

Joseph, for crying out loud, you know — championship 

quarterback, couldn’t hang on to him. 

 

And then they talk about, another few things to talk about — 

oh, our booming population. Oh my goodness, did you open up 

a lab where they can fund and create people for the province, or 

were these people on their way here already? You know, are 

they actually back in some Sask Party room cloning people? 

And oh, a record number of people working. Well hello, we 

done that two years ago, and we keep on doing it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the budget, of course I like the 

budget. It’s a good budget. But there’s huge deficiencies, I 

mean there’s a lot of deficiencies in certain areas that are going 

to hurt. They’re going to hurt. And you look at some of the 

other challenges, Mr. Speaker, and I could go on. 

 

I could go on. But I’m not going to because the bottom line is 

this is one boring government, Mr. Speaker. This is one boring 

government, Mr. Speaker. And about the only entertaining we 

get is when they say, well this new government is proud to 

announce 10 million on housing and there’s the building right 

there. The building took over two years of construction. Well 

we’re going to pay for it. Yes, no you’re not going to pay for it; 

that was money left behind. Well it’s a new government. What 

the heck. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, enough of my imitation of the Sask Party 

government. I think I want to get on to my final point. 

 

And a more serious point is the fact that, you know, it’s really 

important that the Sask Party ought to know — the Sask Party 

ought to know — when you insult the people of 

Saskatchewan’s intelligence by claiming all these good things 

happen because you guys are government, you know, you just, 

you just really get them really upset. And the second thing you 

do, second response you get is you get laughter. And the third 

response you’re going to get is they’re going to be awfully mad 

at you unless you do what you say you’re going to do. 

 

And you can talk about your 58 promises like set an election 

date — I can promise that in a heartbeat, you know and deliver 

it . . . [inaudible] . . . Big deal. Big deal, you know. And that’s 

supposed to be the mantra of a new government. Well you can 

have that new government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s really important that people ought to 

know is that when this party took over power in 1991 — I was 

not part of it of course — but when it took over power, they had 

$15 billion, a $15 billion debt, Mr. Speaker, 15 billion. And you 

know, the most amazing thing, when these guys took over, they 

don’t have that debt hanging over their head. They have a 

booming economy. They have the greatest population growth. 

They have record revenues, record oil and gas, record number 

of people. The debt has gone down by an incredible amount, 

Mr. Speaker, based on the people of Saskatchewan’s work 

alongside of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now imagine for a moment as those guys rant and rave and yell 

and turn red over there. Imagine for the moment, Mr. Speaker, 

if we did not have that $15 billion debt what this party could 

have done on social programs, on environmental programs, on 

housing programs, and really preparing young people for the 

future, Mr. Speaker. Imagine what we could have gotten. But 

we never had that opportunity. Why? Because we had a 

problem called the big debt left behind by those guys over 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I hear, Mr. Speaker, them talking about a new 

government, give me a break. People don’t believe that. They’re 

going to experiment with you. That’s what I said at election 

day. But, you know, 46 months from now and counting I think 

that experiment’s going to end, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why on 

this side of the House we say, flattery? Thanks. You’re 

following our budget. 

 

But you know if we would have been in power, we would have 

done things radically different on many other fronts to make 

sure that people knew that after we slayed the deficit and the 

debt monster that it was time for the NDP to really put their 

money into the environmental front, which our former leader or 

former premiers tried, on the social programs, on preparing 

young people, and that’s where this budget failed miserably, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my final point is — I’ll point out to these guys across the 

way, Mr. Speaker — very clear, very clear. It is always better to 

be a has-been than a never-was-er. And if that’s all we’re 

getting from the Saskatchewan Party is a cheap imitation of 

what the NDP wanted to do but were never given the 

opportunity to do because of a wide variety of reasons . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Sixteen years. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — And all they yell across the way is 16 years, 

16 years. Like my goodness, give it up already. 

 

You guys talk about looking to the future. Well who’s looking 

in their rear-view mirror is the Sask Party, because they’re 

worried. The NDP are catching up. And guess what? Guess 

what, Mr. Speaker? All the trouble they’ve had since they’ve 

been in government, it’s only been four months, four months. 

Four months and all the trouble that they have caused and 

created, Mr. Speaker, and as much as you want to dress it up, 

imagine what the situation will be four years from now, Mr. 

Speaker. Four months versus four years, and I’ll tell you and the 

people of Saskatchewan, that’s why we think that the budget 

itself is a step in the right direction. 

 

But because there’s huge deficiencies in four critical areas, we 

decided as a caucus that we’d put an amendment, and we’re 

trying to see if these guys would continue copying what we’re 

doing. And if they were smart, they would, Mr. Speaker. If they 

were smart, they would. But I’m afraid they won’t because 

what they’re going to to do, they’re going to say oh no, no, no, 

we’re not NDP-like. We’re right wingers. Okay well show us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out again that Saskatchewan 

really thought, really thought this new government was going to 

be exciting, was going to be innovative, and was going to be 

daring. Mr. Speaker, they’re nothing but. So we’ve been given a 

time out. We’ll graciously take that time out. But as I’ve said to 

those that need the inspiration and to those that have not lost 

hope, we’ll be back. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to debate the new budget, 

the new historic Sask Party budget. But I’d be remiss if I didn’t 

just make a few comments on the member for Athabasca. Just 

remind him that at one time we sat as Liberals over there, and 

he was one of the people that would condemn the NDP day 

after day, just like he did there, and all of a sudden he’s sitting 

with his friends over there and all of a sudden everything’s all 

right. So the member should take a look in the mirror, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I found some of the comments he made over there kind of 

interesting. He was condemning the Sask Party for being in 

power four months and paying some of the debt down. And I 

know this is foreign to the NDP because in 16 years they paid 

no debt down. In fact if you add up the debt . . . The members 

opposite would be well advised to listen. If you add up the debt 

and liabilities of this province, add them together, they’re $21.6 

billion, which is far higher when they came to power in 1991. 

And there’s not a member on that side — including the 

member, evidently, from Athabasca — that even knows what 

paying the debt down would mean. 

 

He went on to talk about the Sask Party selling the upgrader. 

He’s got to start attending caucus meetings because he totally 

missed it, because it’s part of the NDP’s hidden agenda — 

privatization. It will be if they’d have been elected. Four more 

years, they’d be selling the Crowns. He’s got to watch what’s 

going on in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He went on to condemn the Sask Party for the condition of the 

highways and the streets in Saskatoon. He was talking about the 

potholes in Saskatoon. Mr. Don Atchison, the mayor up there, 

would really appreciate that after the NDP had been in power 

for 16 years and those streets helped get to that way by the 

underfunding from that NDP government, so the member for 

Athabasca should pay attention to what he’s saying and who 

he’s condemning for what. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really appreciate having the opportunity to talk 

on this budget when it’s built around growth, security, and the 

promises we made in our campaign. 

 

But I want to just talk a bit about the member for Nutana today 

in question period, and she’s talking about the funding of a 

grocery store in Saskatoon. And at the end of every question, 

she would say, well now is that mean or just incompetent? So 

she was insinuating we’re one or the other. 

 

I want to go back and I want to review what that government, 

that NDP government did when they came to power in 1991, 

just in case the member and the members opposite forgot. And 

let’s talk about what she’s talking today. 

 

Let’s go through the whole list of the things they did to rural 

Saskatchewan. Number one, you cancelled the GRIP [gross 

revenue insurance program] program out there. Now would that 

be mean or incompetent to the people and the farm families of 

rural Saskatchewan? Well you hadn’t been in power very long 

when you did this, so I suggest it was probably mean because 

you hadn’t learned how to be incompetent, but you learned very 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

quickly how that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I just want to remind the 

members that their remarks to be placed through the Chair. We 

shouldn’t draw individual members directly into the debate. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to go 

on to another thing that they did when they got to power in 

1991 and talking about what the Athabasca member said about 

the streets in Saskatoon. They cut funding to municipalities, and 

they downloaded on municipalities to balance the books, and 

they did that all over the province, Mr. Speaker. Now I don’t 

know if that’s mean or mean-spirited or incompetent but to the 

people of rural Saskatchewan, it hit home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they went on in 1991 to close 52 hospitals. I 

would say people in rural Saskatchewan would say that’s mean 

and incompetent because what it did, Mr. Speaker, is it drove 

nurses out of this province. It drove doctors out of this province. 

And guess when we come to power in November the biggest 

issue we had to deal with? A shortage of nurses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been here, like the member said, 

we’ve been here four months and already we’ve hired 300 more 

nurses to backfill for the shortage caused by that government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I go on to talk about 

rural Saskatchewan and what the NDP did when they came to 

power in 1991. They cut funding to education which in turn has 

revolved into closing schools in rural Saskatchewan. Now what 

would you call that? Mean? Well I would call it incompetent 

because you weren’t planning for the future. 

 

When you chased nurses out of this province, when you chased 

teachers out of this province and, Mr. Speaker, when they 

chased doctors out of this province, they weren’t looking down 

the road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they went on in 1991 and they quit fixing 

highways. They quit patching holes in highways. And for a 

member of that government to have the nerve to say that it’s all 

the Saskatchewan Party’s fault because we’ve been here four 

months and all the problems with our roads fall on the Sask 

Party, I think it’s time, Mr. Speaker, that we look at . . . they 

look at in the mirror and just see where they’re going. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit . . . I talked about growth, 

security, and promises, and I want to talk about some of those 

promises and commitments we made. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

talk about young people and keeping them in Saskatchewan. 

And in the election we talked about launching the most 

aggressive youth retention plan in Canada by rebating up to 

$20,000 in tuition costs. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 2008-09 budget 

commits $12 million to the graduate retention program which 

includes $20,000 in tuition fee rebates. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

promise made and a promise kept, something that the party 

opposite probably can’t get. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the nurses that I talked 

before. We committed to filling a bunch of nurse spaces in this 

province, for retaining nurses, and going out and finding nurses, 

Mr. Speaker. That was a commitment that we made during the 

election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the ’08-09 budget provides $20.7 million for 

nurse recruitment and retention, on top of the $60 million 

partnership with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, funded for 

the 2007-08. Mr. Speaker, we go on and talk about . . . we 

provide $40 million for four years to work towards the goal of 

creating 300 new registered nurse education seats in 

Saskatchewan over the next four years. Mr. Speaker, a promise 

made, a promise kept. And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to talk about ag land and what we do in the agriculture 

sector in this province. In the election campaign a promise we 

made was to increase property tax rebate on ag land. Mr. 

Speaker, in the ’08-09 budget, increases to the property tax 

rebate on farm land went from 38 per cent to 47 per cent. 

Promise made, promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it goes on to talk about education. Increased K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] education operating funding to 

school boards by $28 million in 2008-2009. That was the 

commitment, the promise we made. Mr. Speaker, through the 

’08-09 budget, the Saskatchewan Party government is providing 

$34.6 million increase to K to 12 education funding. Once 

again, promise made, promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the list just goes on and on and on. Talk about the CAIS 

[Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program or the new 

AgriStability program, Mr. Speaker. A promise we made was to 

fully fund the provincial government share of the agriculture 

risk management programs. Mr. Speaker, one of the first things 

we did when we came to power, through this new budget, is to 

fully fund the farm programs in this province. Something I 

might add that hasn’t happened under the NDP. They were 

always the last one to fund these programs, and had to be 

dragged kicking and screaming with the federal government to 

actually pay our share and have an input into what the 

programming would even look like. And that programming 

needs a lot of work, Mr. Speaker, because the NDP past Ag 

ministers never got to the table and helped build these 

programs, and we’re having to clean up that mess, Mr. Speaker, 

once again. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the promises we made during the election 

was providing 300 million in five-year interest-free loans for 

municipalities out there to service lots for the growing economy 

that’s coming in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

promise we’ve also kept. Promise we made, promise we kept — 

300 million of interest-free loans to municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also made commitments toward the highways. 

Dedicate 140 million over four years to provincial 

government’s share of the NewGrade upgrader to improve road 

and highway infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, the ’08-09 budget 

provides that 140 million over two years from the NewGrade 

upgrader sales into just those same roads and highways. 

Promise made, promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

Municipal funding, increased funding for municipal revenue 

sharing by 7 per cent. Promise kept once again, Mr. Speaker. 

And I know I could go on and on, and I know I’m getting 

probably tiring because the NDP don’t like to hear when you 

make commitments that you actually keep them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk for a few minutes directly about 

agriculture which is near and dear to my heart. And I just talked 

about fully funding the CAIS program to the tune of $91.5 

million, the new AgriStability, agri-investment that we’ve put 

into this province and we’ve put in for programs for the farming 

community in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Crop insurance, just want to talk on this, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 

program that I think many farmers out there felt that needed a 

lot of work, and we’re going to do that work this summer. But 

when it come to funding with higher grain prices, Mr. Speaker, 

we put $129.8 million into the crop insurance program. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s an additional $25 million more than the NDP 

government put in last year for the crop insurance program. 

 

We’ve also come out, Mr. Speaker . . . and it’s due to the 

drought in the Southwest and the tough times they’re having out 

there, and the problem is many wells are going dry out there 

right now, and they’re real concerned with dugouts and things 

like that for watering their cattle and having water for their 

ranches and farms. We’re going to put $6 million program in 

place for farm and ranch water, Mr. Speaker, into an 

infrastructure fund. The Southwest has had the drought for the 

past 2, 3, 4 years in some cases, and anything we can do to 

alleviate the water situation, I think, Mr. Speaker, will be well 

received. 

 

I want to talk about a committee we put together from the 

Southwest, Mr. Speaker. Dave Marit, the president of SARM, is 

on that committee. Doug Steele, a director with SARM, and 

Larry Grant, a producer in the Southwest, are our resource 

people out there that are helping us put this program together 

and I think have a real handle on the problems out there and 

how we can address them or start to address them to help their 

producers in their area and help the Southwest get through these 

tough times. 

 

We’ve also increased, Mr. Speaker, research funding of 1.6 

million to up to $15.2 million. And, Mr. Speaker, why that’s 

important . . . I think with the agriculture industry that’s going 

to be part of the future, whether it’s in higher yielding grains or 

grains that could be frost tolerant and take 2, 3, 4 degrees of 

frost, which could save farmers millions and millions of dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, down the road. 

 

I want to talk again, because I think it’s very important to farm 

families out there, is the education tax rebate. And this was a 

commitment, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve made over four years, 

that we would start to increase that rebate to farm families to 

get to the point where it’s actually really making a difference — 

something the members opposite always said they were going 

to do but never followed through on, Mr. Speaker. So that 

rebate’s going from 38 per cent to 47 per cent and next year 

higher and on up. 

 

Rural road strategy, $89 million, Mr. Speaker, long overdue 

because . . . one of the reasons I ran for politics, Mr. Speaker, 

was because of the downloading and funding cuts to 

municipalities all over the province but especially the rural 

infrastructure in the RMs [rural municipality]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thing. And there’s so many good things, Mr. 

Speaker, happening in agriculture, which is a far cry from 

where it’s been in the last 16 years, but some of the things that 

happening are too numerous to even keep within the budget. So 

I’m going to tell you about some things that didn’t even fall 

within the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to look and we’re looking very seriously at 

bringing the CAIS administration back to Saskatchewan. And 

that’s something that no previous Ag minister from the NDP 

side would even contemplate, and the reasoning being that if it 

was here in Saskatchewan, the government of the day would be 

responsible when the program’s not responding for our farmers. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if that program’s not responding to our 

farmers’ needs, maybe we need it back here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So number one, we can make it more responsive, that it doesn’t 

take two to three years to get an application processed, which is 

happening now. And if the government of the NDP, previous 

government, had of dealt with this issue long ago we would 

have it here. We would deal with it. And we would be like 

Alberta where turnaround time can be as quick as seven days, 

not two to three years, Mr. Speaker. I think something like 

that’s long overdue, and it’s something we can do in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing we’re going to do is a crop 

insurance review. And I know this really isn’t part of the 

budget, but I think it’s something that is going to be well 

received out there. Very quickly we’re going to put into place a 

crop insurance review where . . . Many farmers in this province 

don’t carry crop insurance because — I said when we were in 

opposition — the crop insurance program doesn’t work for 

many farm families out there. We’re going to go around this 

province and find out what changes we could make to that 

program, how we can improve that program. But those changes 

are going to come from the grassroots and from farmers 

themselves. 

 

And this fall we’re going to put all those ideas together and 

improve that program so once and for all maybe these programs 

start to work for farm families and for farm businesses because 

farm businesses are getting to be very big business out there, 

Mr. Speaker. And we should be doing the things we can and 

then after that just getting out of the road and letting them run 

their own business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to put 380,000 into a gopher research program, 

Mr. Speaker. And I really want to take a minute to show our 

appreciation for a number of the RMs in the Southwest 

especially, Mr. Speaker, 164 RMs who also came to the table 

with $500 each to put towards this gopher research program 

because the problem is so bad in the Southwest and costing 

millions upon millions of dollars and maybe out by . . . You 

know, it probably isn’t going to help this year, but down the 

road it’s certainly I think going to help start to deal with the 

problem of so many gophers out there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also working with SARM to expand 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

the strychnine registration past July 31, 2008. And we think this 

is very important because that’s the only avenue farmers have 

right now to try and control the gopher problem until we get 

this research in place and maybe find other alternatives. So 

that’s one of the things that we’re working on. Another one is to 

approve another 60 additional RMs to be eligible for that same 

strychnine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the Canadian 

Wheat Board today. And I know this is a subject that the 

members opposite really near and dear to their heart. It must be, 

Mr. Speaker, because they invested 123,000 of taxpayers’ 

money into Friends of the Wheat Board to promote the 

monopoly from the wheat board. But they did that, Mr. 

Speaker, right after 62 per cent of Western farmers said they 

want choice to market their own barley. 

 

So what the NDP government as usual have been doing is 

trying to pick winners and losers, although this time they picked 

the minority because far less farmers want the wheat board as a 

monopoly, I believe, right now than the ones that want the 

choice. They’re not saying and we’re not saying the wheat 

board has to go. What we’re saying is farmers should have the 

right to market their grain to who they want, when they want, 

for the largest amount of money they can receive for that grain. 

 

I don’t think that’s asking too much, Mr. Speaker. They put the 

inputs to grow that grain. They pay the taxes on the land to 

grow that grain. They should have the right because it’s their 

property, to market this grain in the best way they see. And it’s 

their grain, Mr. Speaker. It’s not the NDP’s. It’s not the Sask 

Party’s. It’s not the government of the day. It should be the 

right of farmers to do as they see fit with their property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m so enthused about this new budget and being 

part of a Sask Party government, I could go on for hours and 

I’m sure the members opposite would love me to. But because 

my colleagues would like to go on, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll stop 

there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to also congratulate you on letting 

your name stand for Speaker. I know you’re going to do a great 

job. So thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a privilege and an honour to enter into 

the debate on the budget of the Saskatchewan Party, our first 

budget. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I want to begin — as I did not enter into the 

debate on the Throne Speech back in December and this is my 

first opportunity to rise in debate — I want to acknowledge the 

constituents and the residents of Canora-Pelly for re-electing 

me for the fourth time, and I appreciate their support and advice 

that is provided to me on an ongoing basis. 

 

I also want to thank my staff back in Canora-Pelly — my 

constituency assistant, Bob Blahay, and my two other assistants 

who provide part-time work, both Carol Sleeva and Brandi 

Zawislak — for their outstanding work because without them it 

is very difficult to make sure that all of the concerns that are 

raised at the local level are addressed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those opening comments, I’m very 

pleased to be able to talk about this outstanding budget because, 

Mr. Speaker, the reaction by so many has indeed been that. It 

has been outstanding as we look at the comments made by so 

many individuals throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to repeat all of the comments made, 

but I’m just going to talk about some of the headlines. Mr. 

Speaker, after our March 19 budget, the headline that was 

headed . . . article on behalf of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 

Federation said this: STF “welcomes overdue funding for K to 

12 education.” Mr. Speaker, the article regarding the rural 

municipal position was this: “SARM pleased with provincial 

investments in infrastructure.” Mr. Speaker, the Chamber of 

Commerce, their headline on their article was this: “Chamber 

supports strategic investments to promote future growth.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the key to looking forward, to ensuring 

that this tremendous momentum that we have in the province of 

Saskatchewan right now, the growth that we’re seeing in so 

many areas, is going to be sustained into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one of the telltale comments was delivered 

on March 20, the day after the budget, on CJME radio, and I 

want to enter that article into the record, Mr. Speaker. The 

heading on that article was, “Budget: new government put our 

money where their mouth is — growth agenda did a giant step 

forward.” Mr. Speaker, the comments are by Paul Martin. And 

they are, and I quote: 

 

Last fall when the province’s two major political parties 

duked it out in the election, the key theme that emerged 

was centered on the way the parties would deal with the 

buoyant economy. 

 

The NDP said it was time to harvest the economy. In 

effect, it was big enough and that we should take the extra 

money generated by the economic activity to underwrite 

an expensive drug plan. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party on the other hand argued a 

different vision saying that the growth pattern had just 

begun, and it was time to invest in building a bigger 

economy not halt its progress. Well the new government 

got its first chance to put our money where its mouth was 

in yesterday’s budget. 

 

With the title, Ready for Growth, the Saskatchewan Party 

directed its attention to infrastructure, the foundation for 

economic growth as we build a new platform to continue 

building upon. And the government’s promise in the last 

election that it will deliver a growth agenda took a giant 

step forward. 

 

I’m Paul Martin. 

 

End of quote, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that is very indicative 

of how people in the province have reacted to the Sask Party’s 

first budget. 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend some time talking of course about 

my responsibility, and that is education. On behalf of so many 

people in the province of Saskatchewan who have children in 

schools right across this province, Mr. Speaker . . . There are 

over 700 schools throughout the province, and there are many 

parents. There are many children. There are many taxpayers 

who are very concerned about what happens in education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my cabinet colleagues, and 

especially the Minister of Finance, the member for Melfort, for 

understanding that — at this point, because of what the previous 

administration has done to education, its lack of support to 

education for so many years — that there was a need to address 

infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, there was also a need to address 

other initiatives within the education budget, and I think we’ve 

done just a tremendous job. And I want to thank the caucus 

members and the cabinet for seeing that this was going to be 

key to the success of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Education is the cornerstone. It is the building block for moving 

this province forward, and this government has recognized this. 

How has it recognized this, Mr. Speaker? Well I can tell you 

that the Education budget in its entirety is $1.186 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. That is an outstanding amount of money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker — Mr. Deputy Speaker is 

now sitting in the Chair — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was an 

increase of $241.7 million, which is 25.6 per cent increase. It 

increased a quarter of its total amount, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

That shows the people of this province, that shows, I believe, 

the members opposite that we are very supportive and that we 

want to move education forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And I’m going to highlight some of the things that have 

happened in education with this additional $241 million. First 

of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the increase to the foundation 

operating grant. This is the money that is transferred by way of 

government grant to all of the school divisions. This additional 

monies that was provided to school divisions is $34.6 million, 

which is almost a 6 per cent increase to what was previously 

received. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this fulfills a commitment within 

our platform that said over the course of four years, we would 

increase funding to K to 12 system by 20 per cent. And in our 

first year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are already at 6 per cent 

increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also provided $500,000 in the way of 

funding to community schools to increase the nutrition 

program. Mr. Speaker, it was in our platform. It was something 

that we campaigned on, and we have fulfilled that promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many other initiatives that I wish to put 

on the record. I want to talk about the fact that we have 

increased the intensive supports factor. This is a program that is 

within the grant structure that is allocated to school divisions to 

provide support programming for students with learning 

disabilities and difficulties and disadvantages. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we increased this by $3 million, a very significant 

amount. 

Mr. Speaker, this has now raised the total of monies provided to 

school divisions in the way of intensive supports to $67.4 

million. This will allow school divisions to ensure that the 

programs that are needed to address those learning difficulties 

and those learning disabilities will in fact be achieved. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have also increased by $2 million the 

amount of money that is provided for pre-kindergarten 

programs. And what this will mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

we will now add an additional 38 programs. Mr. Speaker, for 

each . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sorry, this pre-kindergarten 

program is designed to provide assistance to school divisions 

for vulnerable three- and four-year-olds. And this will now 

increase the total number of programs from 155 programs to 

193 programs that will meet the needs of over 3,000 students, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member 

from Athabasca talk about that this was something so close to 

the NDP. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this program was not even in 

existence when the NDP were talking about it. This is now 

going to reach proportions that will address the needs. This will 

in fact put in place a program that will be very well accepted 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things we have done is that we 

have added $33.8 million for child care facilities. This is an 

increase of $3.4 million. What will this additional money 

provide, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well I can tell you that it will 

add 500 additional child care spaces. Mr. Speaker, this brings 

that total to 10,350 spaces. Mr. Speaker, that is a commitment. 

That is a commitment of the Saskatchewan Party government, 

and it shows by the fact that we have put our money where our 

mouth is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other 

things that we have provided is $7.5 million in funding to the 

province’s early childhood development and KidsFirst strategy. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve recognized, and many educators across the 

province, many parents, many school boards have recognized 

that the time to deal with ensuring that our young children have 

the ability to succeed at what they do is to address those 

problems early, to address them at the three-year-old stage, 

four-year-old stage. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have programs in schools 

across this province, in community schools, where there are 

18-month-old children that are now coming in because they 

have been identified that they need some assistance. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re providing the funds to those school divisions so 

that those programs can be supported and can be put in place, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the time that I want to 

spend this evening and as limited as it is, I want to spend it 

talking about capital projects, the development across the 

province in dealing with so many of the needs. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think what we need to first have people 

understand is the infrastructure deficit that is currently within 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

the province. 

 

I want to put this on the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that right 

now before the facilities branch of the ministry of learning in 

the major capital request list, there are 107 applications. The 

initial costs — which are, no question they are low, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, at this time because inflationary costs have increased 

dramatically as we move month to month — those projects 

were identified as requiring $555 million. That’s what the initial 

major requests are. In fact the school boards association is 

indicating that the backlog of infrastructure issues might need 

as much as $1.1 billion to address those needs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, it’s very easy to see why 

we have that kind of an infrastructure need. We have to look at 

the times when schools were in fact constructed in this 

province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 1969 and older, those are 

the categories — we categorize schools as being pre-1950, 1950 

to ’59, of that decade, and ’60 to ’69, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that total is 68 per cent of all of the 

schools in the province of Saskatchewan are older than 1969. 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s already 39 years ago and 

older. So we know that there is a decaying infrastructure. We 

know that there is a need. 

 

And, you know, I listened to the member from Athabasca again 

talk about what they had accomplished and what they had done. 

And I want to put on the record that this is the accomplishment 

of the NDP for the past five years. The NDP, through the 

government funding of capital, invested $169.2 million for K to 

12 schools. Five years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they invested a 

total of $169 million. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated and as the Minister of 

Finance indicated, we have put forward a very aggressive 

capital plan. We have put forward a capital plan this year’s 

budget that is $117 million. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we also added just a few weeks 

ago, because yesterday was still the last day of the previous 

budget and there were some additional revenues from oil and 

gas, we added $13.1 million to last year’s capital. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this short time since the 

Saskatchewan Party has been in government we have added 

$130 million to capital in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are going to be many happy 

communities. There are going to be communities right across 

this province that are going to look forward to some new 

projects. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do also want to 

indicate for the record the kinds of things that we as a new 

government inherited from the former ministry. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the projects that were announced in 2003 by that 

former government — and interestingly enough, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it was an election year when those projects were 

announced — there was still an outstanding amount of 

commitment of $27 million for the schools that were announced 

in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have now been able to complete the 

final amounts of money needed to finish Tommy Douglas 

school, to finish Bethlehem School, and to finish the 

francophone school within the province, within the city of 

Saskatoon. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve also been able to finish 

the funding for the project that was identified also in 2003 for 

Nutana and for E.D. Feehan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that $27 million will go towards projects that 

were already announced in 2003. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 2008. So for the member for 

Athabasca to suddenly suggest that we were copying the NDP 

plans is ridiculous. It is totally ridiculous to listen to him make 

those kinds of comments. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other thing 

that we have been able to do is to make announcements about, 

of course, new projects. And that’s the part that I’m really 

excited about, to be able to announce that communities who 

have been waiting a long time for capital projects. These 

projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have been submitted as projects 

by school boards. School boards submit forms that are called 

B-1’s. Some of these forms have been in the ministry in 2004, 

2005, 2006. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re finally going to get the opportunity 

to deal with Scott Collegiate. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Scott 

Collegiate here in Regina is a project that will encompass a lot 

of partners. It will provide the north central region of Regina 

with an outstanding complex that will be able to address the 

needs. It will address not only education needs, it will address 

health needs. It will commit a facility in short order, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because we’re committing the entire amount 

necessary in this year. We’re not spreading any of these projects 

out over a number of years as the former NDP government did. 

We’re putting the money now into place. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other projects that has been 

announced of course is in Oxbow. Oxbow is a community in 

the South East Cornerstone School Division, where they have 

been waiting for a project for a long time. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are two other 

communities that are very close to Oxbow whose schools have 

closed. They were small schools in the communities of Alida 

and in Alameda. Those schools have closed because they were 

under the impression that there was going to be a new school in 

Oxbow quickly. 

 

Well under that government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under the 

former NDP, I dare say those people in Oxbow would have 

been waiting a long time. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 

going to address that need and there’s going to be a new school 

constructed in Oxbow that in fact will result in five schools 

being put together in one kindergarten to grade 12 complex. 

That is going to be significant for that community, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the same thing is going to happen in 

Porcupine Plain. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Porcupine Plain is in need of 

renovations to its K to 12 school to ensure that the programs 

and the environment that students are learning in is upgraded. 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are committing to that project. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are also committing . . . And I know 

the two members from Prince Albert, one on this side of the 

House and the other member on that side of the House, will be 

happy to know that the project for St. Anne School in Prince 

Albert is going to be completed in short order because we are 

providing the funding for that project in this fiscal year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to 

indicate that the Churchill High School in La Ronge is going to 

be constructed as well. Significant dollars. This project will 

probably be in the 14 to $15 million range, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that amount of money is going to be allocated to 

La Ronge. 

 

And I also heard the member from Athabasca talk about 

nothing being provided to the First Nations and Métis. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this school is wanted by that community, is 

wanted by those individuals, and it will address the needs of the 

First Nations and Métis communities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[20:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re also 

announcing a project in Duck Lake. The Stobart Community 

School in Duck Lake in fact has been waiting to have its project 

announced, and we’re going to do exactly that. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there are projects in Maple Creek Composite High 

School. There’s a project at Balcarres School. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the first project of an expansion in Humboldt, the 

Humboldt Collegiate, is also going to be done this year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are significant projects. These are 

projects that are costing in the neighbourhood of $100 million 

because that’s what needs to be done. We need to get ready for 

growth. We need to be ready to ensure that the future of our 

children, that the future of Saskatchewan, that the potential for 

Saskatchewan is in fact realized. 

 

One of the other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re 

announcing is that in the city of Saskatoon — because there is 

significant growth in Saskatoon, Saskatoon’s population, 

Saskatoon’s expansion is significant — and we have announced 

that the monies that are needed to do some land acquisition in 

the Willow Grove area is in fact being announced this year. 

And we are going to spend $1.7 million of this year’s budget to 

ensure that that land is acquired, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 

what this government will do. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re also providing a number of 

initiatives that are referred to as block initiatives. Block 

initiatives are those in some of the other schools that aren’t on 

the large capital scene, and they are projects that are lower than 

$500,000. We’re also going to be allocating $12 million to 

address those projects that are under 500,000. Mr. Speaker, 

simple math tells you that’s going to be 24 schools at least that 

will get some funding to be able to address, whether it be a roof 

repair, a window replacement, or repairs within the structure 

itself to floors. These are things that this government sees as a 

priority, and we’re putting our funds there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had some discussions in this 

Assembly about the education property tax rebate. The 

members opposite have said, well it’s such a small amount. It’s 

really insignificant. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amount of 

money that we are putting in place to ensure that there is a 

rebate to agriculture, residential, and commercial lands is 

$156.6 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s significant dollars, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I want to indicate for people in the 

province exactly where those rebates will be allocated. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as known by all of the members on this 

side of the House, of course agricultural is the main component 

and of course the largest land group owners in the province. 

They are agricultural people. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 

commitment to increase the percentage of rebate to property 

taxpayers of agriculture land will result in $91.8 million worth 

of rebate to agricultural producers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, our commitment to 

increase the percentage of rebate from 10 per cent to 12 per cent 

will ensure that residential owners will receive $43.5 million 

worth of rebates. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is going to be on 

average $133 per person. The members opposite have been 

standing in this House and saying, oh it’s just a $20 pizza for 

this year. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s $133 on average for 

residential homeowners. 

 

And finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the commercial-industrial 

rebate will be $21.2 million which, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

translates into $156 million. I dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that is a significant amount, and when people in the province of 

Saskatchewan who listened to the now Leader of the Opposition 

opposite talk about . . . I believe it was four years ago when he 

said that the current program is “. . . the status quo is not on.” 

It’s not on any more. We can’t have that. 

 

What did they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They didn’t put in 

place a plan that was going to be achievable, and we’ve said 

right from the get-go, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the rebate 

program is a short-term program. And we’ve put significant 

dollars into the rebate program. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

have already started our work to ensure that there is a 

permanent relief put in place for property tax owners. 

 

And my colleague, the member from Rosetown, is going to be 

working on that project as the Legislative Secretary in charge of 

ensuring that the property tax question is dealt with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a couple other 

things that I want to talk about today is the amount of money 

that the province has put into the budget, the education budget, 

to ensure that the pensions that are owed to superannuated 

teachers are in fact going to be met. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 

not a secret — even though the members opposite, some of 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

them don’t want to admit it — there is an unfunded pension 

liability. That unfunded pension liability is significant. And as 

we move through the next number of years, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, up to about 2018, 2019, we will continue to see an 

increase in the amount of money that is needed to address the 

payments made on behalf of pension earners. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not a new problem. I can’t 

blame the NDP entirely for that one because that started back in 

the . . . even though I’d like to. But you know, that one started 

away back. 

 

But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 16 years they, the 

NDP, recognized that there was an unfunded pension liability. 

And I look at what Alberta has done, and I look at what 

Manitoba has done in terms of putting some monies into the 

plan in addition to meeting the obligations on an annual basis. 

And they have addressed that unfunded liability to a degree. 

 

And in fact in the province of Manitoba it looks like the plan is 

about 80 per cent funded. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan by the year 2026 we will begin to see a decline, 

but not till then. We then, from now to then, we must continue 

to add monies to the pension fund to ensure that we are 

fulfilling the legal obligation of this government to ensure that 

the pension obligations are met. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why there is a significant 

increase to the pension plan expenses for the Ministry of 

Education, as you will see in the Estimates book. Because each 

year now . . . Because the plan closed in 1979 — and based on a 

35-year career — probably the year 2014 as I indicated, maybe 

up to about 2017, that’s where we’re going to see the largest 

number of teachers retire. And there will need to be as much as, 

the actuarial report is indicating, that we will have to have a line 

item expenditure in the tune of 250 to $300 million as an 

expenditure. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we better have growth in this 

province. We better have growth in this province because if we 

don’t have growth, it will be difficult to meet that kind of 

obligation as we move forward into that year. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to end with a couple of comments 

about the liabilities of the province of Saskatchewan. And I 

listened, I listened in the last couple of days to the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana talk about the role that the NDP played from 

1991 to 2007. And she talked about liabilities and debt and the 

like. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to put on the record that from the 

auditor’s report, the 2007 report volume 2, that in 1991, as my 

colleague from Melville-Saltcoats indicated, the total amount of 

liability — that is government debt, GRF [General Revenue 

Fund] debt, Crown debt, pension liabilities, and other liabilities 

that the government had in 1991 — that total was $17.6 billion. 

Significant amount. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s move forward in time. Let’s take us 

to 2007, March 31, 2007. The combined amount of debt and 

pension liability and other liabilities is 21.6 billion. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that’s an increase. That’s an increase of $4 billion. So, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for that group over there to say how they 

have made such significant improvement to the economy of the 

province while they were in power is just not accurate, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — It’s not accurate. We have almost a $22 

billion liability in this province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

pension liability for teachers is listed at $4.7 billion. It’s 

something that we’re going to have to pay. You can’t just forget 

about it and say, oh that liability is going to go away. We have 

to pay it. It is going to come from the taxpayers of the province 

of Saskatchewan. So for those people on the other side to 

suggest that suddenly this . . . magically the debt, the liabilities, 

they really don’t mean anything, is just not accurate, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

We must ensure that this province grows, that we are able to 

address these kinds of problems because that government did 

not put in place contingency plans to ensure that we would deal 

with these kinds of projects. They didn’t deal with capital in 

ensuring that schools could be constructed, and now we have a 

terrible disrepair across the province, and we have to ensure that 

those are met. They didn’t put in place or didn’t recognize that 

the pension liability in a few short years — when we’re still 

government — will be a fact that we’re going to have ensure 

that there’s $300 million for that line item, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

They didn’t do that. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am so happy to be part of this 

government. A government that is looking forward, that wants 

to ensure that we have a province that is the envy of every other 

province in Canada. That in fact we will be the place to move 

to, not move away from. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell 

you that I will be supporting the budget presented by this new 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well it’s been quite a night for speeches. There’s been some 

interesting comments made, and I’m very pleased to have the 

opportunity to be able to give a few comments of response to 

the budget. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I, like everyone else, was quite curious to 

see where this government was going to put revenues of over $9 

billion. With the unprecedented revenues coming into 

provincial coffers and the resource revenues that are coming in, 

everyone was curious as to what this government . . . what their 

priorities were and how the people of Saskatchewan would 

benefit at this budget. 

 

And I know there’s been many speeches made tonight about 

infrastructure being the main focus of the budget, and that we 

have heard over and over again. And with a cash surplus of $1.3 

billion over budget, this investment by the government really is 

not unexpected. 

 

But I do have to say schools, highways, and health care will 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

benefit from this infrastructure funding. And it will continue to 

build on the last couple of years where infrastructure was also a 

focus for the former government. And it is welcomed by each 

and every one of us and no one will deny that. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, trying to sell this infrastructure 

announcement as a new $1 billion investment was a bit of a 

shell game. When you look at $600 million is invested regularly 

by departments in infrastructure, it’s an ongoing expenditure, 

not a totally new one. And it’s easy to announce funding and 

put money towards capital projects, but the difficult part is to 

building and completing the projects as announced, on time, on 

budget. So we’ll keep an eye on this and we’ll see where it 

goes. 

 

Locally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for my constituents in Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, there was talk of the funding to the Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital. Now in the budget speech it was even 

mentioned, and I quote, “. . . continued plans to expand the 

Moose Jaw [Union] Hospital . . .” was how it was stated in the 

budget address, but no further details were available. So it’s 

difficult to know if the project is a go or not. The wording used 

in the budget speech was a little vague to say the least. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Now I would expect that it includes part of the funding for 

detailed planning. Now I may be assuming too much, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but I truly hope not. But I would like to see 

some indication of dollar amounts and timelines. And we’ll 

have to wait and see. 

 

I actually called across to the Minister of Health the day after 

the budget and asked if he knew what the funding would be. 

And at that time, he said he didn’t know. Now whether he was 

. . . He could have just been not telling me, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’m hoping that he does have definite facts and a timeline 

because it’s a project that is long past due in the city. And the 

people of the Five Hills Health District have been working hard 

to see this project move ahead. So we’ll wait for a final 

announcement to determine when this much needed project will 

move ahead. And I’m sure that . . . well I’m hoping, Mr. 

Speaker, that Moose Jaw will see this project bear fruits for our 

city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also the increase in child care spaces announced in 

the budget was a welcome addition for many families who are 

currently on child care waiting lists across the province. I was 

very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, though to hear that only 500 

new spaces were being developed this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government provides this province 

with $7.5 million each year for five years, solely for the 

development of new child care spaces. So the question remains 

where the rest of the money is being spent. And lately the 

Premier has stated a number of times that his negotiations and 

close friendship with the federal government have resulted in a 

new $31 million for child care in Saskatchewan. And he said to 

the media that this is outside other agreements and that no other 

province has received this additional funding. 

 

So just some quick math, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 7.5 million that 

comes in the regular programs across Canada, out of $250 

million that the federal government dedicated to the creation of 

child care spaces and the 31 million new dollars that the 

Premier says he has negotiated, that equals thirty-eight and a 

half million new dollars for child care and child care spaces. 

And that doesn’t include any of the money that the province is 

putting in. So 38.5 million, and what do we see? We only see 

500 new child care spaces created in this province. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where’s the rest of the money? And Saskatchewan’s 

families are waiting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, funding agricultural risk programs, the 

continuation of tax initiatives that have been put in place 

approximately three years ago, indexing personal tax 

exemptions, the reduced corporate capital tax, small-business 

tax — they were all well received. And I know the tuition 

freeze for universities was well received by students. But, Mr. 

Speaker, when you look at this budget overall, there’s definitely 

a number of places where it’s missed the mark, and missed 

what’s needed by the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

First and foremost there’s been a very long debate over 

education property tax, and the issue has been studied to death. 

The member from Wood River has a quote: “There’s been 

enough study,” he says. “It’s time for action.” And this was a 

couple of years ago. And there’s many more quotes from the 

members opposite where they say, enough study. We want 

some action. Let’s get this done. 

 

So when they’re first elected to government, what’s the first 

thing they do? Well the Saskatchewan Party government 

appointed someone to study the issue yet again. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I know options are in place to put forward permanent 

solutions. They’re well developed and waiting for funding. 

 

With this government sitting on $1.3 billion cash surplus, they 

should be putting in place a permanent solution or at least 

bringing all taxpayers in this province to a 60/40 funding split, 

and this year. 

 

Instead the Saskatchewan Party plan will give each homeowner 

an increase of $22. Well that’s pretty exciting, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ve put a note on my bulletin board, and at home that’s a sticky 

note on my fridge. And it says, make sure you watch your tax 

notice. See if you got an extra $22 tax credit. I can hardly wait 

to receive this $22 credit, and especially when I know that the 

government is sitting on $1.3 billion in cash. 

 

So why are they studying the education property tax again, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? The options are done. The money is in the 

bank. Why are they studying this issue yet again? It’s quite 

simple actually. They don’t want to commit the funding. 

They’ve got the funding, but they don’t want to commit it to 

education property tax. The member from Rosetown who’s in 

charge of the study said a month ago to the media, “Stay 

tuned.” You’ll like what you see. 

 

So what exactly does that mean? The member from Rosetown 

is studying the issue. We are told he will report by the end of 

the year. Has he done the report already? How does he know 

what the result is? You’ll like what you see. How does he know 

that we will like what we see? This report isn’t supposed to be 

done for another eight months. Is the report done with no 

consultations? That wouldn’t be unusual for this government. 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

Mr. Speaker, it sounds like this government is playing games 

with an issue important to many across the province. Maybe 

they know the results. You’ll like what you see; that’s what the 

member doing the study said. But they just don’t want to deal 

with it in this budget. What they have done . . . put it out for a 

study and they’ve pushed it out into the future, so they don’t 

have to dedicate any money and they can do it later on. 

 

Another area that missed the mark, there is a commitment in the 

budget to new training seats. But with Saskatchewan’s economy 

booming, the expansion of training seats need to be more 

appropriate to address the shortage of skilled workers. Choking 

off our growing economy due to a shortage of skilled workers is 

not a risk that this government should be taking. Training seats 

should be doubled, so the economy can continue to grow so that 

young people can get into the classroom and begin building 

their careers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area where this budget sadly lacks is 

housing. Now this area has really missed the mark with its lack 

of attention paid to low-income and affordable housing. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can give you a list of vacancy rates in 

Moose Jaw for affordable, for senior, for low income, but 

basically what it breaks down to is the vacancy rate is zero. And 

there’s no attention paid to this. Now Saskatoon and Regina is 

facing an even more difficult time with housing, but it’s 

affecting all communities right across the province. And there’s 

absolutely nothing in this budget that addresses the housing 

issue. 

 

Also we see a lack of any significant action on climate change 

and the environmental sustainability, an issue many say is the 

greatest challenge facing our province and in fact the world. 

And here it is in the budget given minor consideration while the 

government is hoarding $1.3 billion cash surplus and giving a 

token acknowledgement to the environment. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that’s unacceptable. 

 

There are a number of other areas, Mr. Speaker, but I guess the 

one that I pay most attention to is the area of municipal affairs. 

And there truly was a number of disappointed mayors, 

councillors, and reeves after hearing the provincial budget. And 

after spending 18 months of work to reach a permanent 

long-term revenue-sharing agreement, all of that work was set 

aside by this government. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the municipalities received less, 

and you heard me right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They will receive 

less in revenue sharing this year than they did last year. The 

comments from the mayors in Regina and Saskatoon said, with 

this budget property taxes will have to go up, and we’re seeing 

that already. There’s been discussions in Regina. We’re hearing 

in Yorkton that there’s going to be some substantial jumps, and 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re all paying attention in our 

communities to see what the effect is. 

 

This government has said, aren’t we doing wonderful things? 

We’ve given you a $22 credit, and in the meantime they’re 

forcing the municipalities by giving them less money than we 

did last year in revenue sharing, forcing them to put up 

municipal property tax. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government is sitting on surplus revenues 

of $1.3 billion, and they couldn’t see their way clear to support 

urban and rural governments. There’s so many demands for 

water, sewer, street, road upgrades, growing communities. 

They’re all left to the municipalities to deal with on their own. 

 

Oh I forgot. The government said they would loan them money 

at no interest rate. So they’ll lend them money. They can’t 

afford to give them any more or keep some commitments, but 

they’ll loan them money. What we’ve seen over the past couple 

of months is this government has been dangling a carrot in front 

of municipalities, called infrastructure money. But they haven’t 

signed on to the federal Building Canada agreement yet. No 

money is coming forward for Saskatchewan municipalities. 

They haven’t signed the agreement. But yet you look across 

Canada, and there’s four or five other provinces that have 

signed on to the agreement. The money’s flowing. Their 

municipalities are able to move ahead with their project. But 

what’s the holdup here? We don’t know. 

 

They’re dangling another carrot in front of municipalities by 

promising $140 million over two years for roads, but I’m not 

sure how much of this carrot is even still available. 

 

The list of projects that we’re hearing this government has 

committed to is growing. They talk about the 70 million each 

year for two years. They’ve also put out commitments on 

IPSCO Place for 20 million. The minister talked in the media 

about the Regina interchange, the money being there for that. 

But there’s no funding amount for these, no timelines attached 

to it. The intermodal facility, the minister has committed to that, 

to funding that project. The federal government has said what 

their share is, but there’s no dollar amounts or no timelines 

from this provincial government. 

 

Rural water project, no. The federal minister says these projects 

have been approved, but we don’t hear anything. We don’t hear 

any funding amounts. We don’t hear any timelines. People are 

waiting. Municipalities are waiting to be able to move ahead 

with these projects. 

 

Now here we are too, they have promised, they promised in 

their election platform and they’ve made the commitment to 

SUMA, to SARM, to many others. They’ve promised to come 

up with a formula to revenue share with municipalities that will 

grow when the province’s revenues grow and decline when the 

province’s revenues decline. But with $1.3 billion cash in 

reserves, this government doesn’t seem too anxious to want to 

revenue share at this point in time. When times are good, 

revenue sharing doesn’t seem like such a good idea and we’re 

just going to dog it to sign any permanent revenue-sharing 

agreement with the municipalities. It’s unacceptable. 

 

Departments and initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are not 

mentioned in the budget can often feel a greater impact than the 

departments that have been highlighted in the speech, and as 

with all things, the devil is always in the detail. And on closer 

scrutiny, the budget reveals that Social Services is targeted for 

restructuring by centralizing the income security branch and 

pulling some services out of communities. It could be 

communities such as mine in Moose Jaw. And potentially over 

a couple of years, we can see 200 jobs that will be lost or 

moved with program redesign. And it could also end up with 

4,000 clients being hit with reduced benefits. So at a time when 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

the government is in the best financial position it’s been in in 

many, many years with $1.3 billion in cash reserves, a time 

when government political staff have received substantial pay 

increases, why would this government target the most 

vulnerable in our society for cutbacks? 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this just goes along with the big 

example that we’ve heard about over the past couple of days — 

Station 20 in Saskatoon. A time when this government is sitting 

on over $1 billion in reserves — in cash reserves — they’re 

targeting the most vulnerable in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with many of these things, the details are not 

revealed or discussed on budget day and only begin to see the 

light of day as scrutiny of the budget begins. As an opposition, 

our responsibilities are to question these details and hold the 

government accountable for its actions, especially when it 

impacts not only our constituencies but people throughout the 

province. 

 

So while many of us were quite curious as to how this budget 

was going to play out, what we were going to see, and how this 

government was going to spend $9 billion plus in revenues, 

there was a great deal of disappointment right across the 

province when people realized personally they wouldn’t feel 

any effects from this budget. Personally you look at all you will 

see is a tax credit on your tax notice when it comes from your 

municipality. Will you see any benefits? Will we see increased 

benefits for people across the province? Absolutely nothing that 

they will feel. Everything’s building — which is good — but 

you also have to balance. 

 

[20:45] 

 

That’s one of the difficult issues when you’re government is 

that you need to look at balance. You need to make sure that 

you’re addressing many problems and many issues and 

demands that are out there. But there has to be a balance. 

 

So talking about buildings and roads is one thing, but there’s 

also the human side of the equation that needs to be addressed. 

And, Mr. Speaker, with attention that was not paid to the 

environment, with absolutely no attention that was paid to 

housing, with absolutely the reduced and seemingly makeshift 

program that was put forward for training for young people 

across this province when our labour market is very short, 

people are crying for workers all over the province, young 

people are waiting for opportunities to get into training 

programs . . . You can’t ignore the human equation when it 

comes to making a budget. And that’s exactly what this budget 

does. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while there was a great deal of curiosity when 

this budget was coming forward, it was a disappointment to 

many. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I most definitely will be 

supporting the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise in support of this budget, the first budget of the 

Saskatchewan Party. And I want to thank the Finance minister 

for the budget he brought forward in three short months, not 

just the minister but the Treasury Board and the very many 

dedicated, professional people that are working in the ministries 

to make sure that we can bring forward a budget that is 

supported by so many people across this province. 

 

It’s impressive and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it reflects the values 

of the people of Saskatchewan. And when I say the people of 

Saskatchewan, I mean all the people of this wonderful province 

no matter what age group or what location, whether they live in 

the North or the South or rural or urban Saskatchewan. This 

budget represents the needs and values of every person in the 

province. 

 

On November 7, 2007, the people of this province spoke loud 

and clear that they were ready for a change, a change to see this 

province rise to its full potential. The new government and the 

people of Saskatchewan are ready for growth. Until recently, 

the trend was to leave Saskatchewan in order to find better 

opportunities. Well not any more, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 

the place to be. 

 

During the election, many promises were made by this 

government and we are keeping those promises. Promises for 

the betterment of education, for better health, for infrastructure 

improvement, for agriculture improvement, and everything that 

is a foundation for the people of this province. 

 

In order for this opportunity of growth to happen, we realize 

that training and education is essential. That’s why we have 

kept our promise for the most aggressive youth retention plan in 

all of Canada: $12 million in this budget was committed to the 

graduate retention program, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 250 training 

seats to the Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 

Commission; and there’s going to be over $160 million to 

repair and upgrade schools, and universities, and training 

centres. 

 

According to the 2006 census, First Nations and Métis people 

make up 15 per cent of the total provincial population. The 

population under 25 years of age accounts for 55 per cent of the 

total First Nations and Métis population. 

 

Many people have indicated earlier that one of the biggest 

assets we have in our province is young people. They need to 

have access to education and training. And once the education 

and training is obtained, they need to have access to jobs. They 

need the security that after all their hard work and their 

dedication, there’ll be a job waiting for them in a province that 

they love. 

 

A report released by the Canadian West Foundation and the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business shows 

Saskatchewan’s growth potential in oil and gas, in mining, in 

manufacturing, and agriculture research, and hi-tech in 

construction, and in capital investments. The young and 

growing populations, along with this government’s commitment 

to education and training, will ensure that Saskatchewan is 

prepared for the growth that’s taking place right now and the 

growth potential for the future. 

 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

For the past 16 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the targets for 

growth were set extremely low. And they were set by the NDP 

across, and that’s exactly what the previous government did. It 

repeatedly set its standards so low that they could easily meet 

their targets. In fact in the K to 12 education system the party 

was prepared to manage a decline — 3,500 students-a-year 

decline. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the economy did start to grow before we became 

government. It started to grow when the NDP started to adopt 

the Saskatchewan Party’s policies. That’s when we started to 

see a turn in the economy. Instead of the copy cat government, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan made a choice on 

November 7. They made a choice to have a government with a 

vision, a government that had clear directions and foresight to 

see that Saskatchewan is an economic leader and not just an 

observer. 

 

This government is setting new standards when it comes to 

health care. We know that the access to health care is an 

important component to growth. In the 2008-2009 budget we 

made a promise for the recruitment and the retention of nurses 

and doctors. That’s a promise kept. In this budget there are 

funds for 120 additional training seats for nurses, with a goal of 

creating 300 new registered nurse education seats in 

Saskatchewan over the next four years; $6.1 million for more 

physician training, for seats, recruitment, and retention. We 

want to make sure that when the people of Saskatchewan need a 

doctor or a nurse, they will have access to one. 

 

We also promised to increase the number of prescription drugs 

covered under the provincial formulary. We kept that promise, 

Mr. Speaker. We increased the funding to $6.1 million to add 

new prescription drugs to the formulary.  

 

The 2008-2009 budget looks at the future needs of 

Saskatchewan and the government realized the need for 

improvement and infrastructure. The investment of $256.2 

million is the capital budget for highways and infrastructure. It 

will dramatically improve our provincial highway system. The 

funding also supports urban highway connectors and upgrades 

to rural and northern roads. The time for this investment is now 

to ensure our communities, our highways, and our roads can 

keep pace with the growth in our population and the increased 

demand for our transportation system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the recent weather disasters that are 

happening and have happened in the past years, I’ve seen in my 

constituency crop failures or the inability to plant crops due to 

very wet conditions. I’m very pleased that the Minister of 

Agriculture was able to fully fund the provincial portion of the 

agri stability and the agri invest. It’s been brought to my 

attention on several different occasions that the current crop 

insurance program does not accurately protect our farmers 

today. The additional increase of $25.8 million to crop 

insurance program will help to ensure the proper protection will 

be there for our producers. 

 

Another commitment that was made is a rebate on property 

taxes paid on agricultural land. A rebate of 47 per cent, up from 

38 per cent, will save the average farm family $2,072.  

 

Within the next 12 to 18 months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, almost 

900 affordable housing units will become available; $60 million 

for the provincial neighbourhood revitalization housing 

initiative which targets inner-city neighbourhoods in major 

urban centres. The time is right for increased investment as the 

numbers show. Saskatchewan is leading the nation in housing 

starts and the percentage of building permits. 

 

The time is also right to take responsibility to protect our 

environment. With the continued economic growth, this budget 

reflects our commitment to green initiatives. An additional $10 

million will bring the total to $17.5 million. The funding will be 

used for climate change, the prairie adaptation research centre, 

solar water heating, geothermal energy demonstration 

programs, provincial air quality programs, and the municipal 

energy efficiency program. We want to make sure that the 

people of our province have access to clean air and water for 

generations to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to say that 87 per cent of the First 

Nations and Métis Relations budget ends up in the hands of 

First Nations and Métis people and northern people. As you 

may know, the former Department of Northern Affairs and First 

Nations and Métis Relations were amalgamated last year to 

form the new ministry, which produced a 22 per cent increase 

over their combined budgets for 2008-2009. 

 

The topic of the duty to consult and accommodate has been 

brought to my attention by the leaders of the First Nation and 

Métis communities. They told me, Mr. Speaker, that they were 

not consulted when the NDP produced the guidelines. Before 

the election, the Premier said that a consultation was a priority 

and that a Saskatchewan Party government would re-examine 

the former government’s policy because so many First Nations 

and Métis people were concerned and upset with the guidelines. 

 

The First Nations and Métis consultation participation fund has 

been increased to $3 million. This represents a 50 per cent 

increase. 

 

The $200,000 for a round table, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going 

to be a key element of developing the new policy. We believe 

this policy will be vital to the continued economic growth of the 

province and ensuring that First Nations and Métis people will 

be able to share in the growth of the province. This government 

promised and is delivering on its promise to consult with First 

Nations and Métis people. 

 

In addition you have to remember that the ministry of First 

Nations and Métis people is a window into the government for 

First Nations and Métis people and northerners. There are other 

doors — doors into health and into education and social 

services and highways — that also provide for services and 

programs. 

 

Some examples are the First Nations access roads and the 

northern roads strategy that will benefit from the $400 million 

dedicated to strengthening the province’s roads; 300 more 

training opportunities for on-reserve adult basic training seats 

through local colleges and the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technology. There will be $2.2 million of funding for the First 

Nations children programming; $3.5 million for Aboriginal 

Health Transition Fund to increase the participation of First 

Nations and Métis people in the development and delivery of 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we believe that the 

passion and strength from the people of this province will be the 

driving force of our economy. We’ve seen the strength and the 

wealth that we have in this province — the strength and the 

wealth from the people of Saskatchewan and the strength and 

the wealth in the resources of our province. 

 

This budget reflects our commitment to the future of our 

province and shows that our government is ready for growth. It 

is my privilege to support this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For 

all the people of Kelvington-Wadena’s constituency, I’m very 

pleased to support this budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While we 

were all entertained listening to the member from Athabasca 

have his Kumbaya moment and recall fond memories of the 

dim and distant past, members on this side of the House are 

actually here to work. We’re here to address today’s challenges 

and plan for the future of our province. Mr. Speaker, with that 

in mind, it’s an honour and a pleasure to rise in the House today 

to speak in support of our new government’s very first budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on November 7 of last year, Saskatchewan 

voted for a change and elected as its new government a party 

that campaigned on a commitment — responsible management 

of the province’s finances. I am pleased to confirm that the 

strengthened balanced budget legislation already introduced in 

the fall session and the sound budget recently presented in this 

spring session clearly show that we are already keeping these 

commitments. 

 

Now here’s what Saskatchewan has said in response — 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association executive 

director, Donna Brunskill, on addressing the nursing shortage: 

“For the first time in a decade,” she said, “I am confident that 

the RN shortage is getting the attention it deserves.” 

Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation president, Dianne 

Woloschuk, on the $240 million in new funding for education: 

“This is significant and, in truth, it’s been long overdue.” 

 

In addition to providers of key public services, our business 

community has also made positive comments. Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce president, Steve McLellan, on the 

historic $1 billion ready-for-growth initiative, he said: 

 

The new capital investments in post-secondary education, 

roads, municipalities and health care . . . will help the 

province realize sustainable strategic growth, not only in 

the short term, but in the future as well. 

 

And business commentator, Paul Martin, said: 

 

With the title, Ready for Growth, the Saskatchewan Party 

directed its attention to infrastructure, the foundation for 

economic growth as we build a new platform to continue 

building upon. And the government’s promise in the last 

election that it will deliver a growth agenda took a giant 

step forward. 

 

Finally, representing rural Saskatchewan, SARM president, 

Dave Marit, is quoted as saying, “They lived up to a lot of their 

promises. We think it’s a very responsible budget.” It’s a great 

start, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, government is all about community 

development, whether your community is a municipality, a 

province, or in fact the whole country. To do the job well, you 

have to work hard to stay in touch with your constituents. If you 

listen carefully, they’ll provide you with the answers to the 

three most important questions a government must address. 

Where are we? Where are we going? And how do we prepare? 

 

As everyone knows, the answer to where are we, at present, is 

right in the middle of a hot economy, that it’s leading the nation 

in a number of key growth areas: retail sales growth, no. 1 in 

Canada; wholesale sales growth, no. 1 in Canada; export sales 

growth, no. 1 in Canada. Housing starts, building permit values, 

even capital investment, almost every category you can think 

of, we’re leading or close to it. We’re experiencing record job 

growth. Our population has increased by over 15,000 in the past 

12 months. And we’re number one in football. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Where are we going? Simply put, 

we’re convinced Saskatchewan has entered an era of 

unprecedented opportunity for economic development and 

growth. The experts all agree on what lies ahead of us. RBC 

Financial Group and TD Economics both predict Saskatchewan 

will record the strongest economic growth in Canada this year 

— an average of 3.5 per cent. BMO Financial Group also says 

we will be number one in Canada for economic growth. And 

the Canada West Foundation is forecasting that Saskatchewan 

will lead the nation in economic growth — 6.3 per cent is what 

they’re telling us — eclipsing even Alberta. 

 

Just as important, in visiting all 13 of our cities plus a number 

of towns, villages, rural municipalities, and northern 

settlements, I’m seeing optimism and confidence like never 

before. Lloydminster, Alberta, has always had a robust 

economy, but now Lloydminster, Saskatchewan, is building 

three brand new residential subdivisions to meet the demands 

for growth in their community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Humboldt is also developing new 

lots, scrambling to keep up. It used to be, Mr. Speaker, in an 

average year, Humboldt marketed about seven lots for new 

homes. Now the figure is 70. Yorkton is planning for the 

possible arrival of two brand new canola crushing plants with 

an investment potential in the hundreds of millions of dollars. 

And Rocanville is organizing to accommodate new growth 

resulting from an expected $1.8 billion expansion in the potash 

industry. 

 

All of this growth is just the tip of the iceberg, Mr. Speaker. 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

And our new $300 million interest-free infrastructure growth 

initiative is going to help municipalities get ready for it. 

 

The third question is, how do we prepare? The answer is that 

while Saskatchewan’s economy and people are ready for 

growth, our infrastructure is not. We’re all aware that far too 

many of our highways are crumbling and that increasing oil 

patch activity and bulk transport of materials like potash and 

grains make a major investment in the roads that are 

Saskatchewan’s economic corridors an absolute necessity. 

 

And everybody knows too that many of our schools and health 

care facilities are in real need of renewal and even replacement. 

Our new government clearly understands these urgent priorities. 

We get the message. That’s why we created the 

ready-for-growth initiative as a central part of our very first 

budget. And it’s why we funded it with $1 billion, the largest 

public sector investment of its kind in the history of our 

province. 

 

Another important fact, Mr. Speaker, is that for the very first 

time there is a five-year capital spending plan included in the 

budget documents. Imagine that — a government with a plan. 

 

Here’s how the money breaks down. Over $400 million will be 

invested in the construction and maintenance of paved 

highways and gravel-surfaced roads. Particular attention is 

being paid to routes serving areas of current and emerging 

economic development, for example oil and gas in the 

northwest and southeast regions of our province. 

 

Nearly $200 million is being directed to health care facility 

projects. Most of the dollars will support a large number of 

regional and community hospitals and special care homes 

around the province. The remainder is dedicated to purchasing 

medical technology like equipment for diagnostic imagery. 

 

K to 12 education gets over $100 million in new funding which 

allows 11 new major projects on the ministry’s capital priority 

list to go ahead in 2008-09. And it also lets previously 

announced projects carry through to completion. In addition, as 

mentioned, there’s $12 million in block funding for smaller 

work. 

 

Post-secondary education capital funding also gets a boost. 

Provincial revenue sharing for rural, urban, and northern 

municipalities — a large portion of which goes to capital 

projects — also increases by 7 per cent as promised. 

 

And finally, there’s $100 million in capital funding directed to 

provincially owned facilities primarily through Saskatchewan 

Property Management and the Ministry of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. Mr. Speaker, add it all up and you get $1 

billion — a landmark figure. 

 

Naturally the budget addresses other priorities as well, as all 

good budgets will. There is money for new physician and nurse 

training seats and retention initiatives as well. There is funding 

to continue the post-secondary tuition freeze for students and to 

introduce our new tuition rebate program for graduates who 

stay in the province. 

 

There are considerably more resources for the U of R 

[University of Regina], U of S [University of Saskatchewan], 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], and other advanced education institutions to 

expand their programs and their capacity for students. 

 

The prescription drug health plan is being expanded to include 

children under the age of 14, and more pharmaceuticals — for 

example the cancer drug Avastin — are being added to the 

formulary list. 

 

Property tax rebates are up. The active families benefit will be 

introduced, and the caregiver’s tax credit is being doubled. New 

child care spaces are being added along with new resources for 

early childhood development and learning, and school lunch 

and other anti-hunger programs are being strengthened. 

 

There is more funding for community-based organizations and 

food banks, including transition houses and sexual assault 

centres in support of their critical, front-line service delivery. 

There will also be more police officers to help keep our 

communities safe. And in particular, the Internet child 

exploitation team that targets Internet predators will nearly 

triple in size. 

 

There is more money for the arts and our provincial parks, and 

tourism’s budget has been doubled in recognition of the huge 

role this industry plays in our growing economy. Funding to 

meet the education, skills training, and employment needs of 

First Nations and Métis peoples has also increased . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Indeed. And there is more money for 

green initiatives designed to reduce our environmental footprint 

and develop innovative technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also included funding to begin the 

establishment of a brand new provincial capital commission 

right here in Regina to feature this city’s unique heritage, 

culture, and arts. Finally, we have eliminated the dreaded 

wiener roast tax . . . [inaudible] . . . for people who want to have 

a campfire while visiting their favourite park. And we’re 

actually paying down the debt by $250 million, again as 

promised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, little if any of this should come as a surprise. 

Virtually all of it is contained in our Securing the Future 

document which we distributed last fall for the election. We’re 

just sticking to the plan and keeping our promises. In fulfilling 

these budgetary commitments, we have kept 40 campaign 

promises made by our party leading up to the 2001 campaign. 

 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly discuss one 

other related issue which has already been introduced this 

evening. Mr. Speaker, we have heard a lot of talk from 

members of the opposition about the need for a new 

revenue-sharing agreement with municipalities. What they fail 

to mention is that, just as with many other important issues, 

they had 16 years to get the job done, and they didn’t get the job 

done. They didn’t get the job done, Mr. Speaker. And yet they 

claim, we were this close, this close to completing the deal 

before the election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’d think that with 16 years to get the job done 

and with the ability to get any election date they wanted, surely 

the former government would be absolutely sure to honour their 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

province of a new revenue-sharing deal and make it a central 

part of their election platform. Well as we know, it didn’t 

happen, and many will conclude, understandably so, that a 

respectful relationship with our province’s municipalities never 

was important to the previous government after all. A sad truth, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

How close are we to completing a deal? Well actually not close 

at all, Mr. Speaker. I’ve done the homework, and I found out 

that while valuable progress has been made on an agreement for 

cities, an enormous amount of work has yet to be done with 

towns, with villages, with rural municipalities, and with 

northern communities. 

 

So what are we to think of the claim from the opposition that 

we were this close? Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s be charitable and 

just term it an exaggeration and leave discussion of possible 

underlying motives to another day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have already discussed the fact that the 

previous government had 16 years to complete a new 

revenue-sharing deal and didn’t get the job done. What they did 

do was relentlessly claw back more and more funding year after 

year throughout the entire decade of the 1990s until the 

revenue-sharing pool was less than half its original size. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s a shallow pool. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — It’s a shallow pool indeed. Oh they 

found money for other priorities, but they turned their backs on 

Saskatchewan’s municipalities. As a result, our cities, our 

towns, our villages, our rural municipalities, and our northern 

settlements all lost their ability to keep up with the repair of 

aging infrastructure and fell far behind in this important work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you’re looking for the cause of today’s $1 

billion deficit in infrastructure in our communities, just look to 

the members across the aisle. In contrast, our $1 billion 

ready-for-growth investment in infrastructure is a very clear 

indication of our determination to correct the errors of the 

previous government. And our plan to revive the 

revenue-sharing agreement discussions, fast-tracking them 

towards a targeted completion this fall, shows our commitment 

to building a better relationship with our respected municipal 

partners and a brighter future for all of Saskatchewan’s 

municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has hit the ground running with 

new energy, new ideas, and a new plan. We’ve rolled up our 

sleeves, got down to work, and accomplished a lot in our first 

four months. We are keeping our promises, making the 

investments needed to sustain the momentum in our economy 

and ensuring that everyone in our province benefits from the 

growth. Mr. Speaker, with this budget Saskatchewan is truly 

ready for growth, and that is why I am very pleased to offer it 

my full support. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 

opportunity to rise here today and engage in the budget of the 

Sask Party’s first budget here. So thank you very much for the 

opportunity. 

 

We do have quite the opportunity lying before us here as 

legislators to ensure that this budget meets the needs of people 

and families of our province. As our Finance critic, the member 

from Regina Douglas Park, has pointed out, this budget almost 

delivers to the people of Saskatchewan. But it falls short and 

misses the mark in some integral areas that need to be 

addressed. 

 

With a 10 per cent increase in spending, this budget tries to 

meet many needs but falls short. In fact it can be very 

accurately argued that this budget tries to meet too many needs. 

It can be argued that this budget is an inch deep and a mile 

wide. Someone mentioned a shallow pool across the other way; 

I’d have to agree. This budget represents a 10 per cent increase 

in spending only a few months after our Premier states that our 

finances were stark. 

 

Mr. Speaker, contrary to the stark finances comment by the 

Premier, the numbers, the statistics, the story of our province is 

one of a thriving province. We have a booming economy. 

Activity and investment across this province is at an all-time 

high. We’re seeing it in our rural areas. We’re seeing it in our 

towns. We’re seeing it in our cities. We have experienced 

record job creation in this province for some time. We forged 

our way to the front of almost all economic indicators in our 

nation. I believe we’re number one almost across the board for 

2007 and of course 2008 looks really strong. Record revenues, 

record investment — things are good in Saskatchewan. 

 

We could talk about the $1.3 billion in the public purse. Wow, 

has there ever been such a transfer of power in any province 

with that kind of money in the bank? What an opportunity, what 

a special opportunity, what a responsible time for the 

Saskatchewan Party government to make sure they meet their 

needs. 

 

The member from Canora-Pelly mentioned here tonight a debt 

number, and I know he talked a bit about a liability number 

that, you know, from 1991 that hadn’t seen a decline, I guess, 

from 1991 till 2007. It’s all a modest increase. 

 

I guess what the minister forgot to mention or the member from 

Canora-Pelly was that we’ve seen compounded revenue growth 

for some time, and we are at such a time in this province right 

now to look at your debt, to look at your liability. You don’t 

look at a fixed number. You look at your ability to pay it. 

 

[21:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Duncan: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate the opportunity to introduce a guest, and I thank my 

colleague opposite for allowing me a few minutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce, seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, my wife, Amanda. She’s here to — the 

better half, Mr. Speaker — she’s here to watch the rest of this 

evening’s proceedings. And I’d ask all members to welcome 

Amanda to the Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it also encourages me that 

the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, a good friend, to see 

his wife in the audience here tonight. And I’m glad to see that 

must keep him grounded and probably offers us good judgment 

on that side. 

 

But going back to the member from Canora-Pelly talking about 

the debt, the liabilities of this province, who are we going to 

believe? Are we going to believe the banter opposite or are we 

going to listen to credit ratings? Are we going to listen to 

investment houses? Are we going to listen to, are we going to 

listen to what I guess investment specialists across North 

America have seen? 

 

And what we know is that we have come from a place where 

debt to GDP [gross domestic product] was last in the nation, 

and then I believe we’re number 2 or 3 right now. That’s an 

honourable achievement by our government, something I’m 

proud of here today. 

 

Moving on to the topic of these nurses and health care. We hear 

the members opposite clamour and talk about 300 new nurses 

from the Philippines. Well they’re not here yet, Mr. Speaker. 

The nurses from the Philippines aren’t here yet. There’s a few 

that have come and that’s commendable. 

 

And it’s commendable as well that they would take the plan that 

was laid out by the NDP government previous to start these 

wheels in motion. These things don’t happen on a whim, snap 

your fingers. The process has been in place for some time. In 

fact the first recruiting mission was over there before the last 

election. I’m very, very glad the Sask Party government is 

continuing to do that, and we’re seeing the reward. We’re 

seeing the benefit of that NDP plan here right now. 

 

So I talk about a whole bunch of great statistics and some good 

things happening in our province. We talk about the reward, the 

opportunity that the Sask Party has in front of them, and I guess 

we could also talk about the coattails that they’ve been riding 

for some time, trying to claim many achievements over there 

that can be very rightfully, thoughtfully attributed to us. And I 

believe if you talk to a member one-on-one, they’re very clear 

that you know these numbers are ours. The member from 

Athabasca did a great job here tonight in talking about that. 

 

The Easter holiday and recess from session allowed me to chat 

with many of my constituents. It offered me the opportunity to 

go door-to-door and ask how this budget affects their daily 

lives. It offered me the chance to meet with and discuss the 

implications of this budget with organized groups and 

associations. I’ve been able to ask if this budget meets the needs 

or represents that their government is listening. 

 

Whether on the doorsteps with constituents or in meeting with 

organized groups, one constant seems to be that this budget has 

missed some important marks. And the common sentiment is 

that the Sask Party government has not listened closely enough 

to the needs and challenges within Saskatchewan. The budget 

builds on many of the principles and programs set out by our 

government. In fact there are parts of this budget that I support 

and definitely welcome, but there are some real gaps that need 

to be addressed to make this a people’s budget. 

 

It is not my desire to reflexively criticize the Saskatchewan 

Party or the Saskatchewan Party’s budget. This is not how I 

carry myself within my constituency, not how I carry myself at 

events out and around Regina and across the province. Mr. 

Speaker, it is my complete desire to always be on the side of 

quality of life, while representing my constituents with a sincere 

and unfiltered voice. It has been through this recent consultation 

and question asking on the doorstep and meeting with organized 

groups that I can confidently summarize four glaring 

shortcomings of this budget that need to be addressed: 

significant property tax relief, the spots of skills training, 

investment in affordable housing, and the environment. 

 

As a legislator looking to work co-operatively for the 

betterment of our province, the progress of our province, I 

request that the Sask Party listen to the voices of my 

constituents and the thoughtful, organized voice of many and 

address them within their first budget. I hope that, given the 

choice and the co-operative feedback, that the Sask Party will 

indeed side with ensuring quality of life, deliver on these 

shortcomings, and deliver a responsive and dynamic people’s 

budget. Mr. Speaker, I encourage the Sask Party government to 

offer the hard-working people and families of our province this 

consideration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to highlight a point on the Sask Party budget 

shortcoming of failing to deliver on significant property tax 

relief, I ask the members opposite to consider the plea of many. 

I ask the members opposite, the Sask Party, to listen to the 

concerns of Saskatchewan families. The Sask Party has 

clamoured for some time on the need for this relief, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Sask Party to step up to 

the plate and deliver the needed relief. It’s unfortunate that the 

Sask Party has failed to ready our province for growth on this 

front. 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

As the Sask Party talks lots about the need for in-migration and 

immigration, I wonder if they also state to those interested in 

coming to our province that across our fine province taxes are 

going up in municipalities across the board. Because of this 

Saskatchewan Party budget, taxes will be increasing across 

Saskatchewan within Regina, within Yorkton, within Saskatoon 

to name a few, many more to come. In Regina, for example, the 

city stated it will be forced to increase its tax rates by 3.9 per 

cent last week; Yorkton, last night, 10 per cent as a result of 

status quo funding received by municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this lack of funding displays the short-sightedness 

of our new Sask Party government in regard to the growth 

economy that they have been handed. It is essential that our 

Sask Party government become dynamic and responsive to the 

needs of our people in this growth economy. They have missed 

the mark in serving families, Mr. Speaker. The fact that 

property taxes will increase as a result of this Sask Party budget 

is a prime example of this. Growth needs to be balanced with 

effective and responsive policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I call on the Sask Party to deliver a significant 

reduction of property taxes and to do so within this budget. It’s 

a fair time with such wealth, with $1.3 billion in its hands. That 

the province will force tax increases upon its residents is 

completely unfair . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member 

from Wood River has mentioned that someone from his side 

might be interested in this speech. And absolutely no problem, I 

can photocopy and offer one for the member from Wood River. 

 

On the topic of housing, within Saskatchewan’s booming 

economy more and more people are feeling the housing crunch. 

The cost of rents have far exceeded the cost of living, Mr. 

Speaker. Many families are struggling to keep afloat. No child 

chooses what socio-economic they’re born into, whether they’re 

born into wealth, whether they’re born into poverty, Mr. 

Speaker. The skyrocketing inflationary costs of housing are an 

extreme challenge for so many. The potential of creating a 

significant wedge between those that have and those that don’t 

are significantly compounded in a growth economy. The 

downward pressure on the quality of life are felt by many, not 

the few. 

 

These housing challenges have been categorized a crisis by the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, a crisis. Yet they choose a path 

with no immediate address. When something is in a crisis, 

prompt, responsive, effective policy are required and required 

immediately. It is the only approach of a responsible 

government. 

 

Our Sask Party government is stalling. At a time where action is 

needed, they’re creating a task force. If we are truly going to 

ready ourselves for growth, we need to ensure that our families 

and residents struggling to get by are able to participate, Mr. 

Speaker — the working poor, the disabled, and our seniors. The 

failure to invest in housing is a shame. I hope that this will be 

reconsidered by the members opposite. 

 

You could look at the topic of skilled training spaces. If we’re 

going to sustain this economic growth, it is crucial to address 

the number one challenge facing our business community — 

the shortage of labour. The Sask Party budget failed to address 

this real challenge. Skilled training spaces are needed for 

business, Mr. Speaker, and also crucial in ensuring all families 

can benefit and participate within our economy, raising the 

standard of living, offering the chance to step out of historical 

poverty. It’s the opportunity we have in this boom. I hope the 

members opposite are willing to engage. 

 

If we look at maybe the largest issue — in fact I shouldn’t say 

maybe — the largest issue facing our province, our nation, our 

country, our world, we need to address the environmental 

challenges that lie ahead of us. As a resource-rich province, we 

have the opportunity to invest and lead on this front. Slashing of 

the budget to address these environmental concerns is a real 

problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This budget lacks the resources needed to meet the aggressive 

climate change targets set out by our New Democratic 

government then adopted by the Saskatchewan Party, which I 

commend them on doing. Mr. Speaker, I request that, on the 

topic of the environment, that we work non-partisan on this 

fundamental challenge. I humbly request our Sask Party 

government to address the shortcoming within the budget. 

 

This budget was cornerstoned around infrastructure. I don’t 

argue about the need for this infrastructure investment. $1 

billion in infrastructure is an important investment. Not 

insignificant but it’s also not going to cure all the issues and 

problems across our province. 

 

It’s important that I mention that $600 million of this is an 

ongoing budget. So we do see a $400 million investment at a 

time, may I remind you, with record revenues and $1.3 billion 

in the bank. I certainly don’t disagree it’s a needed investment. 

We’ve got to talk about things like construction inflation. We 

talk about a $500 million budget that’s going to deliver almost, 

almost 30 kilometres more of highway. I’m not saying that 500 

million is insignificant, but I think we can all share here that 30 

kilometres isn’t significantly more. The cost of construction in 

our province; the cost of delivering on this infrastructure is 

growing more and more expensive as we speak. 

 

$100 million of school capital is welcomed. I welcome the 

investment in communities across our province. I welcome the 

benefit that those schools and the investment in those schools 

will offer those communities. But as the minister opposite, the 

Minister of Education mentioned, we do have an approximate 

over $1.1 billion of infrastructure deficit, while we’ve also cited 

the number in this House of 20 per cent construction inflation a 

year. Well, Mr. Speaker, I know one thing. I know that if I take 

$1 billion and I grow it by 20 per cent, that’s going to accrue by 

another $200 million by next year. So not to minimize that $100 

million investment, but it does not even keep pace with the 

accruing cost of our deficit for our schools in the province. 

 

I guess I encourage the Sask Party to continue that investment. I 

certainly know my wife and I at home couldn’t balance our 

credit cards in that manner. These costs, may I remind you, are 

the challenges of boom, and for the preachers of growth on the 

other side, they’re challenges they’re going to have to be able to 

respond to. 

 

[21:30] 

 

I heard the member from Cannington say he’ll take the accolade 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

of being a preacher from growth. I have to admit — and on the 

lighter side here — I often wonder if they talk about growth so 

much because they think their average height is about five foot 

two. 

 

But I guess I’ll go back to the welcomed investment in 

education. The budget put forward by the Minister of Education 

here today has some good pieces in it. The Saskatchewan Party 

has invested into a proud NDP education framework. We’re 

talking about things like community schools, Schools Plus, 

youth in custody projects, all sorts of investments that are 

invested to get to the heart of a community and offer an 

enriching and fulfilled life. 

 

The member from northwest says, well we never did it. I’ll have 

to take the member from northwest back some time through the 

research, the dialogue, and the debate to create community 

schools, taking it from a concept, and now to have community 

schools across this province that are delivering some real 

outcomes. For the member opposite from northwest to say we 

never did it tells me he’s saying the professionals in those 

buildings aren’t doing it, and that’s a shame because they are 

doing it; they’re doing everything they can. And I ask the 

Saskatchewan Party government to do everything they can to 

continue to support those. 

 

I offer accolade on the food funding. I offer accolade on the 

pre-K [kindergarten] funding. I offer accolade on the child care 

spaces. 

 

Again these investments are allowed to fit into the budget 

because the foundation of these programs has been put in place. 

The philosophical purpose of those programs has been debated 

by our NDP government for years in conjunction with 

department professionals and officials and academics, and some 

good things are happening in our province in education. I 

welcome the investment. 

 

We could maybe talk about school closures. You know, some 

of this stuff is a big challenge, and I think this government 

opposite offered a fair amount of hope on this topic. I know in 

my constituency there’s three slated for closure right now, and 

this is a hard, hard reality, and it’s a hard reality that boards are 

working with communities on. And I tell you, it’s a hard reality 

of declining enrolments and birth rates and different 

demographics and change and movement from area to area. 

 

But I tell you, for this government to go and to run on to keep 

schools open and to be out at town hall meetings saying we 

don’t believe in school closures, but then to come up with $1 

million to address the many — and there are many this year — 

school closures that will be imminent here this year, that will be 

reviewed here this year and more as we go forward, well that’s 

a shame, Mr. Speaker. And I guess a further shame is that there 

was a real false hope sense out of this broad statement of school 

closures or the remedy of such was going to apply across our 

province. 

 

I certainly know in my constituency with three schools slated, 

as I mentioned, that a lot of individuals thought that this 

Saskatchewan Party government were going to offer them hope. 

Well it’s been very clear a few weeks back, a little too late after 

a lot of hard work from some community groups, that that 

funding was never going to be made available to cities. They 

were offered this false hope. And now as we see this $1 million 

I guess it’s just going to be interesting to see what schools, what 

communities, are judged as communities of opportunity. 

 

If we look at the educational funding, I already mentioned much 

of the positives that I do see there, but I’m not willing to 

completely celebrate a 5.9 per cent increase in the foundational 

operating grant. That takes into account the teachers’ new 

collective bargaining agreement. When we factor that piece in, 

we’re talking about a per cent or a bit more. That’s status quo. 

In fact that’s below the increase in the costs to deliver these 

services. In the talk of the property tax review, I’ve already 

mentioned that I’m disappointed that residents in Regina, in 

Yorkton, and across this province aren’t going to see real 

property tax reduction this year. But a review’s been in place or 

has been called, and as I understand, this review will be done 

with the resources within our ministry and that there have been 

no extra resources allocated to that ministry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I understand and as you understand, like I 

can’t assume what you understand, but as I know member 

opposites understand, we have significant challenges in this 

province in regards to education and that our ministry has been 

working at full capacity for some time. For the members 

opposite, for the Minister of Education to simply slide resources 

the way of this property tax review without allocating new 

investment for staff allocation is a bit of a shame because we 

have professionals in that ministry who are working at full 

capacity. 

 

We look at some of the mismanagement pieces here. The Social 

Services incident and how things have been communicated has 

been really poor. It’s been unfair for the individuals within the 

ministry. I think we expect more of a minister. I think we call it 

ministerial accountability. 

 

The seniors’ drug plan that’s been introduced by the Sask Party 

government is creating a new and expensive bureaucracy. It’s 

creating a means test for seniors. It’s excluding what’s a smaller 

proportion of the seniors who can access it. And we have to 

remember something in this province is that those seniors who 

you’re excluding have worked their entire lives. If they’re 

collecting a half-decent payment at that stage of their life, we 

have a thing called progressive income tax and they’ve been 

paying it for a whole lot of years. Hard-working seniors of our 

province finally getting to a stage where they can have 

something they can count on. Instead, just to prove the 

ideological bent of this government, we create an expensive 

department of bureaucracy. 

 

Balanced budgets. We’ve presented balanced budgets for year 

after year. These guys have clamoured, clamoured that these 

weren’t balanced. They use your Fiscal Stabilization Fund. But 

now these guys come out of the gates, and they follow the exact 

same process. They create their own Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 

And in fact without the sale of that NewGrade upgrader — 

which I know the member from Lakeview took you through the 

process here today to explain that actually utilizing those 

revenues is illegal until it’s passed through legislation — you’re 

using those revenues to balance this budget, Mr. Speaker, or the 

Sask Party government is. 

 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

Post-secondary, post-secondary rebates on education just don’t 

address, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, the need we have in 

recruiting in this province. Every sector in our province is 

looking to recruit right now. We need workers from across our 

nation. We need workers from across the world. It falls short. It 

needs to be broadened. And I hope that the minister opposite is 

able to find a way to do so. 

 

First Nations and Métis funding has been significantly reduced 

by this budget, by transferring significant amounts to the duty to 

consult fund. This is good, but why can’t we do both? Why 

can’t we invest at this time of prosperity like we’ve never seen 

in our First Nations people and invest in that duty to consult? 

 

I’m just going to share one statement . . . actually two 

statements here from a StarPhoenix article here from Saturday, 

March 29. And I’ll quote: 

 

If, as is generally the case, the Saskatchewan Party used its 

first budget to set the tone for its administration, the 

province has a growing list to worry about. 

 

Rather than appear to be competent managers of the public 

purse, Premier Brad Wall’s team has been extravagant in 

its spending, ham-handed in its communications strategy 

and incompetent in its delivery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the good part of that article. That’s the part 

that favours the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South has really failed 

our municipalities. In conjunction with the failure to reduce 

property taxes in significant ways, he has offered Regina 

residents a property tax increase. That’s right. The actions of 

this government and particularly the member and minister from 

Regina South have raised property taxes in Regina. Tax 

increases will soon be the reality for municipalities across this 

province — Yorkton at nearly 10 per cent, Saskatoon soon to 

announce, many more to follow. Just consult with SUMA. Ask 

them how disappointed they are with this. 

 

But the member from Regina South had a chance to prove 

himself responsive to the needs of this dynamic economy. Mr. 

Speaker, tasked with this challenge, the minister has chosen to 

hamper cities and towns while his provincial government reaps 

all the benefits of growth. This is not in line with the needs of 

our city, my constituents, nor growing cities and towns across 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Wood River 

account his version of Saskatchewan. He repeatedly cited 

hospital closures of years past as a major issue needing to be 

addressed. Tonight again it was mentioned by the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. I guess I look to the member from Wood 

River for his action plan to address his perceived 

mismanagement. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to hearing from 

the member from Wood River on what hospitals this or future 

budgets will reopen. Mr. Speaker, the member from Wood 

River might have to consult with his colleagues, the Finance 

minister and the Health minister, instead of railing on in his 

speech as if he were in opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest rant and rail against the previous government for 

what he perceives as many social failings. I ask the member, 

where is his voice in his own caucus? Because of his budget, it 

does not reflect the social investment he calls for. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a real disconnect. When $8 million of previously 

committed investment are yanked from an innovative 

community-led project to offer significant health and wellness 

to our most vulnerable, where is his voice? But as he stated 

yesterday, and as the member is stating here tonight, he doesn’t 

like the project. He calls it a grocery store. 

 

Then I ask him again, where is his voice to ensure that those 

previously committed dollars remain a social investment? The 

member from Saskatoon Northwest must be struggling with his 

wee voice within the Saskatchewan Party caucus. He must be 

struggling with his wee role within the Saskatchewan Party 

caucus. It must be hard, with so much conviction, only to see 

the Minister of Health spend it on fire alarms and cooler 

systems. Can’t we do both? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It brings me to another topic. Through 

this debate I’ve seen from a couple of members particularly a 

bit of a politicization of social issues in our province. I’ve seen 

a disregard for the history within our province. 

 

We’ve got systemic issues. We’ve got systemic barriers. The 

challenges we’re facing here today are cyclical and have grown 

through time. They’re real, real challenges. We don’t need to 

deny the statistics that say we’ve got some social challenges 

here. 

 

But I’ll tell you something, Mr. Speaker, that when members 

opposite, particularly two members, take a role and commit to a 

righteous plan as if they are going to fulfill on all the social ills 

of our province, they are taking a role much larger than they’re 

able to deliver on. 

 

The people of our province, the vulnerable people of our 

province, deserve more. They deserve their full commitment, 

which I believe they have, but I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

got issues in this province that are going to go far beyond any 

term in government, far beyond any premier sitting in that 

chair. 

 

What we need to be is thoughtful. What we need to be is 

consistent. We need to make sure we’re shooting in the right 

direction. And I guess I challenge members opposite to 

continue to ensure that we’re approaching these long-term 

challenges with thoughtful and effective policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I listen to the member 

from Batoche’s aye aye captain to his leader, and likening his 

party to a ship. Well I think his romantic prose could have been 

summarized better as a ship being surfed on an island, or in fact 

many islands, stranded until this Saskatchewan Party 

government addresses these challenges. Issues do not exist on 

islands. They are connected, Mr. Speaker. Nor do the 

implications of these issues not being addressed exist on 

islands, Mr. Speaker. These issues are interconnected. 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

[21:45] 

 

An example: without investment in skills training, our labour 

crisis is not addressed, our economy’s stifled, our marginalized 

residents and families barriered from entering this economy and 

the social fabric of our province. A balanced and responsible 

government would offer a balanced and responsive budget. A 

balanced government would address such holes as the property 

tax relief that’s needed, the lack of action on the housing crisis, 

the insignificant funding to skills training, and the slashing of 

the funds to the issue that is first and foremost in our world, our 

nation, and our province — the environment. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to participate 

within this debate. I do feel that there’s some very good stuff in 

this budget, but the shortcomings should be addressed. Mr. 

Speaker, I will not be supporting the motion. I will be 

supporting the constructive amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

colleagues here know that I’m not one prone to overheated 

rhetoric or overt partisanship or anything of that nature, Mr. 

Speaker. But I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, this is probably 

the best budget I have ever seen. Outstanding. Probably the best 

budget in the history of this province. Absolutely amazing, Mr. 

Speaker. I am incredibly proud to stand here and enter debate 

on behalf of the people of Meadow Lake. 

 

I would very much like to congratulate the Minister of Finance 

who in three short months was able to put together an incredible 

document, with shortened timelines, that has been incredibly 

well-received by the people of Saskatchewan and very, very 

well-received by people in Meadow Lake. 

 

You know, we’ve talked about, in this budget, two big things, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked about keeping our promises and we 

have. We’ve kept 40 of our promises in this budget. And we 

talked about preparing our province to be ready for growth, 

which is at variance with the previous government who 

prepared for failure, who didn’t plan for growth. That’s very 

much different from what our approach is, Mr. Speaker. We are 

planning to grow this province. 

 

You know, just in terms of the momentum that this province 

has right now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about some of the 

recent positive economic news in 2008. 

 

In January, year over year, Saskatchewan’s population grew by 

nearly 17,000 people, an increase of 1.7 per cent, the biggest 

jump in population since 1952, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re keeping our young people here. I can tell you a story, 

Mr. Speaker, about my cousin who had a choice, whether to go 

to Alberta or to stay here in Saskatchewan. And this was during 

the election campaign, Mr. Speaker. She had to make a decision 

and she phoned me and said, you know, Jeremy, what are your 

chances of winning? I said, I think they’re pretty darn good. 

And she, on the basis of that, made a decision to stay here in 

Saskatchewan because of what we were going to be doing as a 

government and what we were going to be doing for university 

graduates. So I think that’s a very positive thing. 

 

You know, again in the positive economic news, Saskatchewan 

set new employment records with nearly 500,000 people 

working in the province in February 2008. Saskatchewan has 

experienced the largest growth of any province in Canada in the 

final three months of 2007, with an increase of .33 per cent. 

And that’s attributable solely to our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Year over year, Saskatchewan grew above the national average. 

And five years ago, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to 

remember NDP MLA Doreen Hamilton was quoted as saying 

that this was, quote, “more wishful thinking than statistically 

attainable.” Unbelievable. 

 

Saskatchewan’s now leading the country in several important 

economic indicators, including wholesale trade, 14.4 per cent 

growth, first in Canada; retail sales, 17.1 per cent growth, first 

in Canada; construction permits overall, 42.3 per cent growth, 

first in Canada; residential building permits, 74.2 per cent 

growth, first in Canada; new vehicle sales, 13.1 per cent 

growth, first in Canada; international exports value, 29.8 per 

cent growth year over year, first in Canada. 

 

A new report from the Canada West Foundation predicts 

Saskatchewan will lead the country in economic growth in 

2008. A new report from the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business shows that Saskatchewan business 

owners are the most optimistic in Western Canada and rank 

second in the nation in optimism. 

 

I mean this is outstanding news, Mr. Speaker. This is great 

stuff. Yet we have an NDP who are angry, who are bitter, who 

are frustrated. Now listening to the comic stylings of the 

member from Athabasca over there, you would think this was 

the worst budget that had ever been brought forward. Yet we 

have the NDP that are saying, well this is almost an NDP 

budget, on the other hand. You know, the opposition can’t get 

their stories straight. Their messaging is all over the map on 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You have the Finance critic that says it’s almost an NDP 

budget, but on the other hand, we’re not spending enough. It 

doesn’t make any sense. Leader of the Opposition saying we are 

spending too much. And he’s pointing to the cost of the clean 

coal project. It’s unreal, Mr. Speaker. You know, they talk 

about they want to address climate change. They say that they 

had a great commitment to addressing climate change. I think 

that’s a variance with the record, Mr. Speaker. But that being 

said, we come forward with a clean coal project that would, in a 

very real way, address climate change. It would bring economic 

benefits to the province. And they say it’s going to cost too 

much. You know it really doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things we’ve often heard the NDP talk about is a 

hidden agenda. And they love to throw this phrase out there, 

and they love to acclaim that somehow the Saskatchewan Party 

has a hidden agenda. 

 

Well you know, talking about the budget and what we would 

see in an NDP budget, I think it would be interesting to look at 

some of the resolutions from the last NDP convention, Mr. 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

Speaker, the convention where we had a Young Turk, a young 

fellow who really could fire up the crowd, named Allan 

Blakeney give their speech, the keynote speech at the 

convention, on the subject of renewal, Mr. Speaker, which is, 

you know, very well received, I’m sure, by convention 

delegates. 

 

But one of the motions that we would possibly see in an NDP 

budget was cutting, cutting the D.A.R.E. program which is the 

drug abuse resistance education program, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

program where police officers go into schools, where they talk 

about the dangers of drug abuse, and where they have had great 

success in the past in keeping young people away from 

dangerous drugs. Well what do we see from the NDP? We see 

an NDP motion at their convention to get rid of this program. 

It’s astonishing, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely astonishing. 

 

I’m going to actually read, I’m going to actually read another 

motion from that convention which could possibly be in an 

NDP budget — who knows? I’ll read it. 

 

Whereas tenant-landlord relationships are holdovers from 

feudal times; 

 

And whereas the government currently spends money 

housing people on government assistance by paying rent 

to property owners, thereby exposing themselves to 

market forces [That’s dangerous stuff in the pricing of 

rent.]; 

 

Therefore be it resolved that an NDP government would 

put severe restriction on property owners so that renters 

may have further protections from facing market forces; 

 

And be it further resolved [It gets even better, Mr. 

Speaker.] that an NDP government would purchase 

housing facilities in a variety of neighbourhoods so that 

the government could ensure the people receiving 

government assistance have a decent place to live at an 

affordable rate; 

 

And be it further resolved that the overall agenda of an 

NDP government’s housing strategy would be to lead to 

the end of private landlordship so that every person in 

Saskatchewan could have a place to live.  

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this sort of thing happen 

before. It hasn’t happened in this country but, you know, North 

Korea and Cuba. I mean that’s the type of model that this party 

obviously wants to follow. 

 

And you know, we’ve seen, we’ve seen the founding document 

of this party, the founding document of this party, still on their 

website — the Regina Manifesto — calling for the eradication 

of capitalism. I mean, Mr. Speaker, this is dangerous stuff. 

These are dangerous motions coming from the NDP. And you 

know, frankly, Mr. Speaker, it’s a little concerning to the people 

of Meadow Lake. 

 

I’m going to refer to another motion here, and I’ll read it: 

 

Whereas oil and gas are finite, non-renewable resources 

with a value that will increase as they are depleted; 

And whereas our oil and gas revenues contribute to all 

aspects of life in this province, including the delivery of 

public health and education programs; 

 

And whereas much of our oil and gas revenues are 

currently clawed back by a faulty equalization formula; 

 

Be it resolved that Saskatchewan New Democrats support 

an increase . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I realize it’s getting somewhat 

late in the evening, and I’m surprised that there’s so much life 

on the floor, but I think it’s appropriate for members to allow 

the member from Meadow Lake to complete his remarks. 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 

what’s causing all the commotion in here. These are just facts 

that I’m putting forward in a very even-handed way and 

obviously the opposition are, they’re not happy to hear about it. 

 

But you know, let me go back to this motion that I was talking 

about with regard to oil and gas that was debated at the NDP 

convention: 

 

Be it resolved that Saskatchewan New Democrats support 

an increase in oil and gas royalties so that we maximize 

our oil and gas revenue.  

 

Increase — increase — oil and gas royalties, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, that would be an absolute disaster for our province if that 

were to happen, Mr. Speaker. Yet this is a motion that’s 

seriously debated at their convention. This was . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 

members to allow the member to speak to the debate on the 

budget. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think this is very relevant because this could possibly be in an 

NDP budget. This is what they obviously believe in. But that 

being said, you know, we’re talking about oil and gas, and 

that’s an important part of the budget. 

 

And we’re also talking, we’re also talking about hidden 

agendas, Mr. Speaker. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? I 

have here in my hand, which I’m happy to table, something that 

is shocking, something that I think really does show the NDP 

agenda when it comes to oil sands. You know, this is a real 

bombshell, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll hold it up here. But this is a 

picture taken . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. For the sake of new members I 

would like to remind the members that they’re not to hold up 

anything as a prop and use it as a prop. Would the member from 

Meadow Lake remember that. Order. Member from Meadow 

Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for 

that. But I will describe this picture, and I will table it for the 

House. But this is a picture of the Leader of the Opposition and 

the NDP environment critic standing at a rally today behind a 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

sign that says, stop the tar sands. 

 

We have not been able, we have not been able to get that party 

on the record, since the election, on what their position on oil 

sands development is, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t heard. We 

don’t know what that position is. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Speaker? We know now. We know 

what the position of the NDP is with regard to oil sands. They 

want to shut it down, Mr. Speaker. They want to shut it down, 

just like their leader, just like their leader, the member for 

Toronto-Danforth, who has called for a moratorium on oil sands 

development, just like a former cabinet minister in that 

government who has called for a moratorium on oil sands 

exploration, Mr. Speaker. We know what their position is on oil 

sands. They want to shut it down. 

 

And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? I think that’s unfortunate. 

I really do think that’s unfortunate. The oil sands in this 

province offer incredible potential, absolutely incredible 

potential for our province, for the future of our province. 

 

We have a company operating right now in northwestern 

Saskatchewan that has third party verification of approximately 

1.5 billion barrels in place, and this is only in one township 

that’s actually been fully explored, which would result . . . 

That’s a world-class commercial project right there, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s just scratching the surface. We could end up 

with 10 billion barrels of oil in place or even more. What does 

that result in, Mr. Speaker? That results in thousands of jobs. 

That results in investment of billions of dollars. 

 

And we’re talking about an area of this province, northwestern 

Saskatchewan north of La Loche, that is one of the most 

economically depressed areas in the entire country. And what 

do we have? We have the NDP saying that they don’t want any 

development to happen there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what kind of priorities does this party have? Do 

they want to keep the people of La Loche in poverty forever? 

There’s an opportunity for those people and we are providing 

dollars for training so those people can take advantage of the 

natural resource that exists in northwestern Saskatchewan. And 

they say no. They say no to the people of La Loche. They say 

no to the people of Clearwater River. They say, we do not want 

to see development. It is unbelievable. It’s irresponsible. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk further about this 

picture where we have the Leader of the Opposition and the 

NDP Environment critic. This group today, which was 

participating in a day called Fossil Fools Day, this . . . other 

groups participating in this event, they blocked a gas station in 

Ontario today, Mr. Speaker. They blockaded banks in New 

York City and Boston. They blockaded a gas terminal, like they 

blockaded roads in England. They shut down mines in the 

United Kingdom. 

 

These are people that are breaking the law. These are people 

that are using violence to achieve political means. And you 

know what? You have the Leader of the Opposition and you 

have the Environment critic of the NDP associating themselves 

with these people. It is shameful. It is shameful, It’s 

irresponsible. It’s, quite frankly, sad to see the state that a 

once-proud party has fallen into. They’re reduced to associating 

themselves with groups that are participating in violent 

activities. It’s unbelievable. 

 

You know, the other thing I want to talk about here today, Mr. 

Speaker, is I want to set the record straight on some oil sands 

questions. You know, we heard from the NDP Environment 

critic, who for the first time in this session of the legislature 

asked a question of the Minister of the Environment. And we 

later heard during the comic stylings from the member from 

Athabasca that that would be the end of questions to the 

Environment minister, but we did get a couple anyways. 

 

You know, we — Minister Boyd and I — visited the site of 

Oilsands Quest quite recently. The Minister of Energy and 

Resources and I visited the site of Oilsands Quest very recently. 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the environmental footprint 

really is minimal. The company in question has bent over 

backwards — done everything they possibly can — far 

exceeded any regulatory requirements for environmental 

stewardship in the development or the exploration of what 

could very well be the first oil sands project in this province, to 

the extent of actually hiring summer students to go and walk 

along roads that are near the site, picking up cigarette butts and 

any garbage that might exist to the point of cleaning up any sort 

of possible contaminant that is in existence in the area. 

 

And you know, the other thing I would like to talk about is I 

think the NDP and others of that ilk would like to portray oil 

sands development as being some sort of a giant open-pit 

process. Well you know, frankly, that just wouldn’t be the case 

here, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about an extraction process 

that would be an in situ sort of process, possibly a 

steam-assisted process. There’s going to be no bigger 

environmental footprint than there would be in any other 

conventional oil extraction operation. And you know, I think 

the NDP are trying to blur the truth on that and I think their 

allies in this Fossil Fools Day are trying to do likewise. So you 

know, I think it’s quite unfortunate that the NDP are going 

down this route. 

 

But, you know, the other thing that our government’s been 

doing in order to support revenue for the budget, Mr. Speaker, 

has been . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. It’s been a long-standing 

tradition when we’re into Throne Speech and budget debate that 

the speeches have some variance and I would ask the members 

to allow the member to place his thoughts on the issue. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member for 

Battlefords obviously generating more . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. For the sake of new members, when a 

member has asked the Assembly to come to order, members are 

not to refer to or bring the Speaker into the debate. Just accept 

the motion or order that’s been brought forward and move 

forward with the debate when you’ve been invited to speak. The 

member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

You know, one of the things that our government has been 

doing very aggressively — very aggressively — in order to 

increase the revenue for the budget process in this province is 

spreading our message about our natural resource wealth, not 

just across Canada but around North America. And we’ve been 

taking that message on the road. I know, Mr. Speaker, I was in 

Houston, Texas, not that long ago spreading the good word 

about the incredible natural resource wealth in our great 

province. The Premier and the Minister of Energy and 

Resources, the member from Wood River, and myself were in 

Washington, DC [District of Columbia] as well, attending 

meetings of the Energy Council, Mr. Speaker, and spreading the 

good word about the incredible potential in our great province. 

 

You know, speaking of the Energy Council again, it was an 

initiative of our government to become a full member of the 

Energy Council. The previous government had basically, you 

know, stood at the back of the room for a year or so. We 

decided to become full members, Mr. Speaker, because we felt 

it was important that that message and those contacts be 

obtained for our province. 

 

You know, talking again about the incredible potential in the oil 

and gas industry, look at the Bakken play, the Bakken 

Formation, Mr. Speaker, in southeastern Saskatchewan where 

we have in just the last couple of years gone from 700 or so 

barrels a day produced to nearly 20,000, Mr. Speaker. We have 

seen land sales, land sale records shattered. The last two land 

sales have been record for this province. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, frankly in the discussions I’ve had with stakeholders 

in the industry, it’s a reflection purely, purely of the confidence 

the industry has in our government. The industry wants to work 

with us. The industry wants to be a part of what’s happening 

here in this province because of our government and because of 

what we’ve done. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to wrap up by again 

saying how proud I am to be a part of this party, a part of this 

government, have these wonderful colleagues here, who at 10 

o’clock at night are all here. It’s a very encouraging thing to 

see. 

 

And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? We are so optimistic 

about the future of this province. We’re looking forward. That 

party wants to be negative. They want to look in the rear-view 

mirror. They want to talk about the glory days in the 1960s. But 

you know what, Mr. Speaker? We think Saskatchewan’s best 

days are in the future. And we’re going to work hard. And 

we’re going to make it happen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly appreciate 

my colleagues’ encouragement and I hope they’re as 

enthusiastic when I finish as I am when I begin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve quite enjoyed the debate that’s taken place on 

both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker. And I listened pretty 

closely what the members opposite have to say on this budget. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and I have to say right off the start that all of 

us as elected members, we don’t know how long we’re elected. 

We won’t know how long that the people will want to keep us 

as their representatives. That’s up to the voters of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have to say, I have to say, that for as long as 

the member for Athabasca is an elected member of this 

Assembly, I hope I’m here, Mr. Speaker, because that was one 

of the most enjoyable speeches that I’ve ever heard. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was quite ironic that on the day that the comedy 

awards was announced that it’s coming to Regina . . . And in 

fact there’s going to be sort of a “Canadian Idol” for comedians. 

I would encourage him to go out for that, Mr. Speaker, because 

that was certainly one of the highlights of what I’ve heard in 

this Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this budget is . . . The government, the 

Finance minister, titled this budget Ready for Growth, Mr. 

Speaker. And the members opposite, they’ve come into the 

debate, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t give a title as to what they 

would title their amendment, Mr. Speaker. But I think I know 

what the title should be. This is a ready-for-growth budget, and 

their amendment and their opposition to this budget I think 

should be called the would have, could have, should have, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know what, you hear members opposite . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — We would have paid for that, Mr. Speaker, 

had we been re-elected. We could have funded that, Mr. 

Speaker, had we been given more than 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

Or my favourite, my favourite, after people came to this 

Assembly wanting the cancer drug of Avastin funded, Mr. 

Speaker . . . In fact at the cancer breakfast this morning a 

constituent of mine, Keith Whyte, spoke very eloquently about 

his battle with cancer and, quite frankly, his battle with that 

former government, Mr. Speaker. And the NDP opposition put 

out a report card and they actually gave us good marks because 

we funded that drug, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a shame that they 

didn’t do it when they had the chance, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

absolute shame that they didn’t do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve heard, what we’ve heard from 

members opposite, and especially the member from Athabasca, 

you know on one hand this government can’t take credit for 

population growth, or job growth, or income growth for the 

people. But he wants the potholes fixed already, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve only been in government for about four months but 

there’s potholes out there that need to be fixed. There’s 

municipal issues that need to be fixed, Mr. Speaker. And there’s 

recreational facilities in northern Saskatchewan and rural 

Saskatchewan that have been neglected, Mr. Speaker. And they 

were there for 16 years and it’s a shame that . . .  

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, my good friend, the member from Regina 

Rosemont, you know, he had some good things to say about this 

budget. And you know, it’s good, People on this side of the 

House think he’s in the wrong party and we would sure 

welcome him any day, Mr. Speaker. But he said, on the $1 

billion infrastructure piece — and I’ll get to that in a little bit, 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

Mr. Speaker — he said it didn’t go far enough. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you know what? It probably didn’t, but one step at a 

time, Mr. Speaker, because there was an infrastructure deficit 

left by that government, Mr. Speaker. And $1 billion for this 

year will go a long, long way, Mr. Speaker. But we won’t get 

the job done in four months, Mr. Speaker. And nobody expects 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m really pleased to be able to speak in favour of 

this budget, a historic budget for the people of this province, 

Mr. Speaker. And I want to first begin, as many members have, 

by congratulating the Finance minister and the members of the 

cabinet, the members of this government for putting together a 

plan that we can go to our constituencies. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I would encourage the members opposite. This is a 

good budget for the people of this province and they could sell 

it to their constituents as being a good . . . It’s not just good for 

our constituents. It’s good for the entire province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a budget that’s going to 

build on the optimism that we’ve seen in this province and 

optimism that we’ve seen since the election, Mr. Speaker. And I 

will say that there was optimism. There was things moving 

along. There was momentum in 2007, Mr. Speaker, and there 

was anticipation of a new government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you during the Easter break, I had the 

chance to travel around the constituency. I spent some time in 

Weyburn. I was out in Coronach. I spent some time . . . I spent 

a day in Coronach at one of the municipal offices, Mr. Speaker, 

meeting constituents. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker? People of this province think 

this is a good budget, Mr. Speaker. This is a budget that they’ve 

been waiting for, for a long, long time, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know what, Mr. Speaker? Bright times are ahead for this 

province. Even in fact coming back from the Easter break, it’s 

even brighter in the building, Mr. Speaker. And you know, I 

think that’s an indication of what people are feeling around this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s not a lot of time left, Mr. Speaker, in my 

remarks here, but I have a lot to say. And I think members on 

this side have talked about a lot of the positive indicators going 

forward. So, Mr. Speaker, I won’t repeat a lot of those. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a budget that makes this province 

ready for growth. And again my hon. colleague across the way 

from Rosemont, I believe he called members of this 

government creatures of growth. I’ll have to check Hansard, 

but I think that’s what it was. And I take that as being, I . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Preachers, I’m sorry, it was 

preachers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would much rather be a member of a 

government that preaches growth, than that preaches decline 

like we saw over the last couple of years with that government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — We needed a budget, Mr. Speaker, that looked 

after infrastructure because we’re a government committed to 

growing this province so we can continue to pay for the services 

that people in this province have come to expect. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that this is a great budget because it’s a historic 

budget. It’s the largest capital investment in this province’s 

history, and I think that this is being well-received by the 

people of this province and by the people of Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll get to their comments in a little 

bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at, when you break down the 

billion dollars in infrastructure we’re looking at in this budget, 

$200 million for hospitals and health facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

Facilities that provide the necessities of what this province, 

what people of this province have come to expect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there’s one thing that the government needs to 

provide, it is quality health care to the people of this province. 

And for so long we haven’t seen the proper investment. I want 

to talk about, Mr. Speaker — and that’s a positive development 

— I want to talk about $160 million going into our schools, Mr. 

Speaker, to look after infrastructure. And I want to personally 

congratulate the Minister for Education for pushing this issue, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[22:15] 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in our area, in our area of the 

Southeast, Oxbow is finally, after several years of being on the 

list but never getting the funding, Mr. Speaker, Oxbow . . . And 

even though it’s not in my constituency, what that means for 

my constituents, Mr. Speaker, is that Oxbow’s going to be taken 

care of because the school board in our area thought that was a 

priority, Mr. Speaker. So that meant that other capital projects 

had to wait until Oxbow could get approved, and the school 

board came year after year trying to get funding. Finally we can 

get that project under way and completed, Mr. Speaker, and that 

will help to look at projects within Weyburn, within the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting that . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . If he feels that I’m picking on him, I don’t 

mean it, Mr. Speaker. But the member for Regina Rosemont, 

my hon. colleague, one of the things that he needs to be aware 

of, Mr. Speaker — and I think all people in this Assembly — 

that 88 per cent of the schools in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

were built prior to when I was born and to when . . . because I 

know we’re the same age. We’re right around the same age, Mr. 

Speaker. Eighty-eight per cent of the schools were built before 

we were even born. And they weren’t looked after under this 

government . . . the former government, Mr. Speaker. They 

weren’t looked after properly, and so there’s a long ways to go, 

Mr. Speaker, to bring those facilities up to where they need to 

be to provide those services. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know one thing. If there’s anything that 

people are giving — my constituents are giving — this 

government credit for, it’s the work that this government’s 

committed to in highways, Mr. Speaker, because for so long . . . 

And maybe the members opposite, maybe the members 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

opposite, maybe their constituents, don’t feel that it’s a priority 

or maybe that’s what they suppose. But I would invite any of 

them to come to Weyburn-Big Muddy, and I’ll tour them 

around, and we’ll go through all the small towns in the 

constituency. The number one thing that I’ve heard about from 

my constituents is finally we’re going to see some highways 

being rebuilt, Mr. Speaker, finally. 

 

And finally we’re going to see a plan, Mr. Speaker. Because in 

the past we had the former premier, the Leader of the 

Opposition, say he admitted that it was really a year-to-year 

thing. It was ad hoc. There was no plan, Mr. Speaker. And now 

finally municipalities and constituents are going to be able to 

see where they are in this government’s plans, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think that’s a positive development for the people of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve been listening 

. . . and I listen pretty closely to what the members opposite say, 

but at the same time I’m trying to write my remarks. And I get a 

pretty good, you know, when I’m writing my remarks out . . . 

But every once in a while I’ll hear something that a member 

opposite has said, and so I feel like I need to correct some of the 

things that have been said opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first thing that I want to say, and perhaps it 

was an oversight, Mr. Speaker, but in his reply to the budget, 

the member for Massey Place took a bit of exception, Mr. 

Speaker, with something that was committed to in the campaign 

and what we’ve delivered in this budget, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to read what the member for Massey Place had to say. 

Talking about the Premier campaigning in the last election, 

talking about the leader of our party, he said, and I quote: 

 

In his platform, he committed to, quote, “doubling 

education property tax rebates saving the average 

homeowner $450 a year.” That’s a pretty explicit promise, 

Mr. Speaker, a promise which this government has failed 

to keep. They did not double education property taxes; 

they didn’t even come close to that. Rather they simply 

increased the rebate that homeowners receive on education 

property tax bills from 10 per cent to 12 per cent — a 2 

per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. That’s a far cry from 

fulfilling their promise. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at what we actually made a 

commitment on, Mr. Speaker. And maybe it’s revisionist 

history, Mr. Speaker. Maybe it’s taking a little bit of liberty 

with what actually we promised, Mr. Speaker, but I just happen 

to have our party platform with me, Mr. Speaker. And page 14 

said: 

 

A Saskatchewan Party government will reduce the 

education portion of property taxes for Saskatchewan 

families by doubling property tax rebates over four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, so that’s what we committed to in 

the campaign. And then, Mr. Speaker, I would refer — if that 

member’s reading along with me so that he knows what exactly 

he got wrong in his statement, Mr. Speaker — in the budget it 

says that, and this is on page 12, that “residential and 

commercial portions will go from 10 per cent to 12 per cent.” 

Mr. Speaker, exactly what was said in the campaign, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member, perhaps the member 

just was a little bit fuzzy on what happened in the campaign. I 

know they want to forget what happened in the campaign, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that they’ve talked about a lot 

is the property tax issue. What they don’t mention is what we 

committed to and what we are delivering to agricultural 

landowners, Mr. Speaker. And why don’t they discuss it? 

Because they had no plan in the campaign, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s pretty evident when you look across and see how many 

rural-based MLAs are sitting on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. It really tells the story. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, something else that really interests me on 

the property tax piece. This is, Mr. Speaker, from my home 

newspaper, the Weyburn Review. This came out after the 

budget, and the NDP Finance critic, the member for Douglas 

Park, he said, on property tax, he said: 

 

I think the government really missed an opportunity to 

provide broad-based property tax relief. Certainly the 

government has the financial flexibility to do . . . Why 

they are staging the increase in relief over four years is a 

puzzling question to me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why we’re doing it? It’s because that’s what we 

committed to the people of the province that we would do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — And, Mr. Speaker, I understand why the 

member for Douglas Park is a little bit fuzzy on why a party 

would keep a promise after they made it in the campaign 

because I believe he was the same member that said you don’t 

talk about tax increases during a campaign. What did he do? . . . 

[inaudible] . . . within the finances of the province. Whoops, the 

election comes, they’re re-elected, and he raises the PST 

[provincial sales tax] by 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I can understand why he’s a little, why he’s a little confused 

on why we are doing this over four years, Mr. Speaker, with the 

full intention and the absolute commitment that a permanent 

solution will be found, Mr. Speaker, before that time is up, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, while we’re talking about property tax, the 

member from Regina Dewdney, now this was . . . It was 

another interesting speech, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what did that member, what did that member say, Mr. Speaker? 

He actually — and I quite enjoyed this, Mr. Speaker — he used 

a baseball analogy. And what I think he was trying to refer to, 

they believe that this party is taking credit for things that he 

believes that their party had put in place, Mr. Speaker. And so 

it’s the baseball analogy about, you know — and I think the 

people of the province agree — that we hit a grand slam on this 

one, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — We hit a grand slam. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

and in fact that same member said, he actually gave credit for a 

good budget — I believe he said a good budget — in half the 

time that a government usually has to put a budget in place, Mr. 

Speaker. So really by those standards . . . But here’s the 

baseball analogy that he used, Mr. Speaker. He said, he said that 

they inherited, that this government inherited, “. . . they 

inherited a province where they were on third base.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to build on this analogy because I 

think he got it wrong. And I like the baseball analogy, Mr. 

Speaker. But it wasn’t that we were on third base as the 

government or they were on third base as a government, Mr. 

Speaker. Here’s what it was. The province and our economy, 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the economy was on third base, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And to go a little bit further with the analogy, because I think 

this really, this is a bit of a better use of the baseball analogy, 

Mr. Speaker, the manager of this baseball team is the voters and 

the province is on third base. We’re just about there, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to score a run, and the manager — the 

voters, if the member can follow this — the manager’s looking 

at who he has up to bat. And let’s go back to November. Who’s 

he got up to bat, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And the manager, the voters . . . well it’s the 16-year-old 

veteran that, you know, sometimes has to take every third day 

off because, you know, they’re little bit rusty. And they’ve had 

a not a bad career, Mr. Speaker, but they’re on the downturn of 

a career, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so the manager’s looking and instead of going with that 

veteran, the manager — the voters — decided they were going 

to go with something new, something that they trust, trusted, 

Mr. Speaker, something that they could believe in, Mr. Speaker. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, our government was elected, and I think 

we’ve got this province . . . we’ve batted a run in, Mr. Speaker, 

on this one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, just a bit further on the 

analogy — and I don’t want to go too much further on it, Mr. 

Speaker, but it reminds me . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I 

know that members on this side, I hope they’re enjoying this. 

But it reminds me of a first baseman for the New York 

Yankees, Mr. Speaker. And he was given a chance. In fact in 

1925, Mr. Speaker, the Yankees decided to put Lou Gehrig in. 

And he was in for 2,130 consecutive games, Mr. Speaker — 

yes, a record that lasted until 1995, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know what? Nobody remembers who he replaced. You 

know, Wally Pipps was his name, but nobody really remembers 

that. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that this Premier of this province 

is going to be like that. He’s going to have a long run, Mr. 

Speaker, a long run. And down the road when he’s got many, 

many terms as Premier of the province, Mr. Speaker, the people 

of this province, they’ll remember that there was a premier 

before him, but they won’t remember who he was, Mr. Speaker, 

because this government is going to do some tremendous things 

over the next number of terms that we will be in government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re still on the property tax piece here, 

Mr. Speaker. And there was some talk about, there was some 

talk . . . Maybe, Mr. Speaker, my time’s winding down here. 

 

So I’m just going to move on to talk about the reaction of the 

people of Weyburn-Big Muddy. And I’ve already talked a little 

bit about it, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, the hometown 

news, the front page — “Budget gives broad-based support to 

infrastructure,” Mr. Speaker. The mayor of Weyburn, she was 

quoted in the paper, Mr. Speaker. She said that overall . . . This 

was her quote: “Overall, as I sat and listened to the budget, I felt 

it’s a good time to be a resident of Saskatchewan,” Mr. Speaker. 

That’s from the mayor of Weyburn. And we certainly 

appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s good comments from people in the 

education system in our area, Mr. Speaker, from the Chairs of 

the boards of the school divisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other one that I want to talk about . . . And I know the 

member for Elphinstone had some comments about the regional 

colleges and that he felt that there wasn’t enough there for 

regional colleges. And, Mr. Speaker, this comes from our 

newspaper, and the quote is, Mr. Speaker, “Overall, I think the 

infrastructure investment of 45.8 million for post-secondary 

institutions was a wise decision by the government [Mr. 

Speaker].” 

 

Now who was that person? That’s the president and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of our regional college, Mr. Graham 

Mickleborough, Mr. Speaker, who just two years ago was an 

NDP candidate, Mr. Speaker. So he liked the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Being at the time of adjournment, this 

Assembly is adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 499 

  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 500 

  Bjornerud .................................................................................................................................................................................. 504 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 507 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 511 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 516 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 518 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 523 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 526 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 519 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 




