




















































Hansard: April 01, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 18A  TUESDAY, APRIL 1, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 469 

 April 1, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to take this 

opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the members 

of this Assembly Mr. Jim Coutts. Mr. Coutts is the chairman 

and chief executive officer of Canadian Investment Capital Ltd. 

 

As most know, Jim has led an active life, Canadian public life, 

first as secretary to the Rt. Hon. Lester Pearson and later as 

principal secretary to the Rt. Hon. Pierre Trudeau. In 2001 he 

received the Order of Canada. 

 

Mr. Coutts, is also well known for his charitable activities with 

the Hospital for Sick Children, the Nature Conservancy of 

Canada, the Lester B. Pearson United World College. As well, 

he is the co-founder of the W.O. Mitchell Literary Prize for 

writers and mentors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‘m honoured to welcome Mr. Coutts to 

Saskatchewan and to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‘d like to introduce to 

you, through you, and to all members of the Assembly a 

number of individuals who took part in world Fossil Fools Day 

today and they‘re seated in the west gallery above me, and I 

would like all members of the legislature to welcome them to 

the legislature today please. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, Mr. 

Speaker, and through you to the entire Assembly, it is my 

pleasure to introduce with Mr. Coutts, who has been previously 

introduced, a member of the board of trustees from the Lester 

B. Pearson College of the Pacific and a graduate of the United 

World College of America, Montezuma, New Mexico. Mr. 

Speaker, let us all welcome to this Assembly my son, Ian 

Chisholm. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone and the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford in welcoming Mr. Coutts and Mr. Chisholm. 

As I think the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford knows and 

some members know, my daughter is a recent graduate at the 

Lester B. Pearson College of the Pacific. What not as many 

members may realize is that a former chief of staff of mine is 

also a college graduate, not quite as recent, of the college. So I 

have benefited indirectly in many ways from the work that 

these gentlemen have done. My daughter certainly enjoyed her 

experience there, and I want to commend both Mr. Coutts and 

Mr. Chisholm for their public service and for their efforts on 

behalf of a very worthy institution in our country. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through I‘d like 

to introduce a guest in the Speaker‘s gallery, Ms. Patricia 

Fraser. She‘s a constituent of mine. She‘s here for all of us. 

She‘s not a guest of mine. Patricia Fraser actually organizes the 

Saskatchewan House of Prayers in which that group gets 

together and then prays for decision makers within this province 

which includes all of us within this Assembly. I know when I 

sat down with Ms. Fraser, I was humbled by the prayers, and I 

know their wish is that we have the strength to make fair and 

responsible decisions. 

 

I ask that we all greet Ms. Fraser here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present several pages 

of petitions to the Legislative Assembly and the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by people from North Battleford, 

Yorkton, Saskatoon, Regina, Davidson, and Kenaston. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

concerning Station 20 West in Saskatoon. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that signed this petition are from 

Saskatoon from a variety of constituencies on both sides of the 

river. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 1, April 

Fool‘s Day, a day of jokes and fun to be sure, but my look 

today is not a slight towards my learned friend, the member 

from Carrot River Valley. And no I do not use the same barber 

as the Hon. Minister of Justice. I‘m on my feet today for a much 

more worthy reason. 

 

April 1 is also the first day of Cancer Awareness Month, and 

I‘ve chosen a verbal and visual statement, Mr. Speaker. I would 

argue that every person in this Assembly today, if asked, would 

agree their lives have been touched by this disease in form or 

another, whether it‘d be a acquaintance, a friend, or a family 

member, whether it‘d be by way of a battle with cancer or loss 

of life due to cancer. 

 

In this month of April, we should not only recognize the disease 

but the people who volunteer and work to bring awareness to 

find the cure, whether it be the family of Terry Fox, the 

Canadian Cancer Society, or my family‘s own event named in 

honour of my son — Brayden Ottenbreit‘s Close Cuts for 

Cancer — which has raised nearly half a million dollars for 

cancer research nationally and local care and support in the 

Yorkton area. 

 

Also we should recognize the people who strive to make more 

comfortable the lives of those fighting and also those who strive 

to make the passing of those losing their battle more 

comfortable. But mainly I want to acknowledge the most 

important people in this equation, Mr. Speaker: the victims, the 

ones fighting right now, the ones that have won, and the ones 

that have lost. 

 

Saskatchewan people are a hearty and loving bunch, Mr. 

Speaker, and in many situations they will make good come 

from a bad situation. Very often it is a choice, the choice of one 

vowel. Bitter or better, Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan 

fighting for a cure choose the latter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Extremist Comments 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, everyone is entitled to their 

opinions no matter how cold, angry, offensive, hurtful, or 

hateful they may be. And in this Internet age, there‘s no 

shortage of opportunities for people to express their opinions. 

Some are insightful, articulate, and thought-provoking. Others 

are small-minded and mean-spirited, and some cross the line. 

 

Last week a right wing extremist and friend of the Sask Party 

whose name and whose blog do not merit mention in this 

Assembly clearly crossed the line with an offensive post 

regarding people in Saskatoon who would have benefited from 

the Station 20 project the Sask Party government has seen fit to 

cancel. 

 

This blogger has been quoted by Sask Party members in this 

Assembly, and what‘s more, as of right now her endorsement of 

the Premier appears right on the Sask Party website alongside 

mainstream political commentators. 

 

Just yesterday in speaking with David Ahenakew‘s 

reinstatement into the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] senate, the Premier had this to say, quote: 

 

Given the extreme nature of the comments that were made 

. . . imagine the rightful indignation of any group in the 

province if . . . any individual . . . were to say these things 

about a definable group . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the rightful indignation in this case? If 

the Premier truly believes those words, if he does not endorse or 

share the views expressed by this blogger, he needs to 

immediately and unequivocally distance himself from her 

extremist comments. I look forward to the Premier‘s response. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora. 

 

Better Business Bureau Torch Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 

had the pleasure of attending the fourth annual Better Business 

Bureau Torch Awards held on March 19 here in Regina. The 

gala event honoured businesses and individuals in the province 

who have consistently conducted their operations with the 

highest standards. 

 

I would like to thank the sponsors of the Torch Awards and in 

particular major sponsor Jim Kellett and the K-Line Group of 

Companies for their continued support of this worthwhile event. 

 

Seven awards were presented to the following businesses: M.C. 

Painting & Bodyworks, Nestor‘s Bakery, Cowtown, the 

Association of Regina Realtors, Expert Hearing Solutions, 

Performance Marine, and J.A.B.A. Construction Limited. 

 

Keynote speaker Darci Lang touched upon the theme of the 

Torch Awards and its celebration of positive business and 

community relationships with her simple message: focus on the 

90 per cent that is positive in your life rather than spending your 

energy on the 10 per cent that is not. This is a great attitude not 

only for businesses but also for individuals, families, and the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

Better Business Bureau for recognizing Saskatchewan 

businesses and organizations that are having a positive impact 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

in this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Fossil Fools Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 

April Fool‘s Day, there will be many jokes played, but there are 

many participating today in something that is no joking matter. 

I‘m speaking of course of those individuals who are organizing 

and attending Fossil Fools Day rallies across the province and 

around the world. 

 

Fossil Fools Day is an occasion to raise awareness of the 

environmental impact of fossil fuel production and 

consumption. In Saskatchewan, thanks to the hard work of the 

Energy Action Coalition, the rally is about lobbying the Sask 

Party government to show leadership in developing the tar 

sands in an environmentally friendly way — a way that will 

help grow the economy but one that is sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the advantage of learning from the 

Alberta experience in order to avoid repeating many mistakes in 

this province. With any luck the Minister of Environment has 

finally had the opportunity to read up on the issue. Hopefully 

she now knows that the tar sands development involves more 

than just something to do with water. Although the minister and 

the Sask Party may see environmental issues as a joke, the good 

citizens of Saskatchewan certainly do not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all of my colleagues to join me 

in commending those individuals who, on this Fossil Fools Day, 

are raising awareness of this important issue and acting as 

environmental stewards for our province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Acknowledging Saskatchewan Hockey Teams 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 

congratulate all the hockey teams in my constituency that 

provide many . . . makes the winter months go much faster. But 

I would like to in part congratulate a few teams, which is the 

Wynyard Monarchs Pee Wee which are provincial C 

championships over Maidstone. I would also like to 

congratulate the Davidson Cyclones and Kenaston Blizzards, 

two men‘s senior teams that were played off in the northern D 

men‘s final. 

 

That provided excellent entertainment, also a little more for me 

because being so close I know most of the players on both of 

the teams. They provided some excellent, excellent games to 

watch. The first game, Davidson . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‘d ask members to come to 

order and allow the member to complete his statement. The 

member from Arm River-Watrous. 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, Davidson won the first game 

there, and then the second game moving to Kenaston where it 

went into overtime, where Sniper Kevin Johnson scored the 

winning goal to give Davidson the northern D championship. 

 

Davidson then went on to play Eastend and it was an excellent 

game. The member from Eastend, I want to congratulate 

Eastend for winning. But it was an excellent game in Eastend; it 

was one goal. Coming back to Davidson, it went into double 

overtime before Eastend managed to win it. But it was excellent 

hockey on all parts, and the rinks in both of them were filled to 

capacity. 

 

So I want to congratulate the Wynyard, Davidson, Kenaston, 

and all the teams throughout the province that play hockey and 

provide entertainment for citizens of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Hindu Society’s Annual Banquet 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, March 

29, the Hindu society of Saskatoon held its annual vegetarian 

banquet. A number of Saskatoon MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] attended, including the members from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, Massey Place, and Nutana. 

 

The annual banquet is a fundraiser for the Hindu temple, which 

is located in my constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. And I 

consider this event to be a must-attend every year. The Hindu 

vegetarian banquet, as well as raising funds for the Hindu 

temple, provides an opportunity for the Indo-Canadian, and in 

particular the Hindu, community of Saskatoon to celebrate the 

contributions made by members of that community to the larger 

society. And those contributions are many. 

 

In attendance are leaders of the academic, professional, 

business, and community leaders. The Hindu vegetarian 

banquet is also an opportunity for members of the larger society 

to acknowledge the contributions made by their Hindu 

neighbours in a friendly and informal setting marked by good 

food and entertainment. 

 

I trust that members of the legislature will join me in 

congratulating the Hindu society of Saskatoon in its 23rd annual 

vegetarian banquet, and its members in their ongoing, 

extraordinary contributions to the intellectual, economic, and 

cultural life of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow Lake. 

 

Saskatchewan Politics 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, it‘s once again my regretful 

duty to inform the House of a sad event, namely the wake that 

was held this past week which signalled the end of an era in 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

Saskatchewan politics. 

 

The NDP [New Democratic Party] held what is an annual rite of 

spring in the world of provincial politics — the leader‘s dinner. 

If mood and attendance were any indication, the NDP truly are 

dinosaurs firmly rooted in the past. Empty tables littered the 

hall. Indeed the brochure advertising the event did not even say 

NDP once. The few in attendance listened to the Leader of the 

Opposition give an astonishingly brief speech to list off seven 

things the NDP accomplished in power, taking credit for things 

like the Rolling Stones and the Grey Cup. Mr. Speaker, there 

was no mention of the legacy of hospital closures, crumbling 

highways, and deficit budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‘m proud to stand in this House today as a 

member of a government looking to the future. We‘re fixing 

highways, hiring nurses, and balancing budgets. We‘re 

committed to ensuring the current economic growth continues 

and that everyone shares in the benefits. 

 

To the members opposite, we offer our condolences. To the 

people of this province, we offer a Saskatchewan that is not 

only a good place to make a living; it‘s a great place to make a 

life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Environmental Impact of Oil Sands Development 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 

reporters asked the Environment minister in February about an 

Environmental Defence report published relating to oil sands 

development in Alberta and the effects of that development on 

Saskatchewan, the minister had very little to say. In fact she 

said she wasn‘t familiar with the report at all. 

 

The report suggests that 70 per cent of the sulphur entering 

Alberta‘s airshed as a result of the oil sands is transported into 

Saskatchewan, literally raining acid on our province. At the 

time the minister was too focused on her trip to Australia to do 

her job but maybe now she has gotten around to reading the 

report. 

 

To the Minister of Environment: has the minister finally 

bothered to read the report and, more importantly, did she 

actually learn anything? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for her question. I‘ve been waiting. It‘s 

been about 140 days and considering the environment is 

supposed to be such a huge priority, I‘m surprised it took them 

that long. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I have been reading up and I‘ve been 

reading up on the NDP record while they were in office, and I 

would note to the member opposite that in the budget that was 

brought down on March 19 we committed to $1 million for a 

northwest development plan — something that the previous 

administration didn‘t do. So, reading from my briefing note I 

will say this, quote, ―. . . little data exist from the northwest 

where oil sands development will occur.‖ 

 

I will also quote from the previous NDP Environment minister 

who said, and I quote: 

 

We don‘t have as much information as we need and we 

actually have to spend some taxpayers‘ dollars . . . to get a 

baseline of information on what‘s happening in the 

northwest. 

 

We need that information because the NDP didn‘t get it done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, when 

asked by reporters about her current understanding of 

environmental impacts of oil sands development, the minister 

was at a loss for words. All she could say was, quote: 

 

I‘ve heard things that water is being contaminated and 

those sorts of things. I don‘t have any specifics. 

 

Well unfortunately scientists in recent years have discovered 

many specifics such as the formation of toxic pools, oil spills, 

the destruction of Canada‘s boreal forests, the acidification of 

water and soil, and incredible emission rates. The Sask Party 

Environment minister may be among the few people in the 

country that know nothing about the potential consequences of 

unchecked oil sands development. 

 

To the minister: why should the people of Saskatchewan feel 

confident that this minister is able to act in the best interests of 

the environment in their province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member opposite is concerned about my reading schedule, I 

will continue to quote from briefing material. I will also remind 

the party opposite that it was under the NDP that the 

exploration permits for Oilsands Quest in the northwest of this 

province were issued in the first place. If they had such great 

concerns about this then, they should have probably addressed 

the issue starting back in 2005 when the first requests were 

being made. 

 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Oilsands Quest was granted exploration permits in October 

2005, and I quote, ―. . . without being required . . .‖ 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It‘s becoming a little more 

difficult to hear the question and the response. I‘ll allow the 

minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. I would point 

out to the member opposite that in October 2005 Oilsands 

Quest was given exploration permits by the NDP without being 

required to complete a full environmental impact assessment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Order. The Minister of Health will come to order. The member 

from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Environmental Defence 

report called the unchecked oil sands development in Alberta, 

quote, ―the most destructive project on Earth.‖ When reporters 

informed the minister of this in February as she hadn‘t heard of 

the report, she could only laugh. The minister simply wasn‘t 

willing to let reporters bring her down with talk about 

environmental destruction when she was just hours away from 

boarding a plane to sunny Australia. 

 

But she‘s back to reality now, and today there are people 

gathering in Saskatoon and Regina to ask the government what 

they plan to do to ensure oil sand development in Saskatchewan 

does not produce the same harmful effects being observed in 

Alberta. 

 

To the Minister of Environment: assuming the minister has 

bothered to read up on the issues, can the minister tell the 

people who are raising concerns today about the specific steps 

her government will undertake to ensure the protection of 

Saskatchewan‘s environment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to once 

again point out what this government is doing. We are doing 

what the NDP failed to do. And I would remind the member 

opposite once again that if she reads through our budget that is 

only just a few weeks old, that she would find that we have put 

aside $1 million for a northwest development plan, a plan that 

the NDP never got done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are sampling lakes in the Northwest to watch 

for the acidification from wind coming in from Alberta. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I will repeat: we will do what the NDP failed to 

do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

Funding for Station 20 West 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here is what one of the 

members opposite had to say about Station 20 West a year ago 

in estimates, quote: ―So this Station 20 . . . is really unique then 

in the province, bringing in all the organizations as well as the 

health authority having a direct link.‖ 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know if you‘ll believe this — I 

found it a bit hard to believe myself — but that quote was from 

the member from Indian Head-Milestone, the current Minister 

of Health. That‘s the same minister who, with over $1 billion 

just sitting in the bank, ruthlessly took money from the Station 

20 project and delivered a severe blow to the hopes and dreams 

of those who envisioned a better life for those living in 

Saskatoon‘s poorest neighbourhoods. 

 

To the Minister of Health: why this vindictive and harmful cut 

to a project that he saw value in just one year ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, March 19 this new provincial 

government released a budget that is being well received 

throughout the province — throughout the entire province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the budget process, a government goes through many 

priorities, looks at what we can do and what we can‘t do, looks 

at the commitments that this government will have to face 

going forward, whether it‘s capital costs or any other issue, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have to make decisions. 

 

It was not the priority of this provincial government to go along 

with funding Station 20, be it the auditor‘s concerns or many 

individuals in that community‘s concerns. It was the decision 

this government made in the budget process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health 

was asked why he would cut funding to a program designed to 

help some of Saskatoon‘s most vulnerable families, help them 

build better lives for themselves and their families. He said the 

government had other spending priorities — as he‘s just 

reiterated — and pointed to a new fire alarm for St. Paul‘s 

Hospital as one of those priorities. 

 

Perhaps the Health minister is still buying the Premier‘s weary 

message of stark financial times, but the public certainly isn‘t 

buying it, Mr. Speaker. With over $1 billion surplus, it‘s 

insulting to suggest he couldn‘t have done both. 

 

And it‘s interesting. In the budget when you look, Enterprise 

Saskatchewan received an $8 million transfer. I‘m not too sure 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

from where, but it seems interesting that that‘s the amount of 

money that was taken from Station West. 

 

To the Minister of Health, tell the people of Saskatchewan the 

real reason you cut the funding for this important project. Stop 

hiding behind imaginary budget constraints and tell us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that that 

member should be very aware of a study that was done by the 

Saskatoon Health Region that looked at all the facilities, not 

only in Saskatoon but throughout the whole health region. And 

they would be very aware, because they were the government at 

the time, when that study came in and said there was about a 

$404 million deficit, Mr. Speaker, as far as maintaining the 

facilities that are under this government‘s care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member would know, but as well as the 

former minister of Health would know, that study was then 

conducted around the whole province, and he would know that 

there is a huge deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know we talked about a fire alarm or air 

conditioners in our facilities. Last summer in August it was . . . 

July or August there was operations cancelled for three or four 

days both in Saskatoon and in Regina because our facilities 

were not properly maintained. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it‘s interesting that the Minister of 

Health is quoting the study about infrastructure. Of course it‘s 

all about buildings to them. 

 

The study that was done that is really of interest is the core 

study that was done in the Health Disparity by Neighbourhood 

Income study. And this study confirmed that higher rates of 

infant mortality, suicide, and illness were found in Saskatoon‘s 

poorest neighbourhoods compared to the rest of the population. 

 

In opposition the Sask Party were up in arms over the report, 

with the member from Kelvington-Wadena calling the findings 

shameful and demanding the government to act. Now that they 

are in power, they cut all the funding to the very project that is 

part of the solution. And it‘s very nice to put it all into 

infrastructure. People are suffering. 

 

To the Minister of Health: was the government mistaken in 

saying that they cared about the health outcomes of Saskatoon‘s 

most disadvantaged, or will he admit he‘s made a mistake and 

restore funding to the Saskatoon Station 20 West project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

our government is very committed to helping families with low 

incomes, with helping those most vulnerable within our society, 

and we are investing dollars right in Saskatoon next to Station 

20. Mr. Speaker, we presently have a 55-unit affordable rental 

housing project under way. It is 70 per cent towards 

completion. That includes, Mr. Speaker, an 18-unit complex of 

two- and three-bedroom townhouses as well as a 37-unit 

apartment building containing two-, three-, and four-bedroom 

units. Mr. Speaker, that‘s a commitment . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‘m having difficulty hearing 

the minister‘s response. The minister can complete her 

response. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That‘s a 

commitment, Mr. Speaker, of $4.72 million. In that building, 

Mr. Speaker, it houses a library and the library will go ahead. 

 

Just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we made an announcement of an 

additional $500,000 given to Egadz to help the vulnerable youth 

in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it‘s really interesting that that 

minister would take credit for something that was clearly done 

under us. That project did not spring up since November ‘07. 

 

But I do want to remind the Minister of Health of some of the 

findings of the report that I was just talking about, because he 

does seem to have lost sight of the issue. The report found that 

suicide rates were 15 times higher in low-income 

neighbourhoods than in the more affluent neighbourhoods, 

while hospitalization for diabetes was 13 times higher. There 

was a higher incidence of hospitalization and doctor visits for 

injuries and poisonings, coronary heart disease, mental 

disorders, and sexually transmitted infections. The report found 

substantially lower immunization rates among inner-city 

children and that babies born in the poorer neighbourhoods 

were more than five times likelier to die than an average city 

baby. 

 

To the Minister of Health: the people who live these realities 

don‘t need rhetoric; they need a plan. What is the minister‘s 

plan for improving health outcomes in inner-city 

neighbourhoods now that he has axed the solution developed by 

the community? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I agree it 

was the continuation of a project that was begun under the 

previous government that was not cut in this budget. We will 

continue the commitment to that project. 

 

However the $500,000 for Egadz is a new commitment by the 

new government to help keep youth off of the streets in 

Saskatoon. Egadz is for our vulnerable youth. They will get an 

additional $500,000 for housing. The residents will get help for 

day-to-day living and access services, and they will get 

counselling for drug and alcohol addiction services. These are 

to help the vulnerable youth in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Emergency Shelter Spaces in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

the Minister of Social Services admits we have a housing crisis, 

but her actions certainly don‘t match her words. 

 

For months we‘ve been hearing about concerns with respect to 

the number of emergency shelter spots available in Saskatoon. 

Groups dealing with emergency shelter needs say they simply 

can‘t keep up with demands for their services. We‘ve seen 

headline after headline that people are being turned away from 

shelters because simply there are not enough beds. Most 

recently we heard of a group of 14 people being referred by the 

Salvation Army to sleep in the emergency waiting room at St. 

Paul‘s Hospital. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: will the minister take off her 

rose-coloured glasses and admit that there is an emergency 

shelter problem, or does she believe there‘s enough rooms, 

shelter beds, in Saskatoon? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 

particular incident that the member opposite raised, there was 

an issue with the shelter not following protocol. That has been 

investigated and found that that was the case. They now have 

had that explained. 

 

We have not had statistically . . . The ministry officials have 

assured me that we have not had an increase statistically of 

emergency shelter beds in Saskatoon or Regina for this 

particular winter. 

 

Does that mean we do not have a housing crisis? Yes, we do, 

Mr. Speaker. That‘s why I have continued with the projects that 

were begun, and the programming, through the previous 

government. But we‘re going to strengthen those programs, and 

we‘re going to add initiatives for housing as soon as we get our 

report back from the task force. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

Saskatoon Overnight Shelter or SOS is one group that‘s very 

interested in working with the government to work on this 

problem. They have been working with the department to 

secure funding and a per diem support to establish additional 

emergency shelter spaces. 

 

In a letter dated January 4, the minister‘s officials commit to 

providing SOS with $3,000 per month and a per diem fee for all 

the individuals referred to the SOS shelter until the end of the 

fiscal year. However SOS never received the funding and they 

don‘t know why. To the Minister of Social Services: why would 

the minister send such mixed messages to the groups trying to 

be part of the solution? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‘s 

interesting that we have someone from the NDP standing on 

their feet — with their record of child poverty, with their record 

of the situation that the previous member had outlined in the 

Riversdale constituency, with their record of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‘d ask members to allow the minister 

to respond to the question . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With their 

record of the highest or increasing usage of food banks, with all 

of the record that they have, with the fact that on the eve of the 

election they finally woke up to the fact that we did have a 

crisis in housing, I am so surprised that that member stands on 

his feet to even begin to ask those questions. 

 

I have met with SOS. My ministry officials are continuing to 

meet with SOS, and they will help work through the difficulties. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Very interesting answer, Mr. Speaker. In 

February SOS board members said they were told by the 

Minister of Social Services at a Passion for Action Against 

Homelessness meeting that there would always be a per diem 

funding for SOS. 

 

When the group failed to hear from the government about their 

funding, they asked the Legislative Secretary to the CBO 

[community-based organization] sector, the member from 

Yorkton, to look into it. You can imagine their surprise when he 

told them the minister said there would be no funding for SOS. 

Days later they received a letter which said the ministry would 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

not be extending funding to SOS because, and I quote, ―. . . 

immediate needs this year have been met by other means, those 

monies are no longer available.‖ 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: how does she explain why 

SOS funding was not extended, even though she said it would 

be? Why has she mismanaged this very important file? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, she did 

not say it would be. When I met with a member from SOS, I did 

not say we would be extending the funding. I asked them to 

bring forward their business plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are issues that the ministry has discussed 

with SOS, and that will be ongoing discussions. But what are 

we doing, Mr. Speaker? We have an expression of interest to 

partner with different groups, to add to the housing file, the 

affordable housing file, an additional close to $50 million. As 

well as we have in Saskatoon, under construction, 506 units. 

We are doing an expression of interest to partner with Métis and 

First Nations to improve housing for Métis and First Nations of 

$26 million. And I have a task force, Mr. Speaker, that‘s 

looking into even more that we can do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

The Government’s Performance 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it‘s official. Either the 

Saskatchewan Party is incompetent or mean-spirited. Let‘s 

review. Today we hear from a Health minister who axed a 

popular and innovative program in Saskatoon targeted to 

Saskatoon‘s most vulnerable citizens. Is he incompetent or is he 

just plain mean? 

 

We hear from a housing minister who, while acknowledging 

that the housing situation is a crisis, is playing politics with 

emergency shelters while bullying senior civil servants. Does 

she know what a crisis is, or is she sticking her head in the 

sand? 

 

We even heard about a Premier who proudly boasts on the Sask 

Party website support from a radical conservative blogger. Does 

he have any idea how hurtful this blogger‘s statements were, or 

does he just not care? To the Premier: is the government he 

leads mean-spirited or incompetent? Which one is it, or is it 

both? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the deputy 

leader opposite for the question. I would just, I would just say 

this. I think the budget introduced by the member for Melfort, 

the Minister of Finance, answers the questions that we hear 

from opposition members today and in previous days. 

 

Here we have a government in its budget that has demonstrated 

a commitment to continue, to continue growing, to helping to 

grow the Saskatchewan economy, to sustaining the growth that 

exists in the province of Saskatchewan. Of course, Mr. Speaker, 

also balanced against that is what is action with respect to core 

neighbourhood issues in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There are certain members who 

continue to interrupt, and whether it‘s government or 

opposition. And I think it‘s appropriate to at least allow the 

person responding to respond, as well as the questioner to place 

the question. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Action, Mr. Speaker, on addictions 

treatment for people in this province; action, Mr. Speaker, on 

school lunch program and fighting child hunger and child 

poverty; action, Mr. Speaker, with respect to partnering with 5 

million new dollars for food banks in this province and other 

CBOs who want to provide job skills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This side of the House has demonstrated in its first few months 

in office and in this budget that in the issue of social issues and 

on economic issues, we will choose to be about action. We‘ll 

leave the talk over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it‘s action all right and this has 

been simmering since day one. The day they‘re sworn in, they 

have $1 billion in the bank, and they call the province‘s 

finances stark. Is that incompetence? Then they start firing 

30-year public servants and members of the province‘s Labour 

Relations Board who went through a selection process. I think 

that‘s called bully tactics. Then they dangle a carrot in front of 

communities facing school closures, but it‘s now clear that 

they‘re just false hope. Did they know that that promise would 

be broken when they made it? Incompetence or just plain 

meanness. Then they told us before the election there‘d be no 

essential services. Then they introduced essential services. Is 

that incompetence or is that meanness? 

 

A question to the Premier: how can he have any confidence in 

the government he leads when it‘s clear to the public that they 

are either incompetent or mean or both? Which is it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, you know, Mr. Speaker, it‘s 

interesting, the difference in the reality over there amongst the 

NDP benches and the reality right across this province where 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

people in Saskatchewan are excited not just about the 

momentum they see in the province, the common sense 

approach of the new government, its actual commitment to and 

follow-up actions on social issues for core neighbourhoods in 

our province, Mr. Speaker; the commitment of this government 

both to rural Saskatchewan, to urban Saskatchewan; the keeping 

of already 56 promises from the last platform, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a difference. There is a difference with respect to the 

reality that we find over on those benches opposite and the 

reality across the province. I think it was reflected in a poll not 

long ago that was in the, that was in The StarPhoenix where the 

people of Saskatchewan, if given the choice today, in larger 

numbers would choose the Saskatchewan Party over that tired, 

old opposition over there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, they fired several senior public 

servants that had decades of service to the people of this 

province, and it‘s going to cost them millions and millions of 

dollars. In fact they acknowledge that five people will probably, 

or eight people will probably cost them $4 million. 

 

Then they fired the Labour Relations Board that went through a 

selection process, and they appoint their good friend at a 

$60,000 increase. They say that they needed $8 million for 

other issues in the health system. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if 

you add up all the firings and the kinds of severance they‘re 

going to pay these people, it will mean $8 million. They had a 

choice. They are mean-spirited and obviously they‘re 

incompetent. Will the Premier acknowledge today that it was 

mean-spirited and incompetent, or is it both, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‘ll get to 

transition in a moment and the comparisons between that party 

over there and this party on our side. But before I say that, Mr. 

Speaker, let me just, let me just reflect again on the budget. The 

budget and the actions of this new government prior to the 

budget keeps almost all of the election promises already in the 

first four months of our government, promises we made to the 

people of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that budget, that budget sees 

an important strategic increase in investment in health care. It 

sees significant increases in education. It sees increases, Mr. 

Speaker, in advanced education. It reduces some debt. It lowers 

property taxes and keeps a promise that we made there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That particular budget is why this side of the House continues 

to enjoy the support of Saskatchewan people. That side of the 

House is seen as out of touch and backward looking. 

And with respect to transition, Mr. Speaker, you bet we did 

things differently. We didn‘t fire a single mom on Christmas 

Eve like the members opposite did when they did a transition. 

We didn‘t fire 200 provincial department officials with the help 

of now the new Justice minister, the way that opposite party did 

without any class at all. We have conducted this transition as 

we have the budget, Mr. Speaker — professionally and with 

respect to the taxpayers for whom we work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 20 — The Administration of Estates Amendment 

Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi sur l’administration 

des successions 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 20, 

The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 20, The Administration of Estates 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[14:15] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‘s my pleasure on 

behalf of the government to table answers to questions 418 to 

450. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 418 to 450 tabled. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What‘s the member‘s point of order. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 

question period today, the member from Martensville, the 

Minister of the Environment read from and quoted from, 

acknowledging she was quoting from a briefing note, Mr. 

Speaker. The rules clearly indicate that members opposite can 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

ask that briefing notes quoted from in question period can be 

tabled in the House. Mr. Speaker, we ask that the Minister of 

the Environment‘s material be tabled in the House today in its 

entirety. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the Minister of the Environment, we‘ll be very pleased to table 

the documents he referred to in the interests of making sure that 

the members opposite have the adequate information to have, to 

even mount a mediocre objection. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. While documents of this 

nature do not have to be tabled, I appreciate what‘s been moved 

by the Government House Leader. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. Van 

Mulligen.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‘m very 

pleased today to stand and enter into the debate on the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to start my debate last night 

and my views on the upcoming budget or the budget that was 

presented, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‘d like to just summarize some of the concerns that I had, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that there were four areas that this budget 

needed some additional work on before it would be a budget 

that was truly a budget that represented the needs of the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

One, Mr. Speaker, was that we needed to have an increase, an 

immediate implementation of the property tax commitment 

made by this government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they went 

into an election promising a 10 per cent property tax cut, Mr. 

Speaker, and they delivered a 2 per cent property tax cut — 2 

per cent. Now, Mr. Speaker, it‘s only 2 per cent, less than what 

a pizza would cost, Mr. Speaker — 28 to $30 in the city of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. this at a time when they‘re sitting on a 

surplus of more than $1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw nothing in the area of housing, Mr. 

Speaker. The issue of accessibility and affordability of housing 

for many of the residents in our larger urban areas and some of 

our smaller cities has outpaced their ability to pay. Mr. Speaker, 

those who are on social assistance, those who are the working 

poor in our province can‘t afford either to buy or to rent 

accommodations in our province. Mr. Speaker, did we see any 

movement on affordable housing and the issue of accessibility 

for those people in this budget? Mr. Speaker, none. Did we see 

any movement on accessibility or affordability for students? 

None. Mr. Speaker, they fell far short in addressing the issue of 

affordable and accessible housing for those people in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of training seats, again we saw an 

increase of about 1,100 training seats — less than half of what 

was in the budget just one year ago. Mr. Speaker, at a time 

when we have the tightest labour market we‘ve ever seen in this 

province‘s history, when we‘ve had a situation where we have 

so many young people that need access, particularly Aboriginal 

young people, access to those training opportunities to be 

productive members of our labour market in the future, Mr. 

Speaker, we saw a measly 1,100 — measly 1,100 — new 

training seats at a time when we have unprecedented wealth and 

opportunity in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an economy that‘s firing on all eight 

cylinders, Mr. Speaker, throughout the province, one that‘s 

bringing unprecedented revenues to the province. And at this 

time we should see a greater, greater number of training seats in 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‘d like to just mention for a second the 

program that the members brought in, put into place, the 

graduate retention program, that would return up to $20,000 for 

graduates of post-secondary education here in Saskatchewan. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it fails to address those young people who 

would have to leave Saskatchewan to get their education and 

then come to Saskatchewan for employment. 

 

And there are a number of opportunities in our particular 

medical community where we don‘t educate and we don‘t train 

those people in our province. Respiratory therapist would be a 

good example. So if you want to become a respiratory therapist, 

you have to go to Edmonton. And we actually send students to 

Edmonton for their training, and then they come back to work 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Our young people, they 

should have access to the same opportunity for that $20,000 

program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they‘re denied it. They‘re denied it because 

they weren‘t trained in a Saskatchewan facility, Mr. Speaker. 

They weren‘t trained in one of our post-secondary education 

facilities. But, Mr. Speaker, they can‘t be because we don‘t 

have those training opportunities here. So those young people 

should be afforded the same, the same retention opportunities as 

other students would. Mr. Speaker, it‘s a very important issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and last but not least, the budget failed to address 

the issue of environment and the environmental sustainability 

that we need to see in future economic development. Mr. 

Speaker, we want to leave our province environmentally more 

sound than when we found it. We want our children to have the 

same opportunities we had to have beautiful parks to go to, to 

have the opportunity to spend time in rural Saskatchewan and 

northern Saskatchewan and have a beautiful environmental 

environment to be in. 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if these issues had been addressed, this 

would have been a very, very good budget. As I indicated 

yesterday, there are many very good things in this budget. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this budget is built upon a foundation of many 

previous budgets, Mr. Speaker. And it is a good budget to the 

majority of people in Saskatchewan. Many of my constituents 

are going to benefit from items in this budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are some flaws in this budget. If the 

members opposite, the government, would address these flaws, 

this would be an exceptional budget. And, Mr. Speaker, with 

that I am going to indicate that I will be supporting the 

amendment and not the main motion, and at this time take my 

seat. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the Saskatchewan Party‘s first provincial budget is the right 

budget at the right time. It‘s about keeping our promises and 

make sure Saskatchewan is ready for growth. This budget has 

already delivered on 40 of our government‘s campaign 

promises, and actually a number of the party opposite‘s 

promises as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The mood of our province has shifted. Saskatchewan has shed 

its image as an NDP, have-not province, and is seen now as an 

economic leader in Canada and North America. While parts of 

Canada and much of the United States are now bracing for an 

economic downturn, Saskatchewan‘s economy will remain 

strong. 

 

The investments in infrastructure in this budget will ensure that 

our province is ready for growth. Saskatchewan is among the 

nation‘s leaders in terms of recent economic activity and 

growth: retail sales growth, number one in Canada; wholesale 

trade growth, number one in Canada; international export value 

growth, number one in Canada. 

 

And the experts agree on what lies ahead for us. RBC Financial 

Group and TD Economics both predict Saskatchewan will 

record the strongest economic growth in Canada this year. 

BMO Financial Group says Saskatchewan will be number one 

in Canada for economic growth, overtaking Alberta. And last 

week the Canada West Foundation forecast Saskatchewan to 

lead the nation with economic growth of 3.6 per cent in 2008. 

Its report says that the outlook for the Saskatchewan economy 

is very favourable for virtually every sector. From coffee row to 

corporate boardrooms, Mr. Speaker, people across this province 

are exuding confidence. Saskatchewan residents are genuinely 

optimistic about what their future holds. 

 

This is a time of tremendous growth in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. It is critical that we be ready to accommodate this 

growth, to encourage this growth, and to stimulate even more 

growth in a sustainable and responsible manner. Mr. Speaker, 

the budget‘s key component is the $1 billion ready-for-growth 

initiative. This is the largest investment in infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan‘s history. It‘s also a huge first step in repairing 

16 years of NDP neglect of our ailing provincial infrastructure. 

The budget outlines $191 million for health care improvements, 

$164 million for new education projects, and $139 million for 

municipal infrastructure and community facilities. We have 

committed $3.5 million to continue our Sask bio program which 

supports investment and ownership in biofuel facilities in this 

province, something Saskatchewan is uniquely positioned to 

explore and develop. All of these items represent key resources 

for capital and infrastructure improvements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, businesses of this province need a transportation 

network which is an enabler of our economy and its continued 

development — not a hindrance or an obstacle. That‘s why the 

ready-for-growth initiative also contains $408 million for 

improving our roads and highways. This will go far toward 

ensuring the safe and efficient movement of people, goods, and 

services throughout Saskatchewan and to markets beyond. 

 

How are we encouraging our own Saskatchewan companies, 

Mr. Speaker, and not only these but the international companies 

and investors from around the world whose interest we seek and 

welcome here? We can look to the significant competitive 

business tax changes which are a prominent part of this budget. 

 

As of July 1, 2008, the general corporate capital tax is being 

eliminated, although special tax rates continue to be applied on 

the taxable paid-up capital of financial institutions. In addition 

the corporate income tax — CIT — rate will come down to 12 

per cent, among the lowest in Canada, with further reductions to 

CCT [corporation capital tax] resource surcharge rates. This is a 

major contributor to maintaining the economic momentum we 

have built and are building in Saskatchewan. 

 

On top of this, Mr. Speaker, the income threshold for the 

current 4.5 per cent small business corporate income tax rate is 

being increased from 450,000 to $500,000. Further reductions 

to the corporate capital tax resource surcharge rates have been 

made. And the 10 per cent mineral exploration tax credit is 

being reinstated. This, Mr. Speaker, is providing a significant 

economic stimulus at a crucial juncture in our provincial 

history. 

 

People are coming to Saskatchewan in numbers we have not 

seen in half a century. Our province‘s population grew by 

16,492 over the past year. It‘s the biggest one-year jump in 

population since 1952. The number of workers in Saskatchewan 

grew by 3.4 per cent in January 2008 over January 2007. The 

number of people employed in the province increased to 

433,100 from 418,800 in January of last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the business incentives I have described will not 

wedge the door tighter in the face of opportunity and 

investment. It will swing it open even wider. And while we 

welcome our new residents, we also congratulate those who 

have decided to stay here and build their lives and careers at 

home in Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The new graduate tax rebate that we are introducing in this 

budget for young people staying in Saskatchewan is proof of 

that. So is the offer of a tuition rebate of up to $20,000 for 

post-secondary graduates, alongside a continued freeze on 

tuition rates. And so are the major increases in training 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

incentives and expanded seat spaces in vocational trades which 

will help address the labour needs that have accompanied our 

remarkable economic prosperity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this ready-for-growth budget keeps no less than 40 

of the promises the Saskatchewan Party made to the people of 

this province in the last election. We have delivered a balanced 

budget, which is one of those promises. The $250 million debt 

reduction, Mr. Speaker, is another of those promises. 

 

But there is one promise in particular that is quite significant: 

the big changes in the way Saskatchewan will be doing business 

from now on. These changes aren‘t coming somewhere down 

the road. They are already happening, and it represents an 

historic turning point for our province and our approach to 

economic development. I‘m talking, Mr. Speaker, about the 

establishment of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Our economy is on a roll in many sectors — in fact almost all 

sectors — and because of that, we are being called the rising 

star of Western Canada and perhaps the entire country. These 

are great days to be living and working in Saskatchewan. But 

we want to do everything possible to make certain that it stays 

that way. The critical quality for achieving this goal is to not be 

satisfied with the status quo. 

 

Yes, we are enjoying record prosperity. But we want to do even 

better, and we want it to continue, and we want to broaden the 

base of this already dynamic economy. This will only happen, 

Mr. Speaker, if we encourage investment and innovation and 

support it in every way possible. Our ability to seek out and 

create new markets for our products, encourage investment, and 

stimulate growth will be how we sustain this economy. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will be the first of its 

kind in Canada, a special operating agency organized and based 

on the key sectors of our economy. It will — through its 

collaborative sector teams and other participants — identify, 

develop, and monitor competitive advantages and disadvantages 

in each sector. It will prescribe action, remove barriers to 

growth, and facilitate stronger economic planning by 

accommodating increased leadership and partnerships. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan is a bold and innovative approach to 

creating sustainable economic growth in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, its emphasis will be on being quick and flexible. 

 

It will be led by economic development and community 

stakeholders to coordinate the province‘s growth agenda. The 

Premier has made it very clear that our economic growth is too 

important to not involve strong input from industry and other 

partners in economic development. We need stronger 

credibility, idea generation, and genuine partnerships with all 

key stakeholders. We need more grass roots and open sharing of 

concerns and fresh policy thinking. And we need increased 

coordination and focus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these qualities contribute to the most 

important objective — an emphasis on outcomes and results, 

not just activities. An example of this is the enterprise regions 

program. This will see $2 million to be provided to 

high-performing regions and $1 million for development of 

tools and initiatives for regional capacity building, Mr. Speaker. 

One of this government‘s highest priorities is getting the word 

out, far and wide, that Saskatchewan is the best place to live, 

work, and operate a business, and to invest, Mr. Speaker. 

Efforts to communicate this message will be led by Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and coordinated with other agencies. This will 

mean effective co-branding, co-marketing, and strategic and 

aggressive promotional and sales efforts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to see the board hit the deck 

running with the inaugural meeting yesterday. Yesterday was a 

full and productive meeting of the board. We have very talented 

and well-respected individuals that are working together to 

establish a solid foundation from which Enterprise 

Saskatchewan will lead economic development in 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I can say that I am proud to 

be associated with that board and those members. 

 

The board‘s mandate, Mr. Speaker, is to pass along 

recommendations to cabinet as well as to provide direction to 

the CEO [chief executive officer] of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

The board will also communicate its findings to the public on a 

regular basis. Public accountability is at the heart of the 

philosophy behind Enterprise Saskatchewan. This new 

approach is exciting, and we have high expectations of what it 

will mean for our future economic development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget goes a long way to seeing that these 

expectations become a reality. This budget benefits all 

Saskatchewan people in many ways in terms of business, 

careers, quality of life, and hope for the future. Our hope is that 

we have laid the foundation for continued growth with this 

budget, growth that is as smooth and responsible as possible. I 

think we‘ve approached this challenge in the spirit of 

Saskatchewan: a spirit of common sense, optimism, and 

co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the outcome will be the kind of province we know 

Saskatchewan can be and the kind of place we can be proud to 

tell the world about. Mr. Speaker, I‘m very pleased and proud 

to support the Saskatchewan Party‘s first budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, good day. And this being 

April 1, I actually wanted to have a little bit of fun here. I 

wanted to stand up here and say how we had such a deplorable, 

disgusting budget and how I wouldn‘t be able to support it. But 

that was . . . They told me April 1 ends at — or the joking ends 

at — noon time so I can‘t say that. What I can say, Mr. Speaker, 

is this is a fantastic budget, an absolute fantastic budget. 

 

You know, I give credit. I give credit to our Finance minister. I 

give credit to the cabinet. I give credit to everybody that worked 

on this to move, to move Saskatchewan forward. As everybody 

knows, not everything is perfect. It‘s not the perfect budget, as 

the Finance minister said, but boy it‘s as close to being perfect 

as you can get. I‘m telling you it‘s basically like our 

constituency assistant at home, as close to being perfect as you 

can get. And I have to say that, Mr. Speaker, because I know 

that she is watching, and she‘s as close to being perfect as you 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

can get. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being from the Carrot River Valley out in rural 

Saskatchewan, one of the most beautiful parts in all of 

Saskatchewan, you have to realize how a budget like this is 

going to support us to move us ahead. 

 

In rural Saskatchewan, or at least in Carrot River Valley we 

have lakes. We have trees. We have trees that . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . yes, we‘ve got trees. It‘s not like the people 

from down south here, you know. These are trees that actually 

grow; people don‘t plant. We‘ve got fantastic opportunities for 

hunting, for fishing. Everybody knows the story about Tobin 

Lake, how the fish are that big. And we won‘t get into that 

because I just about got myself in trouble last time, Mr. 

Speaker. But anyway, we have a fantastic outfitting business 

going on up there. 

 

We‘ve got beautiful parks, beautiful regional parks. And I 

should know. I sat as a director on Pasquia Park for quite a 

number of years. And you know, Mr. Speaker, these parks were 

being stymied. These small, small community parks, they didn‘t 

have the resources. In this budget, in this budget there is 

$525,000 going into the regional parks to help out our parks and 

our small communities. This is something that we really, really 

need in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing that we‘ve got up there in Carrot River is we 

have some of the most progressive farmers, the most 

progressive farmers in I would have to say Western Canada and 

maybe all of Canada. These farmers work very hard at their 

jobs, and they do a good job. And they grow a lot of crops. 

They don‘t just rely on wheat and barley, Mr. Speaker. They 

rely on a lot of different things. 

 

This budget is going to help out our farmers. We‘re going to be 

up to . . . It‘s going to save the average farmer just about $2,100 

on the education portion of their taxes, Mr. Speaker. This is 

going to be a great help, a great help. 

 

The other thing that this budget does is it‘s going to fully fund, 

fully fund the ag stability, the ag investment, formerly known as 

the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] program; 

91.5 million total funding, Mr. Speaker. It‘s a campaign 

commitment, and we‘re going to keep it. Also, Mr. Speaker, 

we‘re going to look at the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance; 

$129.8 million total funding. That‘s a $25 million increase from 

the province‘s share of premium costs. And as promised, as 

promised, we will take a look at crop insurance and try and 

make it more fair and more equitable in the years to come. 

 

We do this, spending money properly. The NDP, when they 

were there, pledged over $100,000 in public funds to go and 

fight against the democratic will of the farmers when they 

funded the friends of the wheat board. We‘re not going to waste 

money like that, Mr. Speaker. We‘re going to put our money 

right where it belongs. 

 

Also this budget, this budget is going to reduce the education 

portion of the taxes of our homeowners up in our area and in all 

of the province. 

 

We‘re seeing people moving back, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

we‘re going to have to have money. We‘re going to have to 

have money for our small towns for our infrastructure. So towns 

like Carrot River and Nipawin and Tisdale, places like that, 

they can go out there and they can start putting up lots for the 

influx of people we know, for the influx of people we know, 

Mr. Speaker, that will be moving back — moving back and 

staying. And we have a $300 million interest-free loan for these 

communities, specifically for these communities to go and do 

that. 

 

We‘re also going to be putting money into health care, Mr. 

Speaker. And I‘ve got a little story to tell you about in our 

constituency on health care. Mr. Speaker, a matter of just a few 

years ago, there was a hospital in Arborfield that was closed, 

that was closed by that government. And they closed that 

hospital. And they said don‘t worry, don‘t worry; Carrot River 

is only 15 miles down the road. Well then, then, then they got to 

Carrot River a few years later and they went into Carrot River, 

and that government closed down the hospital in Carrot River 

and said, don‘t worry, Nipawin‘s just a few miles down the 

road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we, we as a Saskatchewan Party government are 

going to make health care accessible to all. We‘re going to 

improve the health care. We‘re going to improve the 

infrastructure to make things work. We‘re not going to tell 

people, it‘s just a few miles down the road. 

 

Some of the things, some of the things we‘re going to have in 

health care . . . just take a look at the nurses for example. How 

quickly, how quickly we‘ve moved on our promises for nurses, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — You know, we got $20.7 million for nurse 

recruitment and retention, on top of the 60 million partnership 

with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses funded in 2007 and 

2008. 

 

These are things that are coming out of our budget: 10.5 million 

for more nurse training seats; 6.1 million for more physician 

training seats, recruitment and retention; the new prescription 

drug plan . . . 

 

[14:45] 

 

An Hon. Member: — But none for grocery stores. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — And none for grocery stores, unfortunately 

. . . 10.7 million increase for the cancer care; 6.1 million 

increase for new prescription drugs. Here‘s a real good one, a 

10-year, a 10-year capital plan for health care, Mr. Speaker. 

This is only done by a responsible government — 250,000 to 

conduct patient exit surveys; 1.5 million for patient-first review 

of health care; 1 million a year in new funding to promote 

health and wellness. Mr. Speaker, it just moves on and on. This 

government is committed, is committed to helping 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Going back to our constituency, I see big things happening in 

our constituency now that we have a what you would call a 

business-friendly government in power. In our Pasquia Hills 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

there has been a lot of forecasting, a lot of drilling going on out 

there and I don‘t think that these people are doing it just for the 

goodness of their heart. I think these people are going there 

because they know that the Saskatchewan Party government, 

the government that is in power, are going to help these people 

come in and move this province ahead. 

 

We have logging up there. We have uranium. We have uranium 

that is right . . . We‘re basically at the bottom end because we‘re 

on the forest fringe. We have uranium that we could be, could 

be if looked at properly, we could be maybe one of the 

processing places to enrich uranium. And who knows, this may 

come. This may come to be. 

 

We have the east-west corridor, Highway 55, running through 

there. Now Highway 55 is not exactly what you‘d call in very 

good shape right now. Fact is, it is in deplorable shape. It has 

been promised for years that Highway 55 would be . . . They 

never ever kept it up. This highway, this highway should be 

redone. It‘s an east-west corridor. And I realize, being an MLA, 

that‘s one thing I want to push on, is get that Highway 55 

redone. 

 

This government, this government is committed, and I believe 

that they will do that eventually. When I say eventually, we 

have such an infrastructure deficit within this province, we have 

to get a lot of other places done first. And I realize that, but I 

want to push to get that done because we desperately need an 

east-west corridor there. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, we have to think about our 

children. We have to think about our children. That‘s one of the 

main things. 

 

I have two, two children. One is in her first year of university, 

taking education. What we want to do is we want to see more 

people in Saskatchewan because when she comes out of 

university, I want to see her get a job in a school because I want 

to see new schools rather than schools closing down. Let‘s get 

the people here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — We have, Mr. Speaker, we have to do 

something to keep our children here, and this budget does it. 

This budget does it because we have a $12 million graduation 

retention plan. Up to $20,000 in tuition rebates, Mr. Speaker — 

that‘s what was brought out in this budget for post-secondary 

graduates of Saskatchewan institutions. 

 

We have a 38.1 million funding increase in post-secondary 

institutions. We have 25.5 million to continue the university 

tuition freeze for 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe I‘m a little greedy but what I want to do is 

I want to see my kids. I want to see my kids here looking after 

me when I get old. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also, also in the Carrot River Valley, we have our 

First Nations people. We have the First Nations people of Red 

Earth and Shoal Lake. The First Nations people is one very 

large advantage that Saskatchewan has over other provinces. 

Here we have a young group, a young group of people just 

sitting there waiting to go into our labour market. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this is going to help us in Saskatchewan move forward 

because we as a Saskatchewan Party government are willing to 

consult with our First Nations, are willing to consult so we can 

work together with them, not against them. 

 

In this budget, in this budget on First Nations, for the First 

Nations people it provides a $14 million increase for a total of 

50.9 million for the First Nations Trust. This budget also 

provides 4.2 million to address provincial financial obligations 

for five treaty land entitlement agreements. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party 

supports the continued success of the First Nations and Métis 

people. In this budget we provide 1 million of funding and add 

200 new training opportunities for on-reserve adult basic 

education through the regional colleges. It is very important that 

we meet, that we meet with our First Nations people and that 

we have these training, these training spots available; that we 

get them trained because, Mr. Speaker, what we are going to do, 

what we are going to do is we are going to move this province 

forward. We‘re going to get everybody working here. We also 

will give to the Saskatchewan institute of technology $500,000 

to add 100 new seats. 

 

In the 2008-2009 budget, Mr. Speaker, 50.6 billion of federal 

and provincial funding has been allocated for the affordable 

housing program and the Aboriginal housing program. Mr. 

Speaker, these are things that we are doing with our First 

Nation companions. 

 

Now I happen to know that the member from Athabasca, the 

member from Athabasca said on December 13, 2007, he 

claimed that the Saskatchewan Party would neglect First 

Nations and northern communities. Obviously he‘s wrong. We 

are not. We‘re going to be working with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On top of that, in this budget, Mr. Speaker, what we do is we 

see a $250 million debt reduction — $250 million. That‘s not 

small change. That‘s not small change. This ready-for-growth 

budget, Mr. Speaker, puts out $1 billion, $1 billion for capital 

and infrastructure improvements. 

 

Now $1 billion or 1 billion is a very large number. And let me 

tell you, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, exactly how large a 

number it is. It‘s almost hard to comprehend, comprehend how 

large it is. Mr. Speaker, $1 billion is one grain of salt, one grain 

of salt in an Olympic swimming pool that is filled with salt. 

One dollar is one grain of salt. A billion is a very large number. 

Mr. Speaker, that‘s what we‘re coming through with. That‘s 

what we‘re coming through with for capital in infrastructure. 

 

This budget also, this budget also keeps 40 of our promises — 

fantastic, four months. You know, we‘ve got most of our 

promises done in four months. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, at one time the former premier, the 

former premier from that side said, well we are just a wee 

province. Well I‘m saying, Mr. Speaker, we are a we province 

but I‘m spelling it a different way. He‘s using w-e-e. I‘m using 

w-e. It‘s a we province, Mr. Speaker, and I support this budget 

to my whole heart and I do not support the amendment. Thank 

you. 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‘s my 

pleasure to rise this afternoon to talk about the budget and deal 

with a number of the issues that are here within Saskatchewan. 

And I would like to start off my talk this afternoon by putting it 

into a bit of context by quoting one of my favourite poems here 

in Saskatchewan. And I know that people appreciate both in the 

legislature and across Saskatchewan when I identify the 

Saskatchewan poets that have done a good job here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The poem I‘m going to read is by Andrew Suknaski who now 

lives in Moose Jaw but he‘s from the southern part of the 

province, Wood Mountain area. And the poem is called ―Indian 

Rings on the Edge of Tonita Pasture‖ and I will explain why 

this is my favourite Saskatchewan poem. 

 

the meadow lark‘s song proclaiming spring 

waters lazily flowing from wood mountain peat moss 

springs 

becoming five mile creek running north 

through this coulee 

where i caught fish and swam in boyhood unaware 

of three indian rings that nearly vanished 

beneath dust from a field 

lee soparlo‘s father worked 

trying to feed his family in the thirties — this 

and standing here now in this great centre ring 

where something holds 

me around the heart the way 

the wired stone anchors a cornerpost of the nearby fence 

stretching north 

and west to the village where i grew up — i claim these 

things 

my ancestral space to move through and beyond 

chronicling the meaning of these vast plains 

in a geography of blood 

and failure 

making them live. 

 

Now I like this poem and I use it quite often when I‘m talking 

to people because of the line about ancestral space. And a 

budget in the year 2008 is another chance for us for as 

Saskatchewan people to basically claim our ancestral space on 

this vast plains and make appropriate decisions that will allow 

us to build on the geography of blood and failure that makes 

this place come alive. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, a budget — as we on this side know well, 

and I think that the members opposite are learning now — is 

about choices. And there was a great deal of fortune available 

for the Finance minister and the team of budget ministers and 

cabinet and caucus as they moved forward this spring to put 

forward a budget for Saskatchewan, because there were 

resources there. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that means that in 

some ways the choices have been harder, because basically the 

public are expecting a broad array of services that will be 

provided to them. 

 

My first response in many ways would be to say thank you to 

the Finance minister and his people for listening very carefully 

to the advice that they received from senior civil servants right 

across the board as they developed the budget. It‘s very clear 

that they built this budget based on the format that we had used 

in government for quite a number of years. And that‘s very 

clearly acknowledged when in the press release announcing the 

budget they talk about the 15th consecutive balanced budget 

and the fact of all of the credit upgrades that have taken place as 

a result of careful planning. 

 

Now this particular budget has many good things, as some of 

my colleagues have outlined and clearly as members of the 

opposite have outlined, but there are four gaps that can be 

addressed. It‘s our hope that they would do it this year and not 

wait. Obviously some of the choices that will be made may 

extend that time period to a longer time period. 

 

But basically the four gaps are . . . not very much on property 

tax relief for individuals and families, probably a substantial 

amount in the agriculture side but not so much for ordinary 

people in Saskatchewan. The number of new training seats — 

there are some more, but there aren‘t sufficient numbers, and it 

would have been possible to put more money in that area. Also 

the whole issue of affordable housing has become even more 

important than it was a year ago, and this has not had the 

attention that it should have had. And finally the areas of green 

initiatives have been substantially changed and reduced, and 

there‘s many things that need to be done in that particular area. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So I would like to spend a little bit of time talking about how 

the government can take some steps to address some of these 

issues. Now the first one is the property tax relief. I think there 

was a miscalculation made there, that people expected that there 

would be substantially more dollars there, based on the words 

that we had heard for many years coming from the members 

who were then in the opposition. And this is an area where the 

government I think has made a miscalculation about the 

response. 

 

I think that a number of people have indicated that the kinds of 

increases that will be coming on their property taxes because of 

the structural needs and other things that are there in 

municipalities or in smaller towns will eat up any of the kind of 

money that‘s returned in this way. And so I would urge the 

members opposite to take another look in this particular area 

and see if there isn‘t some way that they can move up the 

proposals that they have to deal with the property tax issue so 

that they‘re dealt with in a more expeditious fashion. 

 

Training seats continues to be a challenge. It has been a 

challenge for every government for quite a number of years as 

young people complete their high school education or 

sometimes their junior college kind of education and are 

looking at what kind of training that they want to start and build 

their career. There were substantial numbers of seats added last 

year and the previous year. I think this year the numbers were 

not as many as had been added last year. That seemed a little bit 

counterintuitive, based on the numbers and the dollars available 

in the budget. And so I urge the members opposite to listen 

carefully to the people across the province and work to increase 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

the number of training seats at least to the level of the increase 

that was done last year and possibly more. 

 

The whole area of housing and affordable housing has moved to 

the front of the concern. And it‘s tied in with the property tax 

relief issue as well. As the value of properties has increased 

across the province — whether they‘re people owning their own 

homes or condos or other things, or whether it‘s rental homes, 

rental properties — all of the costs around this aspect of living 

in Saskatchewan have increased dramatically. 

 

And there is a role for the government to be involved in this 

whole field, and it has to be done in a way that encourages a 

long-term solution. And I know the Minister of Finance and 

others obviously figured out a couple of days before the budget 

was going to be released that there was a fairly major hole as it 

related to this area. So we did have an announcement of a study, 

another study. But we‘ve heard time and time again from many 

of the members opposite over the last number of years – hey we 

know where the problem is here; time for study is over; let‘s get 

something done. 

 

So it was quite surprising actually — to me and I think the 

public — that what was the response to what‘s obviously a 

major gap in this budget was another study and not necessarily 

very obvious to me and, I think, to others yet as to what the 

study will produce or where it‘s going to go. I think it‘s obvious 

that there‘s a whole number of things that have been done by 

people who have been working in this area for a long time, and 

that information would have informed some good policy. 

 

Now it does also reflect the fact that many of the people that 

worked in some of the most senior policy areas in the 

government were released for whatever reason, and we‘re still 

waiting to hear some of those answers. But it‘s in some of these 

fields where some of the best minds that had been working on 

the problems for a long time are no longer here. 

 

Now it‘s quite curious to me to listen to the speeches from the 

new members who have come to the legislature after the last 

election as opposed to those speeches from those members who 

have been here for a while. And I think the ones who have been 

here for a while in the same sense of those of us who had been 

part of the government before know that it‘s not as black and 

white on all of the issues that one is dealing with. 

 

But I think it was especially curious yesterday when I heard 

some comments about the financial situation that the province 

was in back in 1991-92 when the last change of government 

took place. And so I thought, well I‘ll dig out some of my 

library materials. I think everybody knows that I collect a lot of 

material, and I also actually read it. 

 

And so I went to the report of the Saskatchewan Financial 

Management Review Commission dated February 1992. And I 

will read from page 1 and 2 of this which is the summary and 

highlights because it‘s got a lot of detail. But basically starting 

out, ―Contextual Considerations.‖ So just think of this. This is 

February 1992 which is 16 years ago I guess it is now. I‘m 

quoting now: 

 

Saskatchewan faces a difficult financial situation. The 

main causes are weak markets and low international prices 

for our agricultural and resource production and economic 

uncertainty due to worldwide political and market 

restructuring. 

 

Government spending has been at levels which cannot be 

maintained based on the province‘s revenue-generating 

potential. To re-establish a more secure financial position 

the government must bring its spending back under 

control. 

 

This report provides a benchmark. It has measured our 

Province‘s current financial position and has established a 

base upon which choices can be made for our future. 

 

This report advocates allowing the residents of our 

Province and their elected representatives to participate 

more fully in the Province‘s decision-making process 

through public disclosure, thereby making the government 

more responsible and accountable. 

 

And then it goes on to say that the accounting principles should 

be the public sector accounting and auditing committee of the 

Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants guidelines and that 

it should be used in all government-controlled organizations 

including Crown corporations. Then it says: 

 

By applying . . . [these Public Sector Accounting and 

Auditing Committee] guidelines, the accumulated deficit 

of the Province at March 31 . . . has been restated at 

$7.538 billion, rather than the $3.688 billion which has 

been reported in the Public Accounts. The 1990-91 deficit 

has been restated at $975 million as compared to the $360 

million reported in the Public Accounts. The Commission 

believes that the revised amounts are a more complete and 

realistic reflection of Saskatchewan‘s financial position. 

 

Then it goes on to say that as of October 31 the province‘s 

accumulated deficit, using these accounting principles, was 

8.697 billion and that the province had incurred a loss over the 

seven-month period of that particular fiscal year of 1.154 

billion. So this would increase the deficit that was there. And 

basically it also then went through to say that part of the work 

that was being done in this report was to look at a number of 

transactions that were not properly reported. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I bring this forward and also the report from 

the Provincial Auditor which was then brought out a little later 

in 1992 to remind us here in the legislature that we had a major 

problem in 1992 around accountability and around the role of 

the legislature in keeping track of the funds that were entrusted 

to us as government — whether we‘re on the government side 

or on the opposition side. And there was a major failure of this 

institution, which everybody assumes is a building, but it‘s 

actually the people here. And we as people had a job to do back 

then — both opposition and government. 

 

And I‘m pleased to say that working together in the committees 

and in the way that we worked with the Provincial Auditor and 

with the various accountability structures, that over a 16-year 

period, we‘re not in that kind of lack-of-accountability situation 

that we were in 1992. But what happened in 1992 was there was 

a fiscal mess. There was a shortage of cash. There was an 

inability to meet the payments as they came due. There was a 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

necessity to get some help from the federal government to in 

fact just keep everything moving along. 

 

The province pulled together — all the people of the province 

— to deal with this problem. And the government of the day 

spent much time working at making sure that they could make 

the right choices to keep the structures of the province going 

while at the same time bringing the costs of what was being 

provided more in line with the revenues that were there. 

 

This was not an easy time for the province, and I often like to 

describe it like this. In that year it was very clear that there was 

no way of getting out of the responsibility of dealing with the 

fiscal deficit — in other words, had to get the books back in 

line. And in fact within a couple years, Saskatchewan produced 

the first balanced budget in Canada. A lot of people forget that, 

but we were the first province that actually went back on to a 

balanced budget. But we had a substantial amount of debt to 

deal with. And that debt was then tackled in a couple of 

different ways. 

 

There were some choices made around dealing with the social 

deficit — education, health, social services, some of the people 

kinds of things that were needed to be done. And choices were 

made to make sure that those areas would get the funding. What 

ended up happening — and I think we all know it, and it was 

not necessarily only in Saskatchewan, but I think a little more 

drastic in Saskatchewan — was that a lot of the renewal of the 

physical structure of the province was delayed. Now the hope 

was always each year as you do the budget, that it‘d only be a 

one-year delay. But unfortunately it doesn‘t always work that 

way because the demands that arise during the year still say, 

well you‘ve got to keep those capital budgets down. 

 

Now as the previous government, our NDP government, moved 

forward, we tackled a number of the issues as it related to the 

social deficit and we also dealt with the levels of taxation that 

had gotten us out of whack with our neighbours and with other 

jurisdictions around. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the types of 

things that ended up happening as we, in a very organized way, 

tackled income tax deductions, we looked at business tax 

reductions, we looked at the whole issue of property tax, which 

I said is a gap in this particular budget. We looked at the 

resource revenue, whether it‘s potash or uranium or oil. All of 

these things were looked at in a methodical way to make sure 

that the revenues that were going to come in would be sufficient 

to provide for the long-term health of the province, but that they 

would also be of sufficient amount to encourage the 

development and activity in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the year 2007 — started 

in 2006 for sure but 2007 and clearly now in 2008 — the 

confidence in the economy, the way that things have moved, 

much of that is built on the work that has been done over many, 

many years as we tried to deal with the crisis time of 1992. 

 

And I think it‘s disheartening to me but also I think 

disheartening to people who listen to members speak about this 

budget that there isn‘t a recognition of the hard work that we all 

did to get to the point where we are now. That inability to 

acknowledge the good work of others is one of the difficulties 

that I see with the whole present government as we move 

forward because there are going to be times where it will take 

us all pulling together to deal with the issues that are coming. 

 

I want to talk a bit more about this $1 billion fund that‘s set up 

in this budget. And I‘m sure, I‘ve spent a fair bit of time 

working on developing budgets but this was clearly something 

that the Finance minister and his other ministers working on 

this budget identified, which was to have something that would 

look as a core proposal for this. 

 

And so they‘ve taken the ongoing capital spending which 

happens in any government and then increased it by the 

appropriate amounts based on the booming Western economy, 

which has increased the costs of doing any of this kind of work, 

and then added some money to get it up to $1 billion spent in 

this year. 

 

Well I went through quite carefully all of the documents, and I 

see basically that the ongoing spending is probably around 800 

million. And that would have been money that was spent. And 

if you look at that, those are projects that have been worked on 

through the appropriate 17-step process in health, I‘m not sure 

how many step process in education or in post-secondary, but 

those are all things that are moving along and this is the 

appropriate year to spend this kind of money in those areas. 

 

What I do acknowledge and I applaud is in the area of 

education. They‘ve actually moved up the K to 12 [kindergarten 

to grade 12] construction by $100 million which then allows for 

more projects to get started in this year than there has been in 

other years. 

 

Also in health, they have taken $100 million to put into the life 

emergency area — the basically repairs of buildings — and 

that‘s basically I think an increase in that particular fund of 

probably 60 or $70 million. Slight reduction probably in some 

of the equipment funds and other things, but there is an 

injection of cash into the Health budget which allows for that to 

go. 

 

So those are positive things. But I don‘t think that the hype that 

we‘re hearing about $1 billion spend quite matches what 

actually is happening when you look at the books of the 

province and of all of the education regions and the health 

regions as we move forward, that many of the amounts of 

money that are being spent are the amounts that were already 

planned as we moved forward. 

 

I think that many of us who worked very hard in a number of 

these files are pleased to have acknowledged — sometimes 

grudgingly, but sometimes a little more openly — about how 

well the plans were there. Right now I‘m involved as the Justice 

critic and so there are a whole number of things that the former 

Justice minister did and worked at in the budget which are now 

moving along. And so I‘m pleased to see that those things 

continue to have the funding, whether it‘s some new court 

facilities or new security that‘s required, new staff, all those 

things. That‘s important that that continues along. 

 

There are some areas where I‘m sure later when we get a 

chance to get into committee we can get more detail which I 

won‘t talk about now, where I‘d need to have a better 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

understanding of how all that works. But I think practically that 

many of the initiatives that have developed over many years 

and I guess — since I was Justice minister from 1995-99 and 

then 2000 and 2001 — that continue and provide good service 

to people, and that‘s been acknowledged. So I need to say thank 

you for that. 

 

Now one of the areas that is outlined in the budget — and I laud 

because it‘s something that we were working on and this year is 

the right timing for it to go forward — and that‘s the whole 

concept of a provincial capital commission. This is something 

that has been in the discussion stages for quite a number of 

years, so I think it‘s helpful for the public to understand that this 

just didn‘t drop out of the air, and in actual fact it was part of an 

overall plan. And so maybe I can just give a little bit of a 

background here. 

 

Basically back six years ago there were some discussions about 

how to change the Wascana Centre Authority Act that would 

allow it to become the Saskatchewan capital commission Act. 

And these were supported in the discussions that were going 

forward by quite a number of the ministers and caucus 

members, but there were some financial questions that were 

raised in the process through the various officials whose job it is 

to ask those questions. And so this ended up . . . I mean 

obviously the first go-round took a little bit longer. In April 1, 

2003 — so that‘s five years ago today — the whole urban parks 

program was transferred from the Municipal Affairs and 

Housing area to Saskatchewan Environment, which included 

parks. 

 

In that fall, the Wascana Centre Authority, and I know that 

some of the members here in the House were quite involved 

with this in various of their previous careers, took a poll of the 

Saskatchewan residents around Wascana Centre Authority and 

the Saskatchewan capital commission. And it was positive for a 

change, but it wasn‘t overwhelmingly positive, so it forced 

another look at this. 

 

Then as we all know, the excitement around the digging of the 

lake here meant that the capital commission project was put on 

hold for a while. In the late 2005, both the present minister 

responsible and the mayor of the province were quite interested 

in restarting this whole process, and that‘s when the matter 

started coming back together so that in 2006 — and I think as 

we moved forward into 2007 — plans were continuing to be 

made around how there could be a capital commission for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I know that one of the original goals was to try to get this done 

by September 18, 2007, because that‘s when the Canadian 

capital commissions organization was having their annual 

meeting in Regina. Now that didn‘t quite happen, and a few 

other intervening things happened. But it‘s good to see that in 

this budget and what‘s happening here, all that work over many 

years, building on the good work that was done 40 years ago or 

more, is now coming to fruition, and there‘s actual dollars 

allocated to assist in that. 

 

That I think is a common thread or is a common story which 

one would see in every single department and every single area 

as it relates to this budget. And I think that‘s a positive thing 

about the budget. But once again, I‘ll remind you that there are 

four areas where some of that momentum wasn‘t followed up 

on — and that‘s the property tax relief, clearly the training 

seats, the affordable housing area, and then the green initiatives. 

 

Now I have been looking at this budget, and I think the Finance 

minister knows — I‘m pretty sure the cabinet knows — that as 

it exists today, this budget doesn‘t work. And the reason for that 

is that certain amounts of the money that are going to be used in 

the budget this year cannot be used until the law is changed. 

And I assume that‘s why the government introduced Bill No. 1 

last fall, which was to change the law around the sale of capital 

assets and using that money for programming. 

 

Now anybody who‘s had a history in working in a city or a 

town or municipality knows that you have certain funds where 

the money can‘t be used for operating funds. Well effectively 

that‘s the rule we‘ve had around the sale of capital assets in the 

Crowns — that they can‘t be used for operating budgets — just 

as a common sense sort of governor on how the spending goes. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this budget as it stands right now, 

it doesn‘t comply with the law of Saskatchewan. To make it 

comply the law has to be changed, and so that‘s something that 

we‘ll hear about, I assume, as we move forward in this 

particular session because the money that‘s sitting over at CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] from the 

sale of the upgrader cannot be moved over to the General 

Revenue Fund until that particular law is changed. 

 

And so one of the issues is, now as a policy has this government 

changed the perspective on the sale of capital assets within the 

Crowns or is this a one-time event, or what is this particular 

issue? And that says something that we will obviously talk 

about as we move into that particular legislation. But it is a bit 

of a cloud over this whole budget. 

 

Now if you go back to my comments about the $1 billion fund 

— which is actually 800 million in ongoing funding plus 200 

million — well of the 200 million health and education, that 

probably does come from the sale of the upgrader money, the 

320 million. We know that there‘s 40 billion spread out over 10 

years that‘s going to green area and we know that there‘s some 

of that money which is not . . . which is capital money is going 

to be spent in the highways area. All of these things though 

raise questions about how this is planned. 

 

When we set forward our climate change plan and our green 

strategy last year, we knew that it was not possible unless the 

Crowns had resources. And that was one of the reasons that we 

set up the kind of money that we did in CIC, to allow for the 

long-term transformation of how we provide energy in this 

province. That whole underpinning of those long-term plans has 

been gutted and that‘s a disappointment to me. I think it‘s a 

disappointment to many people across the province. I know it 

should be a disappointment to the Minister of Environment 

because she‘s the one that‘ll have to be responding about how 

we do the things that need to be done to meet the plans which 

have been wholeheartedly endorsed by the new government. 

 

You can‘t . . . I think that one of the lessons that everybody 

learns is that you need to make sure that your budgets match the 

kinds of things that you say in what you do. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, there‘s a whole area here as it relates to the money to 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

allow for the transformation of Saskatchewan to be the energy 

centre for Canada that isn‘t in this budget. And I know that 

there are many people that are disappointed about that, 

especially the people that work so hard both in industry and in 

government and in our institutions across the province to 

develop a plan that would allow for that particular change. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget, it comes in a long history 

of dealing with some of the major problems that arrived in 

Saskatchewan in the early ‘90s and it‘s, I think, the culmination 

of many good choices along the way. 

 

I encourage the government to continue to make good choices. 

And I think they would be well advised to listen to the advice 

that comes from this side of the House because I hazard a guess 

that many people respect the kinds of decisions we‘ve made 

over the last number of years and they would, as voters in 

Saskatchewan, encourage people to — the people opposite — 

to listen to what we have to say. 

 

So I end my comments about this budget, and I thank you for 

listening to me this afternoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Cannington. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‘s a pleasure to rise today to speak on this historic budget, 

historic in the sense that it‘s the first Saskatchewan Party 

budget to have been presented in this province. 

 

I know back in 1997 when the Saskatchewan Party was first 

formed, the members opposite who were in the government at 

the time tried to minimize that event and pretend that it did not 

have any significance in the province of Saskatchewan and 

would amount to nothing but a dust storm blowing by in the 

wind. Well thankfully, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan took a little more notice of the 

Saskatchewan Party over the years. 

 

And yes, we had to spend some time in opposition and giving 

the people the opportunity to learn who we were, what we were 

about, and to give us some opportunity to learn how to operate 

in the sense of in the House and to learn some of the 

mechanisms of government, Mr. Speaker. But we‘ve had that 

opportunity to do so now. 

 

I found it interesting that the member from Regina Lakeview 

was going back in his speech for material back to 1991 when 

his seatmate sitting almost directly behind him, the member 

from Saskatoon Centre — I actually had that written down here 

just in case I didn‘t remember it — Saskatoon Centre said this 

in question period, it‘s about now, not about the past. So 

perhaps he needs to lean over and whisper that into the ear of 

the member from Regina Lakeview, that it‘s about now. This 

budget is about now, not about 1991. 

 

I mean I could back to the budgets that came down, what the 

administration before the NDP won in 1991, go back to 1992 

and talk about the $6 billion in debt that was left there at 15, 20 

per cent interest rates. But there‘s no point in going over that, 

Mr. Speaker. That has been debated for the last 20 years. 

 

I know that the members opposite would like to go back to 

1991 and refight that election all over again because then they 

were young and fresh and vigorous. But it‘s 16 years later, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and that‘s not the case with them over there, 

Mr. Speaker. That‘s not the case any longer. Sixteen years, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, has worn them down to a nubbin of their 

former selves. 

 

And I know that some of them are excited about my speech. 

Well as they can tell, I haven‘t been worn down to a nubbin, 

Mr. Speaker. I‘m as youthful and as enthusiastic as I was back 

in 1991 when I won. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, this is also a 

historical budget in the sense that as the member opposite was 

speaking about, it‘s a $1 billion budget on capital, on 

construction in this province, Mr. Speaker — $1 billion. That‘s 

with a ―b.‖ That is a huge amount of money, Mr. Speaker. And 

yes some of that was built into the process already, but it‘s the 

first time in the province of Saskatchewan that $1 billion has 

been dedicated to capital construction in this province. 

 

Those people that last fall made a decision at election time, they 

had a government opposite that had been in power for 16 years. 

They had a choice of a new party and to create a new 

government. And they looked at what was going on around the 

province. And as the member from Regina Lakeview was 

saying, it was about choices. It was about making decisions. 

 

Well the people of Saskatchewan said, when they made their 

decision in November of 2007, that they didn‘t agree with the 

decisions the members opposite had made when they were in 

government. They said that the failure to fix the capital 

infrastructure of this province — the highways — was no 

longer acceptable. They said that the failure to provide proper 

educational facilities for our youth was no longer acceptable. 

They said the fact that we were 800 nurses short in this 

province was no longer acceptable. The people of 

Saskatchewan said that the NDP‘s failure to maintain the health 

infrastructure was no longer acceptable. 

 

And we heard that message, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We heard that 

message, and that message is reflected in this budget today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‘re addressing the NDP‘s failure to provide for 

highways and roads across this province so that we can grow 

this economy, so that we can get ready for the growth that will 

take place, that is already taking place and will take place in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‘re going to be able to ensure with this budget that our 

children will have the proper schools and post-secondary 

educational facilities to get the education they need so that they 

will have the opportunities, not just to have jobs in the province 

of Saskatchewan, but to be able to build careers in the province 



488 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to build careers for themselves 

and to raise their families in the province of Saskatchewan — 

which I‘m sure everyone in this legislature acknowledges is the 

best place in Canada to be living. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the choices made by the people of 

Saskatchewan and this budget reflect very positively on my 

own constituency. Cannington is benefiting, Mr. Speaker, from 

the $100-plus oil prices. 

 

Right now in my constituency you would be extremely 

challenged to find any rental accommodations. Every possible 

home is being utilized, Mr. Speaker. It was amazing going 

around this past winter in the various communities and seeing 

how much renovation and construction is taking place. Every 

home . . . I shouldn‘t say every home. Every second home is 

being renovated, and many new ones are being developed. And 

fact is in the town of Oxbow they‘re developing two new 

subdivisions — two new subdivisions — which is extremely 

unheard of. 

 

Last winter I was in the town of Griffin, which is just east of 

Weyburn on the very edge of my constituency. And while I was 

in there, a gentleman came in and bought the very last lot 

available in Griffin. I‘m not sure when the last time there was a 

boom in Griffin, but my guess would be sometime in the early 

1950s. Every lot is bought up in Griffin. Griffin is a very, very 

small community, probably 10 to 15 homes. They have an RM 

[rural municipality] office and a post office. They don‘t even 

have a grocery store, so they have to drive all the way to 

Weyburn or to Stoughton, more than 25 miles either direction, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the people in that area know and understand this is a 

community that has potential, and they‘re prepared to invest 

and build their homes there. Why? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they‘re in the middle of the Bakken oil field which has huge 

potential for Saskatchewan and will aid in our prosperity in the 

coming future. 

 

But Griffin‘s not any different than any of the other 

communities throughout my constituency. They‘re all enjoying 

the benefits of the resurgent resource revenues that are taking 

place across the province, in particular in southeast 

Saskatchewan, be it in the Cannington constituency, in Estevan 

or Weyburn, Moosomin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or even up closer 

to Regina in the Indian Head-Milestone area where there is 

starting to be some oil development now as well. 

 

And fact is there‘s surveying taking place along the entire east 

side of the province, even up into the Hudson Bay area looking 

for oil and oil field developments, Mr. Speaker. This 

development‘s also taking place in the Northwest up around the 

Lloydminster-Cut Knife area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‘m not as 

familiar with that area, but I do know that there is a huge 

amount of development taking place, and it‘s going to benefit 

all of us. 

 

However that means it creates its own challenges. Members 

opposite, when they were in government, in some ways they 

were successful in ignoring the infrastructure issues. But it 

meant at the end of the day that those infrastructure issues 

having been ignored means that they are now in critical need of 

redevelopment. And this was the reason why this government 

put in place the $1 billion capital that was needed to develop the 

infrastructure across the province. 

 

We need that, Mr. Speaker, to develop the resource industries. 

We also need that in place, Mr. Speaker, to develop the 

agricultural interests across this province. When people are 

developing agricultural interests, when you have the 

transportation of our, now, very high priced agricultural 

commodities, when we‘re looking at secondary manufacturing 

of those products, we need the infrastructure and the highways 

in place to be able to move those products to market. And 

unfortunately for 16 years, that necessity was ignored. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will no longer be ignored. I don‘t 

know about all of the other constituencies and what is 

happening in those areas, but I‘d like to relate a little bit about 

what is being done in my own constituency when it comes to 

the infrastructure renewal. 

 

Of the $408 million going into roads and highway construction, 

there‘s some of that actually being spent relatively for some 

new projects that have not been done, Mr. Speaker, in my area 

— new in the sense that the previous administration generally 

tried to ignore our area. 

 

But highways like Highway No. 8, Mr. Speaker, are being 

renewed. And I know that many people in this Assembly have 

driven on No. 8 and used words that would not be 

parliamentary in describing the shape of that road. And fact is 

the former minister of Finance, the member for Regina Albert 

South at the time, came down No. 8 from Moosomin to attend a 

health meeting in Redvers and ripped the muffler off of his car. 

I know that he was not appreciative of that fact and even said so 

at a meeting with the health boards here in the Assembly, and 

described the terrible conditions of that road. 

 

Well the current government, Mr. Speaker, will be fixing that 

road this year. 

 

As well there will be work on No. 48 from Wawota to No. 9. 

Yes, this project was started under the former administration. 

It‘s been ongoing for over five years. It‘s not that long a stretch 

of road, and it‘s still not done. That will be completed this year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

No. 13 Highway will have work done on it. And fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, last fall after the election, the Department of Highways 

fixed a bridge west of Kisbey, between Kisbey and Forget, 

which had been out for six months. It was finally done last fall, 

and it‘s still in rough condition in the sense that the pavement 

hasn‘t been put over top of the bridge. That will be done this 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

No. 33 Highway will have work done on it, Mr. Speaker. No. 

47 Highway will have work done on it from Stoughton south 

towards Estevan. 

 

There are many more highways in my constituency that I know 

that need to have work done on them. They have been ignored 

for years, and I am working with the Minister of Highways to 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

convince him that these roads and these highways need to be 

upgraded. But we can‘t do it all at one time. 

 

The rest of the province has been equally . . . well maybe not 

equally from my point of view, but have been ignored, Mr. 

Speaker, as well on the infrastructure. And they need their roads 

and highways fixed as well. So we‘re prepared to wait a little 

bit as long as some is being done. 

 

One of the other areas that the previous administration ignored 

was capital construction for education for the K to 12 system. 

The Oxbow school has been on the top of the B-1 list for about 

five years for new construction. It kept getting bumped off 

because of health concerns with other schools. Finally after five 

years, this school will be built this year, Mr. Speaker. And that 

is a huge benefit to the community of Oxbow and surrounding 

area especially with two new subdivisions going into that 

community. 

 

But just to give an example of the condition of our schools and 

the impact that they have, there was a new school built a 

number of years ago in the Carnduff community. Last winter I 

was called to a meeting there, and you know what the concern 

was? The concern was they had too many children in 

kindergarten for the size of the school. I know in other areas of 

rural Saskatchewan that there is a concern of the lack of 

students and the closure of schools. But in Carnduff, that was 

not the concern. Their concern was they had too many kids in 

kindergarten and not enough room and not enough teachers. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‘s a good problem to have, one that the 

government was able to resolve, Mr. Speaker, by doing some 

adjusting within the school division. The school division looked 

after this, and they adjusted some of the teaching arrangements, 

and that will benefit Saskatchewan in the long run. 

 

Now I know members in the past have seen me speak on their 

budgets, and I always have my budget book available with my 

sticky tabs on it to let me know where I want to go to where I 

want to speak. So just to make the members opposite feel at 

home and comfortable, I made sure I had my budget book with 

the sticky tabs. 

 

So I would like to talk now about the areas of the budget that 

I‘m responsible for, and that is Government Services. 

Government Services is doing some of those capital 

construction projects that are part of the $1 billion. 

 

We‘re completing the Regina Provincial Correctional Centre 

which is a $51.5 million project that was started under the 

previous administration. We will be completing that. And we 

will be completing something that the members opposite seem 

to have missed in this construction, is they were building a new 

facility at the Regina Correctional Centre, but they forgot to put 

a kitchen in it, a new kitchen, Mr. Speaker. So we will be 

funding the new kitchen at the Regina Provincial Correctional 

Centre. You know, one would think that, when you‘re replacing 

a 1913 section of the correctional centre, that you might also 

want to change and upgrade the kitchen. So we‘re going to go 

ahead and do that, Mr. Speaker. I think the people that will be 

receiving meals from that will appreciate the fact that they‘re 

getting it out of a new and modern kitchen. 

 

We‘re continuing with the upgrades to the Walter Scott 

Building which have been ongoing for a couple of years. The 

project is more or less just starting, and we will be continuing to 

work with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that the members of the legislature have the 

opportunity to see on a daily basis is the scaffolding that went 

up here this winter in front of the building, on the east wing of 

the building. Government Services is looking at the outside 

shell of the building. Over time, over the hundred years of this 

legislature . . . We‘re actually built on the Regina gumbo, so it 

has a bit of a tendency to shift. And fact is over the years, the 

west wing has been jacked up. The east wing has been jacked 

up 6 inches, so the facade and the stonework on the building in 

that shifting has cracked, and now we‘re getting moisture in 

behind that, and that‘s causing problems and deterioration. 

 

Because this is a heritage building, it takes certain criteria. You 

can only do the work in a certain manner. So we‘re taking a 

look at that, Mr. Speaker, and we will be doing so on an 

ongoing basis to renovate and renew the Legislative Building. 

 

You know, when you‘re sitting in here in the wintertime in your 

offices or at meetings and you happen to be next to a window, 

you better hope that the wind isn‘t blowing from that direction 

because this building certainly gives each and every office a 

sufficient supply of fresh air through those windows. Whether 

they‘re closed or not doesn‘t seem to matter too much. We will 

be replacing those windows in the foreseeable future, Mr. 

Speaker. That will be part of the future upgrades that take place 

within the Legislative Building. 

 

Some of the other areas that we‘re looking at, Mr. Speaker, is 

we continue to do work on the capital replacement of the 

Saskatchewan disease control laboratory and for more space for 

the nursing education programs at SIAST [Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] and Saskatoon — 

very important programs, especially the nursing education one. 

 

One of the issues, one of the problems we‘ve had in the 

province of Saskatchewan over the last number of years is the 

lack of training seats for nurses, and that‘s why we have an 

800-nurse deficit in the province of Saskatchewan. Soon we‘ll 

be receiving immigrant nurses from the Philippines. They will 

be carrying on that role thanks to the hard work of the Minister 

of Health and the member for Regina South who went to 

Philippines . . . no, Regina northwest; sorry, Regina northwest 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Qu‘Appelle Valley, Regina Qu‘Appelle 

Valley. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Qu‘Appelle Valley, okay. It was 

up there someplace, Mr. Speaker, in Regina, the northwest 

corner. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those members did a good job in recruiting 

nurses along with the Health department staff and 

representatives from the health districts. They went over and in 

one trip, Mr. Speaker, were able to recruit almost 300 nurses. 

Previous trips by the administration opposite resulted in very, 

very few recruits, Mr. Speaker. And I don‘t understand the 

reasons why, but it just didn‘t seem to work when they went 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

over, whereas when the Health department along with the 

member from Regina Qu‘Appelle Valley went to the 

Philippines, they managed to recruit an appropriate number of 

nurses to stopgap the shortages that we have in Saskatchewan. 

 

And what did those shortages mean to the rest of us? Well what 

it meant was — and still is, because those nurses haven‘t 

arrived here yet — is that 10 beds are closed at the long-term 

care facility in Carlyle. The Arcola hospital is open. It‘s not 

open. It‘s open. It‘s not open because they‘re short of nurses. 

The hospital in Redvers, if one more nurse left or got sick or for 

some reason was unavailable for work, the hospital in Redvers 

would‘ve closed because of a shortage of nurses. And this 

wasn‘t just peculiar to my own constituency. This was the case 

across most of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So those 300 nurses 

that will be arriving from the Philippines are certainly welcome 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things that the Premier did when we formed 

government and he formed cabinet was to give to each of those 

of us who were chosen to serve in cabinet with a mandate letter. 

And part of that mandate letter that I received from the Premier 

was dealing with Government Services and the environment. 

 

He asked that I ensure that all of the vehicles purchased by 

Government Services — and Government Services purchases 

and supplies all the vehicles to government and a significant 

number of the vehicles to the Crown corporations — that those 

be fuel-efficient vehicles, that they be in the top 20 per cent of 

their class; if they‘re smaller passenger vehicles, that they be 

flex-fuel or hybrids. We‘re doing that, Mr. Speaker. Every one 

of the vehicles that we‘re purchasing is in the top 20 per cent of 

their class. Of the light vehicles, if they‘re not a hybrid then 

we‘re buying the E85 flex-fuel vehicles. 

 

Now you can‘t buy E85 fuel in Saskatchewan, but we need to 

develop a critical mass that makes it worthwhile for someone 

— one of the oil companies, an independent operator, whoever 

that might be — to establish an E85 or E85 stations across the 

province. So they need to know that there is a fleet, that there 

are vehicles out there that will purchase E85 fuel if it‘s 

available. And so we‘re doing our part as government to try and 

ensure that there is a critical mass so that someone will supply 

the E85 to Saskatchewan. 

 

We produce enough ethanol in Saskatchewan to provide that 

fuel to Saskatchewan, but no service station yet provides it, but 

we‘re hopeful that that will be occurring. 

 

We‘re also ensuring that all of the new buildings that are being 

built for Government Services are LEED [leadership in energy 

and environmental design] certified so that they follow the best 

practices and the best environmental practices to ensure that 

they are as energy efficient as possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the other areas that the Premier asked me to look after 

was Information Technology. And the mandate to that area was 

to carry on with being environmentally sound, being efficient in 

our operations, and we have certainly done that, Mr. Speaker. 

And fact is it was the former Finance minister who initially 

developed the ITO [Information Technology Office] and I was 

the critic from day one on that issue. And I gave him lots of 

credit at the time and supported this initiative because I believe 

it had long-term, significant potential for the province of 

Saskatchewan and would benefit the province of Saskatchewan 

by the consolidation of IT [information technology]. And fact 

is, what it has meant is that now we have a savings of 12 to $13 

million per annum on IT services because of the changes that 

were made. 

 

But there‘s still more things that we can do. And the Premier‘s 

mandate to me was to establish an electronic embassy or a 

one-stop portal for IT services with government. So if someone 

wants to come to government and says, you know, I want to 

know what the environmental issues are, they can go to that 

one-stop portal. They can look up Environment and start 

drilling down. And then they can say, what are you doing at X 

or how do I get information on Y or how do I get a hunting 

form through Environment. That will all be able to be done at 

some point in time through that one-stop shopping, you might 

say, through that one electronic embassy to the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing that the ITO was dealing with as well is, the 

Premier, as part of the mandate, requested that I make sure that 

all of the orders in council be put online. And that has 

happened, Mr. Speaker. Now whenever an order in council 

comes out, that is placed online. So it‘s accessible to 

government members. It‘s accessible to the opposition. It‘s 

accessible to the media or to the general public, Mr. Speaker, so 

that allows this government to be accountable to the voters, Mr. 

Speaker, to the people that we are responsible to. 

 

I attended an IT function last night in Saskatoon. And one of the 

comments . . . and it was kind of out of the blue because we 

weren‘t talking about this particular issue, but it speaks to 

getting ready for growth in Saskatchewan. And what this young 

entrepreneur mentioned to me was that he thought the $20,000 

post-secondary graduate tax credits were extremely important in 

developing the IT industry in this province and in keeping our 

graduates here in the province. And I believe this is going to be 

one of the major initiatives that helps to grow this province. 

 

The IT industry is very strong, has huge potential, and is just 

now starting to realize the potential that is out there, and is 

eager to grow and is eager to take advantage of the 

opportunities that we have here in Saskatchewan with a strong 

broadband base that has been developed across the province 

with CommunityNet II . . . CommunityNets I and II with 

high-speed Internet going to many communities and with many 

more communities having been supplied with wireless 

high-speed Internet. Unfortunately there are still communities 

that do not have access to high-speed Internet and that will 

continue to be worked on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But this young entrepreneur felt that the $20,000 tax credit for 

post-secondary graduates was extremely important to keeping 

young people in Saskatchewan and allowing them to have their 

families here and to help to build and grow Saskatchewan. This, 

I believe, is going to have significant impact. 

 

We‘re also putting a half a million dollars into the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology to deliver 100 

new training seats for on-reserve education. I think this is going 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

to also go a long way in developing the young people of this 

province and to help build the workforce that we need so that 

these people . . . as I said earlier, it‘s not just the job that they 

will be having; they will be building careers in this province. 

 

The IT sector, in growing and becoming much more robust in 

this province, will provide the productivity and the innovation 

that will be the cornerstones of the 21st century. And we have 

an opportunity to play a leading role in that and to take our 

place on the world stage. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‘ve had some opportunity. I know that 

there are many more things that I would like to talk about, 

however, there are others who also wish to have that 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. So this budget is good for 

Saskatchewan. This budget is good for Cannington. This budget 

will be a budget that will lead us into the future, Mr. Speaker, 

and I‘m pleased to be able to support it. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‘Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 

honour to rise in the House today and represent the good people 

of Regina Qu‘Appelle Valley — not Regina South — but 

Regina Qu‘Appelle Valley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Ross: — I‘m very proud to take part in the budget debate 

today. This is a time of incredible growth in Saskatchewan. 

Prices for our natural resources are at a record high. As our 

Premier, the member for Swift Current, found out during his 

recent trip to the United States, our neighbours to the south are 

looking to Saskatchewan as a conflict-free source of their 

energy needs. Let‘s not let these opportunities slip through our 

fingers. 

 

In January our population crept past 1 million people. For the 

first time since 2001, Saskatchewan‘s population growth rate is 

the third highest in Canada. For the first time in years, there 

were more people moving from Alberta than moving to Alberta. 

You can literally see the evidence of that in the number of 

Alberta license plates prowling the Saskatchewan streets. 

People realize Saskatchewan is not just a great place to make a 

living; it‘s a great place to make a life. Quality of life may well 

prove to be this government‘s most enduring legacy. 

 

We talk a lot these days about maintaining the economic 

momentum, ensuring everyone shares in the benefits, and 

taking the steps necessary to avoid the problems created by 

unmanaged growth. So what does this mean? Let‘s make sure 

our kids have the best schools to go to. People shouldn‘t have to 

wait years to have surgery. There has to be a competitive 

business atmosphere. 

 

Our roads and our highways have to be able to handle the 

increased traffic generated by this economic growth, which is 

why the theme of our Saskatchewan Party government‘s first 

budget is Ready for Growth. The centrepiece of the budget is 1 

billion ready-for-growth fund, a capital infrastructure 

investment that will see roads, hospitals, schools, and other key 

components get some long overdue attention. 

 

Under the Ready for Growth budget we are spending a record of 

408 million maintaining, repairing, and upgrading highways 

and roads. Now this is good news for the residents of our 

province who have been patiently waiting to have their roads 

repaired. 

 

As you know, I‘ve spent some time in the Philippines which is a 

Third World country. And as I was travelling on their roads that 

needed repair, I thought to myself that the new nurses will think 

they‘re back home in the Philippines driving over these bumpy 

roads. Now lucky for them and all the other residents of this 

province, our government in this budget has set aside the 

much-needed funding to undertake the much-needed road 

repairs that this province so richly deserves. 

 

There is 191 million to improve hospitals and health care 

facilities, purchase medical equipment, and to continue 

construction of the new provincial lab building. 

 

And under the Ready for Growth budget, over $160 million will 

focus on important upgrades and repairs to schools in rural and 

urban communities, and make the improvements to our 

universities and training centres. It‘s necessary to make these 

investments. And is it necessary? Absolutely. Our government 

believes this investment is crucial to the future direction of this 

province. This is a tipping point. Today we can afford these 

upgrades thanks to our thriving economy and strong financial 

position. 

 

It‘s also worth noting that this government‘s first budget is 

balanced. For the first time in many years, we are not spending 

more than we make. 

 

The Ready for Growth budget increases the education property 

tax rebates by 156 million — increased revenue-sharing money 

for municipalities. And this budget will continue the university 

tuition freeze. And this budget provides up to 20,000 in tuition 

rebates to university grads who choose to stay in Saskatchewan. 

 

My husband teaches at the University of Regina, and he has 

told me that many of his students are pleased with the 

commitment that our government has made — promises made, 

promises kept. 

 

We are dramatically increasing the number of training seats for 

doctors, nurses, and other health care professionals, and we 

have embarked on aggressive recruitment and retention 

campaign for nurses. 

 

As the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Health, nurse 

recruitment and retention, it is my job to ensure that we fulfill 

our campaign promise of adding 800 nurses by 2011. Now this 

past February I was part of a delegation that consisted of 

government employees, five health regions, and educators from 

the University of Saskatchewan and SIAST. We went to the 

Philippines to recruit nurses. Three hundred Filipino nurses 

accepted job offers and will begin arriving Saskatchewan this 

summer. 

 

Our approach to meeting promised health care commitments is 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

much broader. In addition to hiring 300 Filipino nurses, we plan 

to create 300 new registered nursing training seats, increase the 

use of nurse practitioners, bring Saskatchewan-trained nurses 

back home to work, recruit and retain a higher percentage of 

Aboriginal health care workers, and establish a bridging 

program to encourage licensed practical nurses to become 

registered nurses. Is this the right prescription for fixing the 

nursing shortage? We think it is. 

 

I‘m not a nurse, though Donna Brunskill is. Ms. Brunskill is the 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses‘ 

Association, and she was working as an RN [registered nurse] 

when they were told there is no nursing shortage. Now what 

does she think now? Well this is what she had to say the day 

when the Saskatchewan Party government delivered its first 

budget, quote, ―For the first time in a decade I am confident the 

RN shortage is getting the attention it deserves.‖ 

 

Now I‘m sorry to see that the minister of . . . I mean the 

member of Saskatoon Eastview is not here today to hear my 

story . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You can‘t say that. 

 

Ms. Ross: — I can‘t? 

 

An Hon. Member: — You can‘t say that. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Okay, well whatever. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Whatever? 

 

Ms. Ross: — I‘m sorry. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They‘re just the rules. 

 

Ms. Ross: — I apologize. Anyways I have a story to tell in that 

it was made mention that we were paying more attention to 

facilities than we are to people in health care. This past summer 

during an absolutely incredible heat wave, my cousin was 

admitted to the Pasqua Hospital with heart failure. It was so hot 

in that hospital. They were only allowed to use fans the size of, 

oh, about a bagel, to cool these patients — bagel fan. The sad 

part is that this was causing a health crisis in the Pasqua 

Hospital. 

 

We care about people; we just do not care about facilities. The 

Saskatchewan Party government does not just pay lip service to 

health care. This budget has health care front and centre. We are 

rolling up our sleeves and getting the job done. Our government 

will continue to focus on sustaining growth and ensure 

Saskatchewan people share in the benefits of growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment to the 

budget. Mr. Speaker, I will be voting in favour of supporting 

the budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to enter into the 

debate concerning the budget delivered by the Sask Party 

government on the 19th of this month. First I must offer a 

confession. When the Sask Party delivers a self-professed 

Ready for Growth budget that by their own acclaim builds on a 

tradition of balanced budgets, it‘s nothing short of amusement. 

 

In the 2008-2009 provincial budget backgrounder it states under 

the title sound fiscal management that the Sask Party budget is 

the 15th consecutive budget. Moreover it cites that the first Sask 

Party budget is one of 16 credit upgrades since 1985. 

Consecutive then must mean right after the 14 previous 

balanced budgets and 15 previous credit upgrades achieved by 

the former NDP governments after an era of Conservative 

disaster. 

 

For a newly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. I agree. 

It‘s worth clapping for. For a newly elected government, it must 

sure be interesting to publicly posture that you actually have 

credibility, citing the fiscal management of the former NDP 

government as proof that you can handle the job of leading a 

province. To be sure this seems like a good strategy, for their 

former claim when taking office of inheriting a stark treasury 

was met with a resounding laughter. Something needed to be 

done to explain why an economy is firing all cylinders and over 

$1 billion is in the bank. I guess the redefinition of the word 

stark was unsuccessful after all. 

 

That has not stopped the redefinition strategy of the Sask Party 

government however. They are determined to convince us that 

democracy or rebalancing can actually mean taking away the 

dignity and rights of workers with proposed amendments to 

labour laws represented by Bills 5 and 6 or further still, the 

redefinition of the word competitiveness when it comes to 

handing over decision-making capacity of an elected legislature 

to a non-elected group known as Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

On the other hand, it would have been interesting to think what 

kind of bill of goods the Sask Party might have tried to sell the 

people of this province had they believed the initial, wild claim. 

As history proves with all Conservative governments, it all 

comes out in the wash. 

 

Here we are several months later, and the story has changed. I 

guess a budget is more than simply an exercise in accounting. 

Rather, a budget is a living, social, and political document. It 

expresses the current government‘s intentions to address public 

concerns and deliver on policy commitments. Ultimately a 

budget expresses fundamental judgments about what kind of 

province we ought to have. In this light when assuming the 

meaning and acceptability of the Sask Party budget, one must 

take into consideration both what is said in terms of actual 

money commitments and what the budget does not say — in 

other words, who benefits and who is left behind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget that was delivered on March 19 told a 

remarkable narrative of kept promises and vision. The 

centrepiece of the budget is a large infrastructure initiative that 

tops a $600 million mark that had all ready been in a 

component in past budgets. While overall spending has 

increased by approximately 10 per cent over last year‘s budget, 

there exists fundamental omissions. In fact there are even cuts. 

 

Let me provide a brief portrait of the people these cuts leave out 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

of the overarching promise of the Sask Party to secure the 

future, supposedly. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Attending a women‘s dinner on March 27, I along with two 

other panellists addressed the issue of the economic inequalities 

experienced by women. In that discussion, I highlighted that the 

recent Sask Party budget embodies hostility towards women 

and asserts a disregard for women‘s issues. This, I argued, is 

evidenced in a $300,000 cut to the Status of Women office and 

Ministry of Social Services cuts that, according to the budget, 

entail a decrease in the transitional employment allowance from 

46.5 million to 23.8 million. 

 

It is malicious cuts such as these, Mr. Speaker, that impact the 

most vulnerable in our province. Working people across the 

province, their families, and their friends are not alone in 

questioning these cuts. Why in a budget that delivers a slush 

fund for Enterprise Saskatchewan, that appeases corporate Sask 

Party contributors with tax cuts, and according to the literature 

keeps promises, do we find extensive cuts that beyond a doubt 

negatively impact women? I guess that is more than accounting; 

it is simple ideology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, working people know that nothing comes for free. 

This is more than a common sentiment; it is a lived reality. 

They have worked hard. They have built the prosperity of this 

province. It is indeed from many people‘s strength that we 

enjoy the economy of today. 

 

Yet although we understand that the economy is doing well, 

how are ordinary working people doing? What is being done by 

government to ensure that they enjoy the good times as well? 

Further, to what extent are we ensuring that the prosperity of 

today isn‘t simply passing on problems to future generations? 

 

At the core of this Sask Party government‘s budget is a narrow 

conception of what governments can do for ordinary working 

people. Government, in light of the Sask Party budget 

commitments, picks clear winners and losers. The construction 

industry is a winner. The working poor and the environment are 

clear losers. 

 

A headline in the March 29 StarPhoenix conveys a sentiment 

many people are feeling today. It reads, quote, ―Government‘s 

actions signal trouble ahead.‖ In the article, the paper explains 

that, quote, ―If, as is generally the case, the Saskatchewan Party 

used its first budget to set the tone for its administration, the 

province has a growing list to worry about.‖ 

 

The article specifically cites the recent decision following the 

budget to deliberately cancel the former NDP government‘s 

commitment of $8 million to what is described by many as a, 

quote, ―much-lauded inner city redevelopment project‖ known 

as Station 20 project in Saskatoon. As the article relates, the fact 

that no one from the Sask Party government can get their story 

straight, quote, ―. . . does little to foster confidence in . . . [the 

Sask Party‘s] ability to manage public money.‖ 

 

Station 20, Mr. Speaker, Station 20 West, Mr. Speaker, is a 

unique made-in-Saskatchewan approach to urban renewal in the 

poorest neighbourhood in the city of Saskatoon. The 

community enterprise centre would bring, among other things, 

low cost dental services, outreach clinical services, and other 

community services such as a library, a grocery co-op, and 

affordable housing units to one of Saskatchewan‘s most 

stressed neighbourhoods. 

 

While the initial response provided by the government involved 

the inaccurate citing of funds that would need to be raised by 

the public for the project, it seems that to any sentient person 

the cancellation goes well beyond mere incompetence. Instead 

it is ideologically motivated. 

 

In a March 28 StarPhoenix article, quote, ―20th Street ‗mall‘ 

not a priority‖ by the government, Premier Wall states that the 

government, quote, ―ought not to be in the mall business and 

it‘s just, it‘s a different approach.‖ He went on to say, we don‘t 

think, quote, ―We don‘t think that the government of 

Saskatchewan should be . . . competing with grocery stores, 

competing with others who are already renting . . . now to 

community clinics in the area.‖ 

 

What Premier Wall unfortunately forgot to include in this 

quote, Mr. Speaker, is there has not been a full grocery store in 

the area for approximately 10 years now. And there appears to 

be no development on the horizon. As a result, many 

low-income residents are forced to travel unreasonable 

distances to get food and services they need, if they have the 

ability to travel at all. 

 

As the author of the article, quote, ―Wall has a strange idea of 

‗mall‘‖ that appeared in the March 29 StarPhoenix rightly 

suggests, quote, if ―Premier Brad Wall thinks the Station 20 

West project is a ‗mall,‘ perhaps he‘d like to visit the day spa 

run by the Friendship Inn or tour the luxury condos being built 

by Habitat for Humanity.‖ 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear to many people around this province that 

the Sask Party government‘s notion that they are securing the 

future for everyone is a little short on change and a poorly 

constructed mask when it comes to hiding ideological 

orientation. 

 

In the March 29 editorial of The StarPhoenix titled, quote, 

―Government‘s actions signal trouble ahead,‖ an author 

sketches out the demonstrable right-wing agenda of the Sask 

Party. 

 

The author starts by asserting that Premier Wall‘s, quote: 

 

. . . clear lack of understanding about the dire needs of 

core neighbourhoods and the history of Saskatoon 

demonstrates just how out of touch he remains with urban 

Saskatchewan. Considering the role the province‘s largest 

city is playing in the economic revival of Saskatchewan, 

such ignorance could have dire consequences. 

 

In response to the poorly crafted and dubious competing line 

given as the only real explanation for the government‘s inertia 

on the issue, the editorial explains, quote: 

 

The proponents of Station 20 want a grocery store not 

because they want to compete with private industry but 

because many people in core neighbourhoods don‘t have 



494 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

the wherewithal to keep hiring cabs to go . . . [to them]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us leave the ideologically motivated attack on 

poor people demonstrated by the denial of funding to the 

meaningful Station 20 West project for a moment. Instead let us 

quickly review the budget fundamentals. 

 

The Sask Party budget assumes a conservative benchmark of a 

US [United States] oil price of $82.36 a barrel, compared to the 

current price of $110 . . . $100 a barrel. In this context the 

government, despite its spending commitments outline, is 

projected to have a $250 million budget surplus for 2008-2009. 

They have the money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In describing the Station 20 development, Mayor Don Atchison 

in a February 2, 2007 news release, reiterated that with, quote: 

 

. . . the support of all our partners, it is the City‘s hope that 

. . . the recently announced Station 20 project, will 

demonstrate that the Pleasant Hill neighbourhood is 

leading the way in community renewal and revitalization. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this will not be the case. Although 

several years of work went into this project and co-operation 

between all levels of government had finally transpired, the 

Sask Party government‘s conservative ideology will not permit 

the project to proceed. 

 

The Station 20 project had the potential to vastly improve the 

health and economic status of those it served. It in turn would 

have provided an opportunity for the disenfranchised and 

struggling, a place that took their needs and dignity seriously. 

Moreover it would have undoubtedly saved health and welfare 

costs in the future. 

 

The decision of the Sask Party government to pick winners and 

losers, quite frankly, only confirms working people‘s notion of 

a greed economy — an economy that places the needs of the 

Sask Party corporate friends ahead of the interests of the 

working poor. In their short and, I fear, not too distant future, 

the Sask Party has been telling us that essentially only the 

private sector matters. More specifically, the well-being of their 

top corporate donors, who are primarily based in Alberta, 

matter. 

 

These sentiments, Mr. Speaker, are not just confined to the 

Station 20 issue. Rather they are conveyed by many 

well-regarded and fair-minded stakeholders from across the 

province. In describing the budget, Peter Gilmer of the Regina 

Anti-Poverty Ministry confirms that the budget delivers, quote: 

 

. . . very little in regards to putting resources directly into 

the hands of low-income people and ensuring that they 

will be able to afford rent. I don‘t think that this budget 

deals seriously with the question of poverty in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Larry Hubich of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 

reminds us that, quote, ―[infrastructure] . . . is more than bricks 

and mortar . . .‖ We need to also make sure we are investing in 

social infrastructure. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party government 

abruptly and callously leaving behind the working poor and 

putting the brakes on community-minded development, given 

the budget surplus and given the admission by their own 

minister that there is a housing crisis? 

 

Mr. Speaker, besides the working poor being left out of this 

budget, the Sask Party government clearly does not take the 

environment seriously. The larger environment and the issue of 

climate change is another shameful area of neglect by the Sask 

Party government in its first self-declared ready-for-growth 

budget. How can you be ready for growth if you do not take the 

environment and climate change into real consideration? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has come a long way on 

environment issues like greenhouse gas emissions and climate 

change. It used to be that they just flat out denied any kind of 

problem even existed. Now they don‘t do that any more — at 

least not in public. 

 

The budget, I believe, delivers a clear message about the Sask 

Party‘s ambivalence towards the whole issue of climate change. 

It lacks the financial resources needed to meet the aggressive 

climate change targets adopted by the Sask Party from the now 

largely disregarded NDP green strategy, no less. While the Sask 

Party government is adding $10 million in funding for green 

initiatives, the funding doesn‘t even come close enough, 

especially considering that this Sask Party government has 

completely scrapped the NDP‘s $320 million Green Future 

Fund. 

 

While the budget delivers a paltry sum for the environment, the 

Sask Party government has been preoccupied lately with a 

string of reannouncements alongside their Harper Conservative 

cousins in relation to the costly plan of a clean coal retrofit at 

the Boundary Dam power plant. Mr. Speaker, for all this 

government‘s cheer about this announcement, the clean coal 

project — once it is up and running and in the projected seven 

years, that is — will not come close to fulfilling its targets. 

Likewise the retrofit itself will only divert 1 million of the 

roughly 13 million tonnes of CO2 as we as a province produce 

each year via power generation. 

 

Also this project is, among all counts, financially irresponsible. 

The $1.4 billion project, with likely cost overruns projected in 

the billions, would be chiefly financed by the province. 

According to the deal the Harper Conservatives will only give a 

one-time donation of $240 million. The rest is up to the 

province to absorb. This type of announcement sure does 

conjure up images of the past, Mr. Speaker. Fortunately the 

overplayed message that a megaproject would be just the thing 

to bring this province closer to the divine is already wearing 

thin. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, as I outlined earlier in my speech, when 

assessing the meaning and acceptability of the Sask Party 

budget, one must take into account both what is said in terms of 

actual money commitments, and what the budget does not say. 

What this budget says is that the Sask Party does not wish to 

reach greenhouse gas reduction. Concurrently what this budget 

does not say is that the Sask Party mantra of securing the future 

is only really about securing corporate profits indefinitely, and 

further, ahead of the interests of working people. 

 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats know that we can‘t think 

about the economy and about prosperity without thinking about 

its environmental impacts. This province needs vision like the 

NDP‘s green strategy that was scrapped by the Sask Party 

government, a vision that reflects the realities of a complex 21st 

century economy. A government serious about climate change 

would recognize that the fundamental goals of an economy are 

simultaneously to create financial stability, promote human 

development, increase social equity, and improve 

environmental quality. 

 

In the business community this is known as the new bottom line 

— the third bottom line approach — and it is a line that is taken 

seriously in the Scandinavian countries. A successful economy 

of the 21st century that is indeed ready for growth would 

consider the concerns of working people and the environment 

as priorities, as such would invest adequately in the needs of 

our community that people want and need. It would build rather 

than take away the ability of governments to provide a 

framework for our economy. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Someone has to look out for the common good, and that quite 

frankly is what working people expect from their government. 

The Sask Party has shown through such actions as their lump 

sum payment to Enterprise Saskatchewan in this budget that it 

is the antiquated 19th century notion of economics — greed 

before people. Why would the Sask Party government do this, 

Mr. Speaker, besides the esoteric Enterprise Saskatchewan that 

has as its goal to increase competitiveness that will ultimately 

make government less democratic, create a back door for 

decision making, and — not to put too fine a point on it — 

easier to pollute and easier for the government to shrug their 

responsibilities when it comes to the environment and 

ultimately the health of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Health is more than just a number of nurses, Mr. Speaker. It is 

also the quality of our environment. The people of this province 

work hard. They know better than anyone else that nothing 

comes for free. We‘ve seen that, having to climb our way back 

from the wonderful debt that the Devine Conservatives left us. 

 

The economy of today should contribute in reducing social 

inequality, enhance democracy, and create good quality and 

safe jobs. Working people deserve a voice. Instead the Sask 

Party‘s budget is tantamount to affirming many people‘s 

concept of a greed economy. We need to support working 

people of this province, the people who built this province with 

their toil every day. Many of these people are ordinary, 

hard-working people who care for others. This budget does not 

adequately create opportunity for them to live better lives. 

 

If the Sask Party really wanted to secure the future for people, 

they would not clearly leave out the poor and the working poor. 

If the Sask Party was really ready for growth, they would not 

have given the equivalent of pennies to an environmental issue 

that will undoubtedly pose the greatest challenge of our future, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I join my fellow New Democrats in demanding 

more support for working people and the environment. We call 

on the Sask Party government to get serious and invest in 

affordable housing ventures such as Station 20 West and invest 

more in green initiatives with the goal of actually meeting 

climate change targets. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I stand in opposition of the motion 

and in agreement with the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

with excitement and a feeling of pride to have the opportunity 

to speak to the first Saskatchewan government budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government stands for hope, pride, and a 

bright future for our great province. This, our government‘s first 

budget, is based on two pillars. The first, Mr. Speaker, is the 

preparation of this province for economic growth. The Sask 

Party government introduced the most aggressive investment in 

infrastructure in the history of this province — the 1 billion 

ready-for-growth initiative. Mr. Speaker, a new report from the 

Canada West Foundation predicts Saskatchewan will lead the 

country in economic growth in 2008. 

 

We look to the West, Mr. Speaker, and we made note. We are 

working hard and preparing this province for growth. We are 

preparing and paving the way so we can minimize the negative 

effect that comes with substantial growth. 

 

The second pillar, Mr. Speaker, is to keep our promises. Mr. 

Speaker, we made promises in the 2007 campaign, and we 

intend to keep those promises. To date we have kept 40 of those 

promises made. Already, Mr. Speaker, we have fulfilled these 

promises made to the good people of our province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government will provide $3.2 million 

to implement the child and family service case management 

system, and this will upgrade one of the systems that was used 

in Social Services which was severely outdated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our budget speaks very well to addressing some of 

the social issues in our communities. And quite frankly, I‘m 

getting really irritated by the sanctimonious, better-than-thou 

attitude of the opposition. It is something to speak about 

poverty. You can speak about poverty, and that‘s all you can do 

about it. You don‘t understand it. You‘ve never worked in it. 

You don‘t know it. 

 

One member opposite from Massey said that the Sask Party was 

going to war with the poor. It‘s absolutely ridiculous, and the 

other thing is . . . to not have any experience . . . or the 

behaviour of the government, the previous government, was 

less than stellar when it came to social issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — I‘ve seen what the members opposite have 

done. In 1999, Mr. Speaker, while working for the Saskatoon 

Police Service, I was transferred into community services and I 

worked in inner-city schools, inner-city elementary schools. At 

that time I met a teacher by the name of Patti Sebestyen, a 



496 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

winner of the Prime Minister‘s teacher of excellence award, and 

she taught me some very, very good things. 

 

She‘d been working for at-risk youth for 35 years, and her way 

of communicating with these youths was just amazing. She 

used a choice theory. She talked about what it means to be 

respectful. And some young at-risk youth involved in gangs, 

that‘s what they say to you. You say, okay, what do you expect 

out of coming to school? I want respect. Well she would say, all 

right, what‘s the behaviour that goes with respect? How does 

someone behave in a fashion that is respectful? You don‘t wear 

your gang colours. You say please and thank you. And 

eventually these kids would just step up to the plate and they 

did wonderful, wonderful work. 

 

Between 2000 and 2003 the children-not-in-school issue was 

becoming very, very serious in Saskatoon. The community got 

together and partnered, and there were meetings at the regional 

intersectoral committee which the previous government had set 

up. Everybody in the community as well as government people 

had agreed to a plan to address truancy in our city. 

 

What we did know about truancy at that time — and it 

continues today — is that in a group of elementary school 

children that were chronically truant, 53 per cent of these 

children were victims of crime. Fifty-three per cent of these 

children experienced violence in the home. Eighty per cent of 

these children live in poverty. They actually live it; they don‘t 

talk about it. Fifty-three per cent have been victims of sexual 

abuse. Seventy-three per cent of these children, either the child 

or the parent have a substance abuse issue. And 13 per cent of 

these children — and these are elementary children — are 

involved in the sex trade. 

 

Now the average attendance for these kids was 56 per cent. You 

cannot get an education attending school 56 per cent of the 

time. Now what‘s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that all of 

the indicators for issues — health issues like substance abuse, 

social issues like violence in the home; addiction issues — 

these indicators of truancy are in the education domain. So the 

theory was and still is that if you can intervene and work with 

the child and the family, you can address the root causes of the 

behaviour or the root causes of the substance abuse, domestic 

violence, etc., and people will make different choices and things 

will get better. 

 

Another study that wasn‘t done in Saskatoon but it was a study, 

a research academic study by Seng-Magnus. They researched 

school dropouts and they researched truancy, and this is what 

they found. 15.9 per cent of children, victims of sexual abuse, 

drop out of school. 55.2 per cent of child victims of sexual 

abuse are truant. So if you‘ve got a truant child, you would look 

at the situation and question if there is sexual abuse. Forty-five 

per cent of adolescent victims of the sex trade drop out of 

school — 45 per cent. 77.8 per cent of adolescent victims of the 

sex trade are truant — 77.8, Mr. Speaker. That means that the 

kid that is truant has a 77.8 per cent chance of being involved as 

a victim of the sex trade. That‘s huge. 

 

We should be working with education. We should be working 

with Social Services to look at the indicator to intervene and 

address these issues — not just talk about them. 

 

The average age of girls entering prostitution in Canada is 14 

years old. What does a 14-year-old do normally? They play 

baseball. They even might watch cartoons still, but they don‘t 

sell their bodies for sex. But in Saskatoon and Regina, that‘s 

exactly what they do. And what have we done? What has that 

government done? That past government has done nothing. 

 

So the whole community was motivated and had a plan. And 

we went to work in Saskatoon to address the issue of truancy, to 

help the less fortunate. The community invited Education under 

that government, Health under that government, Justice under 

that government, and Social Services under that government to 

work with us on this issue. We asked the government for a 

tracking system for children. We do not have a tracking system 

for children in school. You cannot find out by running on a 

computer a child‘s name and discovering that they attended 

valley school, then red school, and now they‘re in blue school. 

It doesn‘t exist. Well it didn‘t at that time. 

 

So in 2001 we said build us a system so we know how bad the 

problem is. That government said yes. Well in 2002, in 2003, in 

2004, ‘05, and ‘06 they failed, Mr. Speaker. They did nothing. I 

ask you, Mr. Speaker, is this or that the behaviour of a 

government with a social conscience? No. So we asked Social 

Services: partner with us. The children that are chronically 

truant have child protection needs. Let‘s look into this. And the 

government said yes, but they did not follow through. They did 

nothing. Is that the behaviour of a government with a social 

conscience? 

 

Our government, our Saskatchewan Party government fixed 

that tracking system. We now have a tracking system under a 

government . . . that the previous government accuses us of not 

having a social conscience. This government cares about 

children and cares about our community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — So after four years — from 2000 to 2004 — 

of talking about children not in school, asking for support from 

the government, getting monies . . . We got monies from the 

federal government to work on this issue, but nothing from the 

province. Is that the behaviour of a government with a social 

conscience? No. 

 

Around that same time, Mr. Speaker, a former MLA of the Sask 

Party by the name of Arlene Julé brought sexual exploitation to 

the forefront in this province. She fought long and hard with her 

party against the government of the day, the NDP. And finally 

an all-party committee was formed and recommendations were 

made. Less than 50 per cent of those recommendations to do 

with sexual exploitation of our young people were followed 

through upon by the former NDP government. 

 

[16:45] 

 

One of those recommendations was as simple as to dedicate one 

social worker in Saskatoon to work specifically with the 

Saskatoon Police Service and Egadz to work with the sex trade 

workers. That‘s simple. And guess what that government did, 

Mr. Speaker? That government, that NDP government did 

nothing. They did nothing. Is that the behaviour of a 

government with a social conscience? 



April 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

Well around that same time, Mr. Speaker, another thing was 

going on: Role of the School Task Force. The Role of the 

School Task Force recommended after hearings that the Nutana 

model . . . or a model where the school is the centre of the 

community and that health workers would go into the school, 

social workers would go into the school and be able to work 

with the community at the centre of the community, as opposed 

to poverty-stricken people who don‘t have vehicles driving 

down to Sturdy Stone in downtown Saskatoon or taking the bus 

or whatever. And that was the recommendation. Did that 

government follow through? No. 

 

They created SchoolPlus, gave a little bit more money to 

education, washed their hands, and walked away with zero — 

zero change, zero change. Is that the behaviour of a government 

with a social conscience? No. 

 

So in Saskatoon, the health district in 2005 did a disparity 

study, a health disparity study. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I know there‘s strong 

opinions on the subject, and members have the opportunity to 

enter the debate as well. I‘d ask members to allow the member 

from Saskatoon to continue with her comments at this time. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — So the disparity study was done in 2005, 

inner city of Saskatoon. It was published in 2006 in the 

Canadian Journal of Public Health. I‘m sure the minister of the 

day would have read it. However, however, Mr. Speaker, what 

they found was that 46 per cent, only 46 per cent of children in 

the inner city are immunized — 46 per cent. 

 

The infant mortality rate in the inner city is that of a third-world 

country. And one of the reasons, one of the reasons, is because 

the mothers living in poverty don‘t have cribs. They sleep with 

their babies and inadvertently suffocate them. That‘s one of the 

reasons that the infant mortality rate is so high. 

 

The HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] rates in the inner 

city, in the young Aboriginal population is growing at a faster 

rate then it did when it was discovered in the homosexual 

population in the ‘80s. So what does the NDP minister of 

Health, what does the socially-conscious NDP do? Well they 

refused to supply Egadz who drive around and give coffee and 

condoms to sex trade workers. The Health people refuse to 

supply Egadz with condoms, so Egadz gets, Egadz gets their 

condoms through money from the Muttart Foundation in 

Alberta. 

 

Is that the behaviour of a socially conscious government? This 

government, in our budget, Mr. Speaker, just gave Egadz one 

half million dollars to do the good work that they do, besides 

what we regularly give them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — So let‘s talk about Station 20 because you 

know, it‘s very different, Mr. Speaker, to sit and talk about . . . 

oh I‘ve got a social conscience and you don‘t although I‘ve 

never been in poverty, worked with poverty, smelled poverty. 

They throw that word around. So Station 20, granted, is a good 

idea. What‘s wrong with Station 20? What‘s wrong with the 

situation is that health care should be the centre focus. That 

should be the focus because that‘s what the disparity study said. 

 

This government had since 2006 — actually 2005 — to open up 

an immunization clinic in the inner city but they didn‘t do that. 

They want to open up a grocery store instead, and the people 

who are going to give the health care . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . The most important thing in Station 20 is health care. 

Absolutely correct. That health care is being provided by the 

community clinic today — today — at zero dollars. 

 

And they do not want to relocate into Station 20 because Station 

20 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The members allow the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland to present her remarks, and then other 

members will be recognized. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Station 20, Mr. Speaker, what it will 

provide is less than what we can presently provide in the inner 

city. Community health is giving the health services that are 

needed and will be expanding those health services. We don‘t 

need a grocery store. Those kinds of services are also being 

provided at St. Mary School, the school that Mr. Calvert refused 

to fund, member opposite, former premier.  

 

So you know, I think that the reason why the partners . . . If 

you‘ve noticed anything, Mr. Speaker, you have to notice that 

the partners — these partners that the opposition talks about 

with Station 20 — have said zero in the news. They‘ve said 

zero, zero, zero because they don‘t support it. If they supported 

it, they‘d be talking but they‘re not. The support is all in your 

minds, is in the minds of the members opposite, not in reality, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — So we want this; the community 

doesn‘t? 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Yes. So the school, St. Mary‘s is providing 

pediatrician services. And it was so successful that they had to 

buy another examining room table to allow another pediatrician 

to come in and have more office. Does the Department of 

Health buy it? No. No. The school system buys it. 

 

The members opposite need to get their facts straight. They‘re 

lost. They‘re lost, Mr. Speaker. They don‘t know what they‘re 

talking about. 

 

So in our budget, Mr. Speaker, in our budget, a budget of a 

supposedly no-social-conscience party, in our budget there is 

298.5 million in total funding for income assistance program, 

including 1.1 million for enhancement to rental housing 

supplements to address the former government‘s lack of future 

planning. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government will support those in need 

by providing 2.4 million to support a growing caseload of 

individuals with intellectual disabilities, accessing residential 

and day programs. 

 

And let‘s take that a step further. A lot of these intellectual 

disabilities are from FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder], 

fetal alcohol syndrome. So KidsFirst was supposed to address 

that. Now what I don‘t understand is that KidsFirst is not 



498 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2008 

available to all of the inner-city residents, and a lot of times 

they don‘t work with the moms prenatally. Now call me crazy, 

but how do you prevent fetal alcohol syndrome by working 

with a mom postpartum? You can‘t. You know, the simplest 

things just escape those people. 

 

So this budget doubles the caregiver tax credit from 4,095 to 

8,190. This budget doubles the infirm dependant tax credit from 

4,095 to 8,190. This budget increases the disability supplement 

tax credit from 4,095 to 8,190. This budget increases the 

disability amount for self tax credit from 7,021 to 8,190. This 

budget provides 2.9 million for a 2.3 per cent increase for 

approximately 300 CBOs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that the behaviour, is this the kind of budget . . . 

This is the kind of budget that is put forth by a party, a 

government, that truly understands and cares about its people. 

They don‘t . . . We‘re not just talking about it; we are doing it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am proud to be a member of this government. I feel that this 

budget, Mr. Speaker, is fair, balanced, and responsible. I am 

proud of my leader, Mr. Premier; my cabinet; and my caucus. 

And I will be supporting this government‘s budget. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‘s an 

honour and a privilege for me to stand in the House today and 

represent the good people of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. 

I‘m very proud to take part in the budget debate today. 

 

I‘ve had the opportunity to speak to a number of my 

constituents over the past couple of weeks, since March 19 

budget day, a budget that was very ably delivered by our 

excellent Minister of Finance. I listened very carefully to what 

my constituents had to say about the budget . . . 

overwhelmingly in favour of it, Mr. Speaker, different people 

for different reasons, things that touch them personally or 

people close to them. But the one thing that I kept hearing over 

and over from every single one of those people, the reason that 

they were in favour of this budget and appreciated this budget is 

because we were keeping our promises. 

 

We kept a number of our campaign promises even before the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. But with the budget came many more 

promises kept. We‘re delivering on our promise to provide an 

extra $5 million a year to community-based organizations that 

provide life skills and employment training. We‘re delivering 

on our promise to make children‘s activities more affordable by 

announcing the new active families‘ benefit starting in the 2009 

tax year. We‘re delivering on our promise for an improved 

prescription drug plan, providing a $15 cap on drugs for 

children age 14 and under. 

 

We‘re delivering on our promise to make our communities safer 

by putting more police officers on the streets. We‘re providing 

an additional $3 million to hire 30 more police officers. That‘s 

step one in our four-year plan to increase police officers. 

 

We‘re delivering on our promise to get rid of the campfire 

permit fee, the wiener roast tax. People hate that tax, Mr. 

Speaker. We promised to get rid of it, and we‘re delivering. 

We‘re delivering on our promise to increase funding to school 

lunch and hunger programs. We‘re delivering on our promise to 

add more drugs to the prescription drug plan. We‘re providing 

$6 million to make new prescription drugs available for many 

of our citizens. 

 

We‘re delivering on our promise to double the caregiver tax 

credit for those caregivers that are helping family members. But 

we‘re doing more than that, Mr. Speaker. We‘re also increasing 

other tax credits that assist families who are caring for disabled 

family members. 

 

We‘re delivering on our promise for initiatives to keep more of 

our educated young people in the province. We‘re offering 

$20,000 in tuition fee rebates over seven years following their 

graduation. This is an important initiative, Mr. Speaker. We 

need to keep our bright young grads in this province. They‘re 

our future. 

 

We‘re delivering on our promise to fully fund the agriculture 

risk management programs, crop insurance and the 

AgriStability and AgriInvest programs. Over . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 5 p.m., the Assembly 

stands recessed until tonight at 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 469 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 469 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 469 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Cancer Awareness Month 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 470 

 Extremist Comments 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 470 

 Better Business Bureau Torch Awards 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 470 

 Fossil Fools Day 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 

 Acknowledging Saskatchewan Hockey Teams 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 471 

 Hindu Society’s Annual Banquet 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 

 Saskatchewan Politics 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 471 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Environmental Impact of Oil Sands Development 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 472 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 472 

 Funding for Station 20 West 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 473 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 473 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 474 

 Emergency Shelter Spaces in Saskatoon 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 475 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 475 

 The Government’s Performance 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 476 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 476 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 20 — The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi sur l’administration des successions 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 477 

  Taylor (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 477 

  Gantefoer (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 478 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 478 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 479 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 480 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 483 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 487 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 491 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 492 

  Schriemer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 495 

  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 498 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


