




















































Hansard: April 07, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 21B  MONDAY, APRIL 7, 2008, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 625 

 April 7, 2008 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased again to stand and enter and return to my comments on 

the motion before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start by, as I mentioned earlier this 

afternoon that there’s one little gentleman who likes to watch 

his grandpa on television and thinks it’s his responsibility to sit 

and watch his grandpa the entire time that he’s speaking. 

 

And so I talked to my grandson here over the supper hour and 

he was wondering if gramp would be getting back up tonight. 

So I said I would say a special hello to my grandson Liam, a 

very special young man in my life and one who brings joy to his 

grandpa at every opportunity. And he’s a very special little boy 

that I call my angel so just wanted to say hello to him. And 

Liam, I hope you don’t listen to grandpa all night and get a 

good night’s sleep. 

 

Well I would like to start my remarks by recapping where we 

were this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We started this 

afternoon, we started this afternoon talking about a motion, this 

particular motion that the government brought forward and how 

they decided to do it, Mr. Speaker. How they, because of their 

own incompetence, their own ability, Mr. Speaker, to manage 

the rules of the House and to manage their own agenda . . . 

we’re in a situation where they moved a motion, Mr. Speaker, 

they moved a motion to unilaterally — unilaterally, Mr. 

Speaker — change the rules of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start by quoting from a book called “The 

Role of the Legislature,” written by one Merrilee Rasmussen, 

and I’m going to go directly to the conclusion, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this conclusion I think is very relevant to the 

debate we’re in today, and it’s talking about the role of the 

legislature and the erosion of the legislature in the period of 

time from 1982 to 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it says: 

 

The erosion of the legislature continues, albeit perhaps 

somewhat more slowly than at times in the past. The 

Devine Conservatives believed that they had a majority of 

the seats in the legislature so they could do whatever they 

wanted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the same situation we face today. 

We have a majority government elected just four months ago 

who believe they can do whatever they want because they won 

the election and they have a majority. Mr. Speaker, there is no 

consideration for minority and majority rights. Mr. Speaker, 

there is no consideration for looking at what is in the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they have 

decided that they will do exactly what they want to do, and if 

they need to, they will unilaterally change the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes to talk about 

legislatures and the responsiveness of parliaments and 

legislatures to the people of Saskatchewan, the people of 

Canada, and how people view some of these high-handed, 

unilateral-type moves. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start with a paper written by 

one Chuck Strahl, and it’s talking about “Toward a More 

Responsive Parliament” in Canada. This particular paper is 

written by Chuck Strahl and it references Stockwell Day, who 

was at that time the leader of the official opposition in the 

House of Commons: 

 

. . . [And Mr.] Day, the Leader of the Official Opposition, 

said during the recent election campaign, “Canadians are 

justly proud of our heritage of responsible government. 

But our parliamentary democracy is not all that it should 

be. Too much power is exercised by the Prime Minister 

instead of being shared by our elected representatives.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s very, very similar to the situation we are 

facing today. We’re facing a situation where, rather than using 

the rules of democracy, the rules of the legislature of 

Saskatchewan, we have a government, through its Premier and 

its Executive Council, deciding that they are going to curtail the 

rights and abilities of the minority opposition here and in fact 

unilaterally change the rules to ram through their agenda on a 

time frame that’s not possible to do within the framework of the 

rules in this legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s being done 

without consideration of the rights of the Saskatchewan 

citizens, the people of Saskatchewan, stakeholders, and in fact 

members of this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say about the time allocation for 

debates and that: 

 

The excessive use of the rules to curtail debate over the 

years has diminished the effectiveness of debate in our 

parliamentary system. While the rights of the opposition 

are immediately and most visibly at stake, ultimately the 

threat is to the democratic rights and freedoms in general 

[in our country]. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have Chuck Strahl, in a paper written for 

the House of Commons, talking about how a government using 

its majority to abuse the rights of the minority is in fact 

curtailing the democratic rights of parliamentarians in our 

country. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what’s going on 

today. We have a government who is unilaterally using their 

power to curtail the democratic rights of the minority — in this 

case, the New Democratic opposition in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing it in a very high-handed way. 

Mr. Speaker, just a few months ago when we were in the 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

government, Mr. Speaker, if they, when in opposition, asked for 

the opportunity to send a Bill out to consultation or for a Bill to 

be considered by stakeholders, Mr. Speaker — they needed 

additional time to consult others — what did we do? Mr. 

Speaker, we granted them that time. We wanted to ensure that 

the principles of our democracy and the principles of our 

system of government were upheld. Mr. Speaker, we have an 

opposition today that still believes in those principles but a 

government that does not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been issues of conflict in legislatures for 

hundreds of years. Mr. Speaker, there have always been issues 

in debate, issues of conflict, and where there’s disagreement. 

But, Mr. Speaker, the true test of a democracy and a true test of 

a legislature or true test of a parliamentary system is how you 

resolve those issues, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why 

you put rules in place. 

 

You put rules in place to govern the debate in the legislature. 

You put rules in place to govern the outcome at the legislative 

level, Mr. Speaker. But when one side or the other unilaterally 

decides they’re going to abuse those rules, Mr. Speaker, then 

you no longer have balance between the minority and majority 

rights. You no longer have the interests of the people at heart, 

Mr. Speaker; you in fact have your own self-interest at heart. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re seeing today. We’re seeing 

today a government that’s using its majority power to 

unilaterally change the rules because, Mr. Speaker, because 

they could not, they could not get through their own agenda. 

They couldn’t put a time frame in place. They couldn’t put 

forward a workable schedule, Mr. Speaker, that would in fact 

allow them to move their agenda forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is pure incompetence, Mr. Speaker. They 

control when this session started, Mr. Speaker, and they also 

control what legislation and what they put forward on the 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These rules that we all live by in this Assembly were agreed to 

by all political parties, agreed to by all members of this House, 

and, Mr. Speaker, they knew what the rules were and they knew 

what to expect. And, Mr. Speaker, when you help make those 

rules, when you help negotiate what the outcomes of those rules 

should be and then, Mr. Speaker, when you’re in opposition 

they’re good rules for you but the minute you become 

government they’re no longer good for you because they don’t 

allow you to do unilaterally what you want to do, that’s 

shameful. That’s absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t work. It doesn’t work. You can’t, 

when you’re opposition, demand one set of rules and say they 

have to be adhered to, and then when you’re in government say 

oh well we don’t like the rules anymore, and we’re not going to 

adhere to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that all occurred over a four-month period. 

The new government was only elected four months ago. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to quote from this book again, “The Role of the 

Legislature.” And it’s says: 

 

The conflict between the executive government and the 

legislature in Saskatchewan during the 1980s and the early 

1990s has resulted in a permanent erosion of this 

democratic component of the institution of parliament in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this book talks about, it talks about the 

unilateral use of power by the executive branch of government 

during the period of 1980s has permanently eroded — 

permanently eroded, Mr. Speaker — the democratic principles 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote again from page 19 of this 

book . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — . . . are you going to table those 

documents you’re quoting from? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Yes. Mr. Speaker, they asked if I will table these 

documents. I will certainly, certainly will table these 

documents, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s very important that these 

individuals get the opportunity to read this book. I think it’s 

very, very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it says in here that . . . and this is coming from the 

Chief Justice, Bora Laskin, described it in this way, and he’s 

talking about, Mr. Speaker, the difficulty of the abuse of power 

in Ontario in this particular case: “That there is no principle in 

this county, as there is not in Great Britain, that the Crown may 

legislate by proclamation or order in council to bind citizens 

where it so acts without the support of a statute of the 

legislature [Mr. Speaker].” So, Mr. Speaker, we have no rules 

here that allows a government to unilaterally do things that isn’t 

reinforced by a statute of legislature, of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have in this case a political party who 

negotiated a set of rules when they were in opposition, who not 

only write the rules but ensured that they were enforced in a 

way that they had the opportunity to send Bills to public 

hearings, that they had the opportunity to hold up legislation to 

get further consultations of stakeholders. And I gave examples 

this afternoon of both those circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we were in government and they were in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, we afforded them those rights and privileges which are 

anticipated in our rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they failed to give that same consideration, 

Mr. Speaker, when they became the government. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s shameful. When a government decides to abuse 

its majority power in the interest of itself and take away the 

rights that are guaranteed within the rules of this legislature in 

order to move their agenda forward in a manner in which they 

couldn’t do — they couldn’t do — within the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s shameful. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know full well, they 

know full well what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They have 

decided to unilaterally change the rules in this Assembly. They 

have decided that they are going to drive through an agenda 

whether it makes sense or not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few minutes to talk about a 

review done in Great Britain. It’s called the “Power to the 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

People.” It’s a report of power . . . an independent inquiry into 

Britain’s democracy, Mr. Speaker. And it’s talking about 

Britain’s democracy, which our Canadian democracy is 

founded upon, Mr. Speaker. As members opposite would know, 

that our parliamentary system is founded on the British system. 

And, Mr. Speaker, what they’re talking about in Great Britain 

would be very, very similar as to what is occurring today in 

Canada and in particular in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about the things that are weakening our 

parliamentary democracy, and this is in fact talking about Great 

Britain, but it fits very well here in Saskatchewan as well. And 

it says one of the things that is weakening democracy is the 

weakening of effective dialogue between governed and the 

governors, Mr. Speaker. When you’re taking away the 

opportunity for people to have input into the issues that are 

important to them, when you take away the right of legislation 

to got go out to public hearings for people to have input, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re talking specifically about governments who 

avoid taking things to public hearings, Mr. Speaker, or to public 

dialogue — governments who unilaterally bring forward 

agendas without consultation of either the general public or, Mr. 

Speaker, curtail debate in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about the rise of undemocratic political 

forces within Great Britain, Mr. Speaker. But that’s very similar 

here. That’s exactly what we’re seeing today. We’re seeing a 

political party move an agenda forward, Mr. Speaker, to 

unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker. That is the rise of 

undemocratic processes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They also talk about the rise of quiet authoritarianism within the 

government, Mr. Speaker. Those are all things that we face 

here. Mr. Speaker, the things that make people cynical about the 

political process, that make people believe that the political 

process doesn’t meet their needs we’re seeing today, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s no different in Great Britain than we’re seeing 

right here in this legislature today, Mr. Speaker, when we have 

a government who’s using their majority to unilaterally change 

the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing that because of their own 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker — couldn’t put forward an agenda 

that would allow them to pass their own budget and their own 

legislation in a timely manner. And, Mr. Speaker, they clearly 

control unilaterally what legislation they put forward, Mr. 

Speaker. They control what gets put on the order papers each 

day and, Mr. Speaker, they control how many days the House 

actually sits. In this case, Mr. Speaker, they controlled it 

because they unilaterally shortened the number of days we 

would sit, Mr. Speaker, denying the opposition the right to 

debate the issues in a timely manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say that “citizens do not feel that the 

processes of formal democracy offer them enough influence 

over political decisions . . .” So what it’s saying, Mr. Speaker, is 

people don’t feel that they have enough input into political 

decisions. They don’t have enough input into things that 

actually affect them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition is asking that two 

pieces of legislation go out for public hearing so that the public 

can actually come forward and make presentations, Mr. 

Speaker, what you’re trying to do is you’re trying to include the 

public in this process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What are they afraid of, Mr. Speaker? Why is the government 

afraid to allow the opposition and government members in the 

committee to take out two Bills for public hearings so members 

of the public and stakeholders can have their say, Mr. Speaker? 

What are they afraid of? Why are they afraid, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to include “. . . this includes party 

members who feel they have no say in policy-making and are 

increasingly disaffected,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so even in political parties where you have a 

government that has all its decisions made in the Executive 

Council, or for that matter all the decisions made in the 

Premier’s office, even members of that political party feel 

disenfranchised and disaffected by the decisions made by those 

in the Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t work. And, Mr. Speaker, where you 

have a government that is willing to unilaterally use its power, 

where it’s willing to unilaterally change the rules of the 

Assembly in order to move forward their own agenda, Mr. 

Speaker, it isn’t democratic any longer, Mr. Speaker. And it 

talks only about the incompetence of the Executive Council, the 

incompetence of the Premier and the Premier’s office, for 

usurping and going outside our democratic processes and 

outside the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a time and a place for everything. And, 

Mr. Speaker, in the first session of a new government’s 

mandate is not the time for them to change unilaterally the rules 

of the Assembly, to decide that the rules that other governments 

have had to live by, the rules that they agreed to, no longer 

apply to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rules of the Assembly should apply to all. And 

they should apply to all equally, Mr. Speaker. You should not 

have a government who believes they do not have to follow the 

rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the noise in the Assembly continues to get louder 

and louder. I can barely hear myself talk, let alone my 

colleagues hear this conversation or hear this debate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d like to say, Mr. Speaker, once again that the rules would 

indicate that the person with the floor should be able at least 

hear themselves, let alone their colleagues be able to speak, Mr. 

Speaker. And again it shows a total and complete disrespect for 

the rules of this Assembly. 

 

I’m going to quote, Mr. Speaker, Robert Kennedy. Robert 

Kennedy said, “[Every] time a man stands for an ideal, or acts 

to improve the lot of others, or strikes out against injustice, he 

sends forth a tiny ripple of hope . . . [Mr. Speaker].”  

 

Mr. Speaker, Robert Kennedy said that in 1966 and that’s as 

true today as it was in 1966. But today, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

government who is unilaterally changing the rules and saying 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

that it doesn’t care what anybody thinks. But they’re 

unilaterally going to do that. Mr. Speaker, that’s injustice. That 

is injustice. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is important that 

the members of this Assembly understand the importance of 

having rules that apply equally to everyone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen this government move unilaterally 

to change the rules without consultation of the opposition, 

without negotiations of the opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, I will 

admit that in the past many times we have changed the rules — 

the sitting hours as the session came to the end — through 

negotiation and in agreement of the House, moved by the 

government House leader, seconded by the opposition House 

leader. In a co-operative manner, we’ve moved to finish and 

complete the work of the Legislative Assembly in a timely 

manner. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that was done through 

co-operation and through negotiation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this move by the government was done 

unilaterally, without discussion with the opposition, without any 

co-operation of the opposition. Mr. Speaker, they don’t even 

want to talk to us. Fine, they say they’ll do it their own way, 

Mr. Speaker. Now that in the end, Mr. Speaker, is an offence to 

all of us. Mr. Speaker, it’s an offence to all of us. When the 

rules of this Assembly which we all agreed to cannot be held up 

by the members of this Assembly, then it’s an offence to us all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we continue to look at this issue there’s a 

number of things that I think are very important to be talked 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes to talk about the issue 

of competency. Mr. Speaker, we’re in this situation because the 

members opposite decided that they weren’t going to follow the 

parliamentary calendar, the legislative calendar that we had 

agreed to. And, Mr. Speaker, that legislative calendar was first 

printed and made known to all members of this Assembly in 

May 2007. It laid out what the calendar for implementation 

would be for the parliamentary session both last fall and this 

spring. Mr. Speaker, last fall it had us sitting 25 days. And I will 

acknowledge we had an election last fall and that would delay 

the introduction of the fall session of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But when we did go into the fall session, Mr. Speaker, all we 

did was sit for eight days, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we sat for 

eight days and eight days, Mr. Speaker, we sat. We sat for eight 

days, Mr. Speaker. And of those eight days, Mr. Speaker, five 

of them would have been budget debate, Mr. Speaker, which we 

didn’t even sit in the evenings because the members opposite 

didn’t want to sit in the evenings. And then we had the 

introduction of legislation and they closed the House down 

before we had the opportunity to debate any of the legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we had no opportunity, we had 

no opportunity in which to discuss that legislation. We had no 

opportunity to talk to people about that legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, we were supposed to start on 

March 3 this spring. When did we start? We started on March 

10. We started on March 10 because the members opposite 

decided — once again unilaterally — that we weren’t going to 

open the House until the 10th, Mr. Speaker, because they 

weren’t ready. They weren’t ready, Mr. Speaker; they weren’t 

ready to do their own jobs. 

 

So then, Mr. Speaker, because they weren’t ready to do their 

own jobs, two weeks into this current session, Mr. Speaker, in 

which they chose not to sit any nights, denying the members of 

the opposition the opportunity to debate that legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, taking away a good 14 hours of debate in the first two 

weeks and a good 25 hours of debate in the first week we didn’t 

sit, Mr. Speaker, denying a full 39 hours of debate for members 

of the opposition which would have passed two of their priority 

Bills, Mr. Speaker — two of their priority Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now because they didn’t do their job, and now because they 

didn’t understand what their job is, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

unilaterally going to change the rules, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that goes directly, that goes directly to competence, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we’re taking about competency, Mr. 

Speaker, while we’re talking about competency, Mr. Speaker, I 

think we need to talk about a number of other issues about 

competency, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the last four 

months we have seen from this government a number of things 

that bring into consideration their competency, Mr. Speaker, as 

does this unilateral change to the rules proposed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a newly elected government who has been in 

power for just a little over four months, the Sask Party’s racked 

up a number of issues around the issue of competency and 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government — and I’m going to start with some of the 

most recent ones — axed the funding for Station 20, Station 20 

West in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. A very innovative and popular 

program in the city of Saskatoon, and oh, they axed it because it 

was nothing but a grocery store in their own mind. Axed. 

People have problems in the community, Mr. Speaker, yet we 

saw over the weekend a rally of more than 2,500 people — 

2,500 people in Saskatoon — asking for the funding for Station 

20 to be restored, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I need once again to point out this: the 

former Grant Devine government took four years, four years in 

office before they could get a rally of 2,000 people or more 

against them; Mr. Speaker, this government managed to do it in 

four months. Now, Mr. Speaker, they might think that’s a good 

record, but, Mr. Speaker, it speaks directly to their 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the members opposite rip the funding 

right out of the stakeholder groups in Station 20, Mr. Speaker? 

They never answered those questions, Mr. Speaker. They never 

consulted with individuals, they never met with the individuals. 

They still are refusing to meet with the founders of Station 20. 

 

The Housing minister. This is really one that is a prize, Mr. 

Speaker. We had a minister of the Crown work on their budget, 

Mr. Speaker, sign off their budget. The minister was on 

Treasury Board, signs it off on Treasury Board, goes through 

cabinet, and then budget day comes along. At 4 o’clock in the 

afternoon the department meets and starts telling employees 

that there’s going to be a fundamental change that’s going to 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

affect 200 employees and there’s going to be a transfer of some 

200 employees — 140 of 200 employees — and about 75, 80 

employees lose their jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister says she knows nothing about it, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister stands out in a press conference, in a scrum, saying, I 

didn’t know anything about this, Mr. Speaker. Well how can 

you not know about it, Mr. Speaker? How do you not know 

about it when you’ve signed it off as the minister, when you 

signed it off on Treasury Board, when you signed it off in 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker? How can you not know what your 

department’s going to do? And then she has the audacity to 

blame the officials, Mr. Speaker, that they simply didn’t 

understand her position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen incompetence from this government 

that is beyond acceptable limits, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’ve been the government for four months, Mr. 

Speaker, and they still don’t know what they’re doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the Premier, the Premier on their website 

taking an endorsement from a blogger, you know, a prominent 

blogger here in Saskatchewan. Right? Called smalldeadanimals. 

It’s called smalldeadanimals, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has an 

endorsement from the founder of a website called 

smalldeadanimals on the Sask Party website, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this radical individual from . . . goes out and says 

some comments that, of course, are very offensive to 

everybody. And then all of a sudden the Premier doesn’t know 

anything about this. Doesn’t know anything about this 

endorsement of this individual and, of course, after we raise the 

issue they remove it from their website, Mr. Speaker, but only 

after somebody else raises the issue, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

they’ve got very short memories and very little understanding 

of what they’re doing in most cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s go back to the first big issue that, just hours 

. . . Some may say just days after the government was elected, 

but I think it was just hours after they were in a position to 

make public comment, Mr. Speaker. We had the Premier of the 

province, the Premier elected at that time saying the province’s 

finances were in stark condition. They were in stark condition, 

the province’s finances, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, he was 

saying that when there was more than $1.5 billion in the bank 

— $1.5 billion in the bank, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if that’s 

competency, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan 

need to check that for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they go and say on one hand the cupboard is 

bare, the finances are stark; and then they turn around and table 

a budget, Mr. Speaker, that’s 10 per cent increase year over 

year, Mr. Speaker — 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they still have $1.3 billion in a slush fund. That’s a 

stark financial situation — $1.3 billion, $1.3 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government that shows their competency 

by firing senior civil servants, Mr. Speaker, that have worked 

for governments of every stripe over the last 30 years, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these members who are now the 

government, who will unilaterally change the rules of this 

Assembly, believe they can do anything, Mr. Speaker. They 

believe because they have a majority government and they won 

an election on November 7 that they can do absolutely 

anything, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s shameful. 

That’s absolutely shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party’s incompetence is costing 

the people of Saskatchewan money. It costs the taxpayers of 

this province money. It costs millions of dollars in severance 

pay. It’s costing millions of dollars in reversing decisions, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it deals with the fundamental 

competency. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s just deal with the issue in front of us. 

Let’s deal with the motion that’s in front of us, Mr. Speaker. 

What’s the impact of this motion, Mr. Speaker? What does it 

cost to extend the hours, Mr. Speaker? What does it cost? Let 

me just give you a rundown of what it’ll cost, Mr. Speaker. It 

will increase the cost of overtime in the Legislative Assembly 

because people are going to have to work overtime in order to 

accommodate the extended hours, Mr. Speaker. That includes 

the Pages, the security personnel, the staff at the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, includes Hansard, includes those that 

are going to transcribe Hansard each day. It’s going to 

significantly increase the cost of operating the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. Have they taken that into consideration? 

 

[19:30] 

 

So their inability to plan, their incompetence, Mr. Speaker, the 

taxpayers have to pay. The taxpayers pay because the 

government has decided they are going to ram through their 

agenda on a time frame that’s unreasonable. And they cannot 

manage within the rules of the Assembly regardless of what the 

outcome is, Mr. Speaker, and regardless what it costs the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are having a great 

deal of difficulty understanding that what they’re doing isn’t (a) 

appropriate, and (b) isn’t principled in our democratic society, 

Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, they continue to chatter from 

their desks and make comment, Mr. Speaker, but they’ve 

chosen to move this motion, Mr. Speaker, and they have chosen 

to unilaterally bring forward this position. So, Mr. Speaker, they 

are failing to recognize the facts of this debate, Mr. Speaker, 

and they’re failing to recognize that what they are doing is in 

fact fundamentally changing the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take some time now and talk a bit about 

the history of the rules in our legislature, Mr. Speaker. Over the 

last couple of decades, Mr. Speaker, the parliaments have been 

modernized, the goal to make parliaments more efficient and 

effective, Mr. Speaker. A common feature of modernization is 

the parliamentary calendar, Mr. Speaker. So when this 

legislature puts forward a parliamentary calendar agreed to by 

all parties, Mr. Speaker, published, Mr. Speaker, for this session 

as early as May of last year, Mr. Speaker, what happens? The 

members opposite, we go through an election and they move 

from opposition to government and then, Mr. Speaker, they 

can’t even keep, they cannot even keep the calendar, Mr. 

Speaker. They want to change the rules . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Thank you very much. The member from 

Weyburn encouraged me to take a drink and I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so as we modernize our legislature and we put in 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

place a calendar, Mr. Speaker, which is a common feature of a 

modern legislature, Mr. Speaker, what happens? The first 

opportunity, the members opposite unilaterally decide not to 

open the session on March 3 but move it to March 10, denying 

the opposition 25 approximate hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when they did that, Mr. Speaker, when they 

changed the rules, Mr. Speaker, they shortened the session. And 

in shortening the session, Mr. Speaker, they made it more 

difficult to move forward their own agenda within the time 

frame that’s allowed within the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You guys agreed to it. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, they’re saying we agreed to shorten 

it from the 3rd to the 10th. That’s absolutely wrong, Mr. 

Speaker. They decided to do that unilaterally. They made the 

decisions. Mr. Speaker, they did that unilaterally. They did it 

without consultation, Mr. Speaker. And they did it in their own 

interest. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, so that denied the opposition 25 hours of 

debate time. It would’ve passed one of their pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, had they followed 

the rules that they had agreed to, one of their pieces of 

legislation would, in fact, could have been fully debated at this 

time, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, not only did they do that. 

In the first two weeks of the legislative session, Mr. Speaker, 

we didn’t sit evenings. We didn’t sit in evenings, again denying 

the 14 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they controlled the agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

They put forward what goes on the parliamentary calendar, Mr. 

Speaker, the legislative calendar each day, that what appears in 

the blues, Mr. Speaker. They decide each day what the issue of 

discussion is, Mr. Speaker. And they decided not, decided not, 

Mr. Speaker, to sit Monday and Tuesday nights the first two 

weeks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so we adopted a calendar and then they failed to 

use it, which has resulted in some of the significant problems 

they have in their time frame today. Mr. Speaker, the House of 

Commons in Ottawa adopted a parliamentary calendar in 1982, 

and I quote: “. . . in order to make the sitting and non-sitting 

times predictable.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason, the reason that you set a calendar is in 

fact to make the sitting times of the Legislative Assembly 

predictable. And, Mr. Speaker, it was predictable when the now 

opposition was the government. Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly not 

predictable today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the United Kingdom instituted a parliamentary 

calendar in 1992 as part of, and I quote: “a more sweeping 

modernization agenda,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s working elsewhere. Why can’t it work 

here? Well the reason it can’t work here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the government of the day, Mr. Speaker, either didn’t 

understand the rules they put in place, Mr. Speaker, or they 

simply are incompetent and cannot function within the rules 

that they agreed to. 

 

Parliamentary calendars have been instituted in Alberta in 1993, 

Manitoba in 1996, British Columbia in 2002. Mr. Speaker, 

they’re working everywhere else. The only place you have 

difficulty is here under this government in Saskatchewan. 

 

On May 15, 2006, the Standing Committee on House Services 

appointed a subcommittee to study delegation . . . whose 

purpose is, and I quote, “. . . to study and make 

recommendations on the adoption of a legislative calendar and 

revisions to . . . sitting times . . . [Mr. Speaker].” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we had a subcommittee that then the 

Minister of Government Services sat on, and on this side, it was 

then the member for Regina South who sat on the committee. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they went all the way to Australia to see how 

things worked, Mr. Speaker. They went all the way to Australia. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Do they work there? 

 

Mr. Yates: — And they work well there. Mr. Speaker, they 

can’t make it work here for some reason. And that’s rather 

ironic. 

 

The subcommittee was made up of the Speaker of the House, 

the opposition House leader and the government House leader 

and the member from Cannington and the member from Regina 

South. And it was a joint, co-operative, and collaborative effort 

between the government and the opposition, Mr. Speaker. And 

they all agreed. Mr. Speaker, they unilaterally agreed to the 

rules. On October 16 the Standing Committee on House 

Services, which was made up from members of the government 

and the opposition, unanimously adopted the recommendations 

of the subcommittee. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the rules were changed. The 

recommendations of the subcommittee were based on the 

experience of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan with 

an informal parliamentary calendar which we tried for a period 

of time — with an informal calendar — and we made it work, 

Mr. Speaker. Why? Because it wasn’t the government of the 

day in charge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you had a competent government in charge. It was 

understood what you had to do to move forward your legislative 

calendar, your legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker, and by the way, 

managed to get its business done, Mr. Speaker, without 

changing the rules unilaterally. Amazing — it can be done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I might point out, I might point out at that period of time, 

Mr. Speaker, that we had a one-person majority or one-vote 

majority in the government, where today they have a 19-vote 

majority, Mr. Speaker. And they still can’t make it work. It’s 

astounding, Mr. Speaker — absolutely astounding, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our changes were also based on reviews of what 

was happening in both Alberta, British Columbia, and 

Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, members of the subcommittee took the 

time to review the operations in the provinces of Alberta, 

British Columbia, and Manitoba as well and see how their 

parliamentary calendars were working and how the outcomes in 

the legislature worked for the benefit of the people of 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that in 

those provinces they managed to make things work without 

unilaterally changing the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the subcommittee also found out that 

the changes to the parliamentary calendar resulted in greater 

co-operation amongst members in the scheduling of Assembly 

and committee business. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s been a 

practice everywhere. And I would have to say, until now it’s 

been a practice in Saskatchewan. This is the first time where 

there has been no co-operation, Mr. Speaker, where the 

government unilaterally decided that they were going to make a 

rule change, or in fact going to ram through an agenda without 

any consultation, co-operation, or work with the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have a new government that doesn’t believe in the 

principles of democracy, Mr. Speaker — a new government that 

believes that might makes right, Mr. Speaker, that believe that 

you can bully people into moving forward with their agenda 

and their time frame, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate 

that we have today in Saskatchewan a government that’s 

heavy-handed, that believes that they can do whatever they 

want to do, and believes they can do anything on their time 

frame, Mr. Speaker; they can get away with absolutely 

anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was found out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the research that, 

if properly constituted, parliamentary calendars fix a number of 

problems. They fix the beginning and end dates of the session, 

and then there are far less days devoted to partisan manoeuvring 

by governments or oppositions. The subcommittee also found 

that a fixed calendar is a more efficient use of staff resources, 

Mr. Speaker — that you can plan the utilization of staff, Mr. 

Speaker, without incurring costs that you don’t foresee such as 

overtime, Mr. Speaker. That is the rules, Mr. Speaker. Planning 

makes good outcomes, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately here we 

have a government that’s not able to plan, not able to 

understand the rules, and must change them in order to 

unilaterally push through their agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was also found that fixed sessions provided 

ministers and members of the Legislative Assembly and their 

staff more time to manage their own affairs, more time to 

consult with their constituents, more time to consult with 

stakeholders, and overall was more efficient and effective, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what parliamentary calendars do to benefit the 

outcomes of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not working here today. Today we are faced 

with a situation where we have a government who wants to 

unilaterally bring forward changes to the hours of work, Mr. 

Speaker, and bring forward changes to the hours of work so that 

they can in fact, Mr. Speaker, so that they can in fact ram 

through, jam through pieces of legislation that the opposition 

would like to see go out for public hearings, Mr. Speaker — 

denying the opposition the time to properly do their jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. And denying, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 

the opportunity to be directly consulted on these pieces of 

legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members of the government should take 

into consideration what the needs of the stakeholders are, Mr. 

Speaker, what the needs of the people of this province are, Mr. 

Speaker, and they should allow Bills 5 and 6 to go out to public 

hearings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prior to an election, Mr. Speaker, prior to an 

election the government today said when they were in 

opposition that there was no need for essential service 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. We heard it from the now Health 

minister, who was then the Health critic, said there was no 

agenda to bring forward legislation, Mr. Speaker, that would in 

fact curtail the rights of members to strike, that there was no 

need for essential service legislation in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We also heard it from the Premier, Mr. Speaker, when he was 

the leader of the opposition and then amazingly, Mr. Speaker, 

out of the blue, Mr. Speaker, when they become government 

they have this piece of legislation already drafted and say 

they’ve been working on it for some time. The minister 

responsible for the legislation said that this legislation has been 

worked on for some time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is about their credibility. This is about their 

competence, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not about the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, because as we all know, Mr. Speaker, 

that the majority, in this case the government, has the ability to 

pass this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All we’re asking for is there be proper consultations, there be 

proper public dialogue on the Bills, Mr. Speaker, and that 

stakeholders, both business and labour, have the opportunity to 

share their positions, Mr. Speaker, that they have the right to be 

consulted, Mr. Speaker, and that maybe out of those 

consultations, Mr. Speaker, maybe out of those consultations 

we get a better piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. Maybe we get 

a better piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the government has no fear because in the 

committee process they also have the majority of seats, Mr. 

Speaker. They have four seats to the opposition’s two, Mr. 

Speaker, so that any changes that were made would have to be 

made with the co-operation of the government in the legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. All we’re asking is those Bills go out for 

consultations through the committee hearing process, Mr. 

Speaker, and both for stakeholders to have the opportunity to 

bring forward their positions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also heard very clearly as we were looking at 

the rule change process that parliamentary calendars help 

members balance their duties in the Assembly with their 

constituency and caucus responsibilities. In short, calendars 

make our lives much more predictable, Mr. Speaker, and make 

it much easier for us to do our jobs as legislators, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it also makes it easier on our families. 

 

One of the major considerations for members of the government 

who are largely centred in some of the larger urban areas, Mr. 

Speaker, was the consideration for those who had long 

distances to travel and who are away from their families four or 

five days a week, Mr. Speaker. So one of the things we ensured 

was that in this process we shortened the legislative calendar 

from five days to four days per week. 

 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

And we actually increased the amount of potential time by 

allowing two subcommittees of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, to 

do the work of the legislature that we used to do in the whole 

Assembly so that we could have two committees sitting at one 

time. So even though we were shortening the time we sat each 

week by one day, Mr. Speaker, we’re actually increasing the 

total number of hours in which we could debate the issues of 

the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our opportunity to improve this legislature 

through the subcommittee was supported by all members of this 

Assembly. The subcommittee was firmly convinced, firmly 

convinced that a permanent parliamentary calendar, and I quote, 

will: 

 

. . . make it easier for the Assembly, as a whole, to carry 

on its functions more effectively . . . [and] that a 

permanent parliamentary calendar . . . [was] the next step 

in furthering the modernization . . . [process in our 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the committee continued its work. The opposition 

and government House leaders agreed on changes, and we 

implemented a permanent calendar, Mr. Speaker. Now the 

permanent calendar anticipated, the permanent calendar 

anticipated that we would in fact sit in this year from the 3rd of 

March through to the 15th of May, Mr. Speaker. Well lo and 

behold, we didn’t start until the 10th, Mr. Speaker. So right off 

the bat, right off the bat, right off the bat we didn’t follow our 

permanent calendar. Mr. Speaker, we started late by a week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the members of the public that are 

listening this evening that the Sask Party was not only part of 

the creation of the new rules, Mr. Speaker; they were in favour 

of the new rules, Mr. Speaker. In fact they led the charge, Mr. 

Speaker. And when they were in opposition, they wanted to 

ensure that there was a minimum of 20 hours of debate on 

priority legislation, Mr. Speaker. And they wanted to ensure the 

rules that are in place today are as they were, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a press release dated October 16, 2006, the 

opposition House leader who is now the Government House 

Leader is quoted as saying, “These changes are about 

improving the way the legislative assembly works . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a bold statement. It’s about improving how 

the Legislative Assembly works. The now Government House 

Leader was the then opposition House leader that said that this 

is about improving how the Assembly works. Well how is it 

working for them, Mr. Speaker? It’s working so well that he 

doesn’t know how to manage their affairs, doesn’t know how to 

count the hours of debate required, and put it in the legislative 

calendar in such a way that he can move his agenda forward, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that deals with fundamental 

competency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on May 17, 2007, the same Sask Party member 

stood in this House and said I quote: 

 

. . . I believe this is the first full session where we’ve 

operated under the new rules of . . . [this] Assembly . . . 

[and] have been established and developed . . . in balance 

[where] we have been very successful in bringing our 

Saskatchewan legislature to the forefront of parliamentary 

process, not [only] in this province but also in this entire 

country [Mr. Speaker] . . . we can be all be rightly proud 

of all of the work that we’ve done to accomplish these 

changes. 

 

These changes . . . are for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan firstly . . . the fact that there is more 

predictability also, in particular, benefits our constituents and 

the people . . . of the province . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the now Government House Leader 

saying that these rules work, Mr. Speaker. Well they worked 

when we were the government, Mr. Speaker, because we know 

how to manage the agenda, Mr. Speaker. We know how to get 

our legislation through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s amazing now that they’re the government, the rules don’t 

work. They don’t work, Mr. Speaker. And they don’t even have 

a full legislative calendar yet, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got about 

20 Bills on the calendar, Mr. Speaker. That’s about half a 

legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a half a 

legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker, and they still can’t make it 

work, Mr. Speaker, not without unilaterally changing the hours. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of members opposite who by 

now must understand that something’s wrong over there. 

Something smells a little bit fishy because how can they not, 

how can the members opposite out there, Mr. Speaker . . . And I 

think a few of them are probably fishermen and have gone 

fishing a time or two, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

something is smelling a little bit fishy over there because they 

can’t get anything done. 

 

So what’s the problem, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, the 

problem is, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t want to work with 

anybody. Mr. Speaker, the day they got elected, they thought 

that, you know, they’d hit a home run, if you want to use a 

baseball analogy. But we’re using a fishing analogy, Mr. 

Speaker. They thought they caught the big one. You know, they 

caught the big one. They’re the government now. They’re out 

fishing. They caught the big one. They’re the government now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what they forgot, Mr. Speaker, not only do you got to get 

the big one the end of the hook; you got to be able to reel it in, 

Mr. Speaker. You got to be able to work your fishing rod, Mr. 

Speaker. And you got to be able to land that big fish, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they don’t know how to land the 

fish. Mr. Speaker, they don’t know how to get to the goal line, 

Mr. Speaker. They can’t get the fish in the boat, Mr. Speaker. 

They can’t get their agenda through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can’t get the agenda through, Mr. Speaker, 

and they’re saying they don’t have a big enough boat, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they say they don’t have a big enough 

boat. They forgot they’re fishing from the shore, Mr. Speaker. 

They don’t know what the boat’s for; that’s the problem. Mr. 

Speaker, they’re fishing from the shore, Mr. Speaker. They 

don’t need a boat. They haven’t figured that out either. 

 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

But, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t want to give them a rowboat or 

a motorboat or a sailboat or, Mr. Speaker, any type of boat. If 

they can’t manage simple rules, we don’t expect them to 

manage a boat very well. Mr. Speaker, their boat would have 

holes all . . . and then be filling full of water so fast because 

they don’t know how to play by the rules. Mr. Speaker, this rule 

change that they’re proposing is like their life jacket, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re sinking, Mr. Speaker, and they’re sinking fast, 

and they’ve got to try to find some way, some way to save 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the problem is what they grab for a life 

jacket is made for an eight-year-old, Mr. Speaker. What they 

grab for a life jacket is made for an eight-year-old. It won’t hold 

them up, Mr. Speaker. They’re sinking right now, Mr. Speaker. 

The members opposite, the members opposite are out fishing, 

Mr. Speaker. They fall in and they’re trying to be held up by a 

life jacket made for an eight-year-old, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 

sinking. They’re sinking. They don’t know what they’re doing, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re grasping at anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s this say about where we’re at? Mr. 

Speaker, this says very simply that this government, this 

government, Mr. Speaker, can’t manage its own agenda. They 

became the government four months ago, and they come into 

the first session of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. They introduce 

six priority Bills that require 120 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. 

They introduce a budget that requires 75 hour minimum debate 

in the estimates, Mr. Speaker. And lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, 

they put forward a legislative calendar that doesn’t give them 

enough time to pass their agenda. 

 

Now who’s responsible for that, Mr. Speaker? Not the 

opposition. The opposition’s not responsible for the 

government’s calendar. That deals directly with the competence 

of the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, then what you would expect a competent 

government to do, Mr. Speaker? A confident government would 

come to the opposition and say, can we make some sort of deal, 

Mr. Speaker. Can we make some sort of deal that will allow us 

to pass our agenda even though, even though we made a big 

mistake, Mr. Speaker? They’d acknowledge for themselves 

they’d made a big mistake. This government won’t 

acknowledge they made a big mistake, Mr. Speaker. They 

won’t acknowledge the mistakes they made. They dropped the 

ball, Mr. Speaker, but they won’t acknowledge they dropped 

the ball. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact the fish got away from them; that’s how 

bad it is. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, these guys . . . How 

bad these guys are is they put a ball out for bait to try to catch 

the fish. That’s how bad these guys are. They don’t understand, 

Mr. Speaker, anything about fishing. They go fishing from 

shore and talk about the need for a boat, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

fishing from shore, and they’re using a ball as bait, Mr. 

Speaker. No wonder we have problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the minister responsible for labour and employment and 

post-secondary education keeps giving us ideas about their 

competency, Mr. Speaker. He’s admitting they put a ball as bait 

on the fishing rod, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes well, Mr. Speaker, he’s done a little mixing up over there 

and that isn’t, Mr. Speaker, that’s not uncommon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, getting back to the issue at hand, when the 

government found out that they didn’t have the ability, that 

they’d mismanaged the issue of time in order to bring forward 

their agenda, Mr. Speaker, when they mismanaged that issue, 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t come to the opposition and say, look 

this is our problem; how can we fix it. No, Mr. Speaker, they 

didn’t decide to do that. They didn’t approach the opposition in 

an attempt to find resolution to the problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They decided we’re the government; we have the power so 

we’re going to unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s absolutely shameful. That is absolutely shameful 

that they would unilaterally decide to change the rules without 

any consultation. Mr. Speaker, that is their definition of 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. And that is shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re faced with a situation today where we have 

a government that believes they can do anything they want, that 

after they won an election on November 7 that this Assembly is 

for their own agenda only, Mr. Speaker. They don’t believe in 

the democratic principles or the rules of which we all passed 

and agreed upon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we’re faced with a situation where we have 

a government that’s prepared to use their majority to 

unilaterally ram through a change to the rules, that’s willing to 

in fact ensure that only the majority interest is upheld in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they have other 

options available to them. They could have come to the 

opposition and tried to find a negotiated settlement to their 

particular problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, I would again like to indicate to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan the legislation in which we are 

dealing with, the legislation that requires 20 hours of debate, 

Mr. Speaker, and what the impact of that legislation would be 

on the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 1, the first Bill they introduced is An Act 

respecting Saskatchewan’s Growth and Financial Security and 

repealing certain Acts, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this piece of 

legislation is to replace the financial fiscal stabilization Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But this new fund does exactly the same thing the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund did — with one minor exception, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it makes it legal, Mr. Speaker, to take the 

sale of Crown assets, Mr. Speaker, and actually put those 

Crown assets in the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker, and 

use it as funds for general revenue spending, Mr. Speaker. 

Previously those funds had to go to either pay down debt, Mr. 

Speaker, or to be used, Mr. Speaker, in the Crown Investments 

Corporation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if this piece of legislation didn’t pass this 

spring and continued on to this fall, it would still pass in this 

year, calendar year, Mr. Speaker, which would allow the 

government, Mr. Speaker, to (a) be able to have this legislation 

in place prior to the next budget. It would in fact could be 

implemented retroactively as much legislation is, but, Mr. 

Speaker, there is nothing saying that this Bill would not pass. 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely nothing saying this Bill would 

not pass in the regular time frames, Mr. Speaker — nothing but 

the imagination of the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

at most requires 20 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. We still have 

five and a half weeks of sitting, Mr. Speaker. Five and a half 

weeks, which within each week they can pass one priority Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, if they have their act together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s a difficult thing to ask them, to have their act together, 

Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, if they had their act together, 

Mr. Speaker, these Bills, that particular Bill would pass in one 

week of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s the second Bill that’s so important to the members 

opposite? Bill No. 2 is An Act respecting Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It puts in place the new entity of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Once again, Mr. 

Speaker, they can pass this legislation. Mr. Speaker, if the 

Government House Leader puts together an agenda and 

priorizes the Bills, Mr. Speaker, he can pass this Bill as well 

before the end of the session, Mr. Speaker, and he can put this 

into law. 

 

So he can put Bill 1 and 2 into law, Mr. Speaker, no problems at 

all by simply, by simply organizing his agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . oh we’re having some, we’re having some . . . 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t even pay the power bill. The lights are 

flickering and members on this side are asking, did they even 

pay the power bill, Mr. Speaker. People are concerned they 

couldn’t even pay the power bill appropriately, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, getting back to the issue before us, Mr. 

Speaker, what’s Bill No. 3? Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 3 — and I 

want the Government House Leader to listen very carefully — 

Bill No. 3 is An Act to repeal The Potash Development Act, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill was put in place in the 1970s, Mr. 

Speaker, and this Bill has never been implemented. Mr. 

Speaker, repealing this Bill makes zero difference, zero 

difference to any of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

It makes zero difference to the business community in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s simply on the wish 

list of the government. So Mr. Speaker, if this Bill . . . if you 

didn’t get to debate this Bill for 20 hours because you didn’t put 

it as a priority, Mr. Speaker, if the government didn’t put this as 

a priority, what’s the impact to the people of Saskatchewan? 

Nothing. Zero, Mr. Speaker. Zero, Mr. Speaker. Zero impact 

because this Bill has never been implemented and been on the 

books for more than 30 years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so 

now you can see why we’re questioning, why we’re 

questioning, why the government is saying they can’t get their 

agenda through in the time frame. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Let’s go to Bill No. 4. Bill No. 4 is a piece of legislation that 

amends The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 

Mr. Speaker, and puts in fixed election dates. They have pushed 

in the next election date to be November 7, 2011, Mr. Speaker 

— November 7, 2011. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, first off, 

that’s three and a half years or more away. So if this Bill didn’t 

pass till the fall, what’s the impact to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? If this Bill did not pass till the fall, 

Mr. Speaker, it has zero impact. Until November 7, 2011, three 

and a half years from now, what would the impact be on the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Nothing. So what’s the 

panic button? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re through the first four Bills, two of 

which they can pass easily, Mr. Speaker, and the other two it 

doesn’t matter if they pass. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now deal 

with Bill No. 5. Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 5 is An Act respecting 

Essential Public Services. Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that didn’t 

appear in their party platform, Mr. Speaker — didn’t appear as 

a priority, Mr. Speaker, prior to the election. In fact prior to the 

election, members sitting in opposition said they had no 

intention to do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, this Bill . . . Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill was not on the government’s agenda. This Bill was not 

in their platform. This Bill was an afterthought . . . or that’s 

what they would like us to believe. It was an afterthought, Mr. 

Speaker. But we heard the minister talk about this had been in 

preparation for months — for months. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

were saying that this Bill wasn’t in the works, and then all of a 

sudden, presto, it’s there. In fact I’d like to bring the attention of 

members back to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s hard to see in here. Do you find it 

difficult to read? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Yes, it is difficult to read. It is getting much 

more difficult to read. It’s getting dim here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but this particular piece of legislation was not a 

priority of the government when they were in opposition. In fact 

we had the opposition critic for Health say that they had no 

intention of doing this. We had the then leader of the 

opposition, the Premier, say it’s not in the order books, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s continuing to get more difficult 

to see in here, Mr. Speaker. It’s getting dim in here, and it’s 

obvious that we’re having some difficulty with the lights, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very important to talk about this particular 

piece of legislation. This is a piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that we’ve had stakeholders ask go out to public consultations, 

public hearings through our committee process — something 

that is anticipated as part of the deliberations in the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. It would be nice to have this piece of legislation go out 

for public hearings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what did we hear from the members opposite? No. No. 

They’re not going to take this Bill out for public hearings or for 

public consultation. And why, Mr. Speaker? Why are they not 

prepared to take this Bill out for public hearings and public 

consultations? They haven’t given us a reason why other than 

they’re just going to unilaterally ram it through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why can we not take a piece of legislation that 

they said wasn’t needed when they were in opposition out to 

talk to the business and labour stakeholders in our province to 

see if we can’t improve upon this particular piece of legislation? 

What are they afraid of, Mr. Speaker? The members of the 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

opposition cannot unilaterally change this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. It would take a majority of the members which . . . 

Each committee consists today of four members of the 

government and two from the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we now have covered five Bills. Mr. Speaker, 

and as I pointed out earlier, the government could pass four 

Bills, if they just managed the session, quite easy. And two of 

the Bills have no impact at all. Two have no impact. The Bill 

dealing with The Potash Development Repeal Act has no 

impact. And, Mr. Speaker, the one that in fact puts in fixed 

election dates, November 7, 2011, if we don’t pass this till this 

fall — lo and behold — we’ll only be three years ahead of time. 

We’ll only be three years ahead of its implementation needs. 

Mr. Speaker, I can’t understand what the big issue is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final Bill that’s a priority Bill for the 

government is An Act to amend The Trade Union Act. This in 

fact is a Bill that they made very clear when they were in 

opposition that they were going to amend, Mr. Speaker. But 

again this is a Bill that if they just stuck to the rules and they 

prioritize their debate, they could in fact pass, Mr. Speaker. But, 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve chosen not, they’ve chosen not to take the 

opportunity to follow the rules that we all agreed to, and they 

move forward with this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it is getting darker in here; it’s 

getting more difficult to see. But, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I rise on a 

point of order. I rise on a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — What’s the point of 

order? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the member who has been 

in his place speaking now for some time has repeatedly drawn 

attention to the fact that it’s difficult to see in the Chamber. It’s 

apparent, I think it’s apparent to all in the Chamber that a short 

while ago the lights dimmed appreciably. 

 

And I wonder if, Mr. Speaker, would be so kind as to inquire 

from the staff that maintain the building as to how long we will 

continue to have to operate in this subdued atmosphere. I am 

not suggesting for a moment that the proceedings be halted. But 

I would ask, Mr. Speaker, to ascertain how long it might be 

before this problem is rectified so that we can carry on with 

debate in a normal fashion. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Point of order is 

taken into account. I recognize the member. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to speak to the point of order raised by the minister 

or the member opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the lights flickered. They have not gone 

off. I mean, if there’s any lack of voltage in this Assembly, it’s 

on the other side of the House. But surely, but surely, surely this 

whole Chamber does not have to be held captive. I trust that 

you will rule that the lighting is more than adequate for us to 

conduct the business of this Assembly. And I would urge the 

members opposite to do just that. 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. The Speaker 

recognizes the point of order but feels that the light is definitely 

sufficient for the debate to carry on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased to continue my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have clearly indicated to all members of this 

Assembly, that of the six priority Bills that the government is 

concerned about, Mr. Speaker, four of those Bills, four of those 

Bills may or may not have some immediate impact, Mr. 

Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, two of those Bills have no — and I 

want to stress, Mr. Speaker — two of those Bills have no 

impact. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so why do we have a need for the 

government to change the rules, Mr. Speaker? They could in 

fact pass those four Bills. If that was their desire, Mr. Speaker, 

they could pass those four Bills by setting the agenda in an 

appropriate manner and debate those Bills through the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why, why does the government feel, why does the 

government feel, Mr. Speaker — and this is a fundamental 

question — why does the government feel they have to pass 

two pieces of legislation this session that would have zero 

impact? Why do they feel they have to pass two pieces of 

legislation that would have no impact? Is it because the ego of 

certain members would be offended if they didn’t get their 

legislation through? 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 3, The Potash Development 

Repeal Act, Mr. Speaker, was put in place in the 1970s, has 

never been acted upon, Mr. Speaker, never been acted upon. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s only an issue today, it’s only in issue 

today if the minister responsible for mining in this province 

were going to implement that piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

And I don’t know why that same minister would put forward a 

repeal Act to get rid of that piece of legislation if he had any 

intention to act upon it, Mr. Speaker. So what is the real need to 

pass that piece of legislation this spring, Mr. Speaker? It’s zero. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this Bill continued on and was passed in the fall, 

Mr. Speaker, it would make no difference at all. It would only 

make a difference in the point of view of their being able to say 

that they have accomplished their mandate, their agenda, on 

their timetable, Mr. Speaker, to show that they’re really the 

bully that they’re portraying themselves to be with this rule 

change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Bill No. 4, Bill No. 4, the one that puts in 

place fixed election dates, an amendment to The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, Mr. Speaker, what does 

that do? Mr. Speaker, that puts in place, Mr. Speaker, fixed 

election dates, and the first fixed election date in the province of 

Saskatchewan would be November 7, 2011, Mr. Speaker. So, 

Mr. Speaker, why do they need to pass that piece of legislation 

in this spring session? Well for only one reason, Mr. Speaker, 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

for only one reason. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well they say it’s about keeping their word, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me, let me assure the Government House 

Leader this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let me assure the 

Government House Leader that if he and his government pass 

that legislation this fall, they’re still keeping their word, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re keeping their word prior to the next election, 

Mr. Speaker, and in fact they are still accomplishing their 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they are still keeping their 

word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so two of the six Bills have no impact, Mr. 

Speaker. Two of those six Bills we’d like to go out to public 

consultation, so we’ve asked the government to consider that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t agree with it, Mr. Speaker, they 

still have the ability, under the existing rules, to pass that 

legislation by simply following the rules that are in place today. 

But why won’t they? Are they that insecure, Mr. Speaker? Do 

they not know that they have the ability to structure the daily 

activities of this Assembly? They have the ability to determine 

what legislation gets called, Mr. Speaker. All they have to do is 

put a single issue on the agenda for that day, and that’s all we 

speak about, Mr. Speaker. We’ll use all seven hours of debate 

that day on that issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the principles of 

democratic reform. The Sask Party used to support broad 

democratic reform, Mr. Speaker. Now because of their own 

mismanagement, their own inability to handle their agenda, 

because of their incompetence, they’re willing to throw away 

the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. They’re willing to set 

aside the democratic process, Mr. Speaker, and unilaterally 

change the rules of this Assembly. 

 

Less than two years ago when the Saskatchewan Party was in 

opposition, they negotiated the very rules that this Legislative 

Assembly lives with today, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, not 

only did they negotiate them; they were in opposition. And they 

negotiated very strongly to want to ensure that those minimum 

requirements for legislation and in fact, Mr. Speaker, for 

estimates were in place. 

 

And we, when we were government, thought it’s fair and 

balanced, Mr. Speaker. It was fair and balanced, so that the 

rights of the opposition, the rights of the minority were in 

balance with the rights of the majority, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it was fair and balanced when we were in government, 

but — lo and behold — when they become government, the 

balance, it doesn’t work anymore, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They don’t seem to understand about fair and balanced 

anymore, Mr. Speaker. They only understand what they want to 

see, Mr. Speaker. Well as a result, as a result they want to 

unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker. These rule changes 

were implemented in 2006, were the results of joint work and a 

joint committee by both parties. The committee was made up of 

both government and opposition members. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, key members of the opposition, now the 

government, sat on that committee, including, Mr. Speaker, in 

the latter stages, the current House Leader for the government, 

sat on that committee, Mr. Speaker, along with myself and other 

members. Our current House Leader, the member for Regina 

Douglas Park, was key in the implementation of the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, and the negotiations of the final implementation of 

these rules. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, these rules were the result of studies that included 

a trip to Alberta, Manitoba, British Columbia, and — lo and 

behold — Australia. And, Mr. Speaker, they went all the way to 

Australia to study the rules. And because the opposition needed 

to do that — the now government when they were opposition 

— needed to go all the way to Australia to study the rules, we 

agreed to it because we wanted to be fair. We wanted to be 

balanced in our approach, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well that’s 

true, the member from Regina Douglas Park didn’t go to 

Australia. It was the member from Regina South went to 

Australia on behalf of the then government and the member 

from Souris-Cannington went to Australia on behalf of the 

opposition. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, years were spent, years were spent, on 

examining the rules and parliamentary calendars in other 

jurisdictions. And then after all that examination, Mr. Speaker, 

and looking at how they worked in other jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker, we took the step here to implement a parliamentary 

calendar, Mr. Speaker, and rule changes. And these were rule 

changes that the opposition, now the government, wanted very 

badly. And, Mr. Speaker, we agreed to them, and we managed 

to make them work when we were government. When we were 

running the agenda, we made them work. Members opposite 

can’t deny, members opposite cannot deny, we made them work 

when we were the government. 

 

And all of a sudden on November 7 we have a change in 

government. We have an election and we have a change in 

government, Mr. Speaker. We moved to opposition and they 

moved to government, and all of a sudden, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — A good thing for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Yates: — They say a good thing for Saskatchewan, they’re 

yelling across, Mr. Speaker; but I really question that, Mr. 

Speaker, because all of a sudden the rules that we made work 

easy when we were government they can’t make work. Mr. 

Speaker, they can’t make the rules work. Mr. Speaker, either 

they can’t count, Mr. Speaker, or they’re fundamentally 

incompetent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If they can’t make the rules work, the rules that all members of 

this Assembly negotiated, the rules that all members of this 

Assembly agreed to, Mr. Speaker, and that the previous 

government could make work, well what’s the problem? It can’t 

be the rules because the previous government could make the 

rules work. It has to be the government, Mr. Speaker. It is to be 

their own inability — their own inability to understand and 

balance their own agenda with the time available, Mr. Speaker, 

and their own inability, Mr. Speaker, their own inability to work 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

in co-operation with the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t understand yet, they don’t understand 

yet that you cannot do things unilaterally, that changes need to 

be made in co-operation. That’s the way to move their agenda 

forward, Mr. Speaker. And when they learn that, if they were 

willing to come over and work with the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, I am sure we could come to an arrangement which 

would allow their agenda to move forward, Mr. Speaker. They 

could come and work with the opposition, and we would come 

to an arrangement to allow their agenda come forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, have they done that, Mr. Speaker? Have they 

made any attempt? The answer’s no. We asked the Government 

House Leader to bring forward a proposal, Mr. Speaker. And do 

you know what his proposal was? A motion to unilaterally 

change the rules. That was his proposal. That was his proposal, 

Mr. Speaker — a motion to unilaterally change the rules which 

is an extremely heavy-handed methodology, Mr. Speaker, to try 

to change anything. Rather than the hours and months of 

consultation and work that went into the existing rules, Mr. 

Speaker, that we all agreed to and that the previous government 

could make work well — that we could make work well when 

we were government, Mr. Speaker — they’re just unilaterally 

changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, without any consideration for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan, any consideration 

for minority rights in this province, Mr. Speaker, and no 

balance, Mr. Speaker, no equality in looking at the issue at all, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And rather than do the honourable thing when they found they 

had a problem and come work with the opposition to resolve the 

problem, Mr. Speaker, what do they do? They bring forward a 

motion saying they’ll unilaterally change the rules. That was 

their bargaining position to us. Mr. Speaker, that was their 

position. When we asked them to bring us a proposal, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s what they bring us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that isn’t heavy-handed, if that isn’t the 

schoolyard bully showing that they got the majority, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know what it is. When we asked them to bring 

us a proposal, Mr. Speaker, and they bring us a proposal to 

unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker, so they can do 

whatever they want and to ram something through — that’s my 

definition of co-operation, Mr. Speaker. That’s democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes, where do we see democracy like that, Mr. 

Speaker? Where you have a dictator. Where you have a dictator, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. It’s my pleasure to introduce, seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery, John Stratford Burton. John, if you could 

give us a wave please. Okay there we are. 

 

John was born at Humboldt, Saskatchewan on November 27, 

1927. The Burton family settled in the Humboldt area over 100 

years ago in 1904. They are Luxembourg-American in 

background. The family has always taken an active interest in 

public affairs. His grandfather was reeve of the RM [rural 

municipality] of Humboldt. John’s father was active in farm, 

co-operative, and political organizations. He served as the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] MLA for Humboldt, 

1938-1943; MP for Humboldt, 1943-49; and MLA for 

Humboldt, 1952-1956. I might add that his father was a 

breakthrough for the CCF in that 1938 by-election, I believe. 

His father served as a cabinet minister in the Thomas Clement 

Douglas government, 1952-1956. 

 

John’s mother was a schoolteacher who came to Saskatchewan 

in 1923 and later worked with her husband in working for a 

better life in pioneer times. John followed that family tradition. 

He took his Arts and Agriculture degrees at the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon and has maintained a lifelong 

interest in agriculture and co-operatives. Indeed the first time I 

had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Burton was in relation to a 

matter around the Wheat Pool, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

He took further studies at the London School of Economics and 

worked on industrial development programs for the 

Government of Saskatchewan and then in the Economic 

Advisory and Planning Board under Tom Shoyama, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, who was later federal deputy minister of Finance and 

after whom the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public 

Policy at the University of Regina is now named. 

 

John first entered the political arena in 1957, running against 

long-time federal Liberal minister of Agriculture Jimmy 

Gardner in Melville and very nearly defeated him, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. While living in Melville, he met his wife, Zenny 

Wiwchar whose family on both sides were original Ukrainian 

settlers in the Canora area and celebrated a 100th anniversary 

family reunion in 1999. She is proud of her Ukrainian 

background and continues to maintain Ukrainian traditions 

which includes introducing them to people of other 

backgrounds. 

 

John’s got a very storied curriculum vitae, Mr. Chair of 

Committees; there’s much more that I could share here. I see 

that you’re giving me the sign to hurry up and finish my 

introduction, so I’ll do that but with some regret because there’s 

so much to talk about in terms of the great life and the great 

career of John Burton. Thank you very much, and thank you to 

the members for their indulgence in this matter, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to pick 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

up where I left off talking about the incompetence of the 

government by unilaterally proposing a rule change, Mr. 

Speaker, rather than doing the honourable thing, the democratic 

thing, and the standard practice of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to rule changes. I wanted to just reiterate that, 

Mr. Speaker. We have had a long-standing, a long-standing, 

honourable, democratic standard practice, Mr. Speaker. We had 

a practice that would say, that when we made a rule change that 

we’d consult with the opposition, that we’d work together. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t what’s occurring today. We have a 

government that’s unilaterally trying to ram through a rule 

change and rather than with work with the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think there are members opposite that are 

uncomfortable with what they’re doing. I believe there are 

members opposite that are uncomfortable with what they’re 

doing, Mr. Speaker. I think they have the ability, they have the 

ability, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, they have the ability, Mr. 

Speaker, to work with the opposition, Mr. Speaker. But they’re 

saying they have no problem with unilaterally changing the 

rules, Mr. Speaker. But going outside the long-honoured 

tradition of working together on rule changes, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re saying they have absolutely no problem with that. 

 

Well that goes to the character of the people we’re dealing with, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve had long-standing traditions that they’re 

just prepared to throw out, Mr. Speaker, with no regard, no 

regard for the minority interests. 

 

In a couple minutes, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go into a study 

paper that talks about the law and the rules of reform and the 

rights of the minority in parliaments in Canada and legislatures 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker. But before I do that, I want to say this. 

I want for the record for people to know that there was 

absolutely no consultations with the opposition, no 

consultations with the opposition by the government. Mr. 

Speaker, it was their way or the highway, Mr. Speaker. It was 

. . . This is very, very unfortunate and, Mr. Speaker, very, very 

bad for the future of this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is how we saw the Devine Conservatives of 

the 1980s operate. This is how we saw then the deputy premier 

Berntson operate during that period of time. They were going to 

use their majority, and they didn’t care, Mr. Speaker. They did 

not care at all about the interests of minorities. They didn’t care 

about fairness, Mr. Speaker. And they didn’t care about 

co-operation, Mr. Speaker, or consultation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let’s make it clear. There were no 

consultations. But this isn’t very surprising because, since this 

government came to power, Mr. Speaker, they’ve had no 

consultations on labour legislation. Mr. Speaker, as we have 

labour organizations asking for public hearings on this, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s been no meaningful consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s been no listening to organizations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was no consultation on Station 20 when funding was 

ripped away, no consultation with the people from Station 20, 

Mr. Speaker, the community leaders — no consultation at all. 

No consultation on these rule changes, Mr. Speaker, and 

surprise, Mr. Speaker, no consultation on how to resolve this 

problem, Mr. Speaker, no consultation on how to resolve this 

problem. They just decided unilaterally they’ll force through 

this undemocratic change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Does the Sask Party care at all about the democratic process? 

Well we say not, Mr. Speaker. So they only care when it’s 

convenient for them. When they’re in opposition, they cared, 

Mr. Speaker, because they didn’t have the majority. As soon as 

they have their majority, Mr. Speaker, did they care about 

democratic process, the Sask Party? Absolutely not. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. Let’s be clear. When they were 

in opposition, they cared about the rules. They cared about 

consultation. They cared about governments keeping their 

word. They cared about working co-operatively with the 

government. But the minute they form government, Mr. 

Speaker, that all goes out, out the cupboard, Mr. Speaker, out 

the back door, Mr. Speaker. And they no longer care because 

they have the majority. They have the power. And they’re going 

to teach the opposition that might makes right, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re going to use the old philosophy of might makes right. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the schoolyard bully all over again, Mr. 

Speaker. It is bullying in any, in any way you look at, Mr. 

Speaker, any definition of bullying. That’s bullying, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And is that in the best interest of the province of Saskatchewan? 

I say no. Is it in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan? I say no. But, Mr. Speaker, do they care? When 

we say that they should, they should have concerns, they should 

be willing to work with us to find resolution to the problem and 

not have to ram through this legislation, Mr. Speaker, they say 

they have no concerns. They have absolutely no concerns. Mr. 

Speaker, that clearly indicates again, they think that might 

makes right, Mr. Speaker, because they’re the majority. They’ll 

do exactly what they want, when they want, and how they want, 

without any consideration for the interest of the minority or any 

consideration for the interest of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the rule changes were finalized in 2006, the 

Leader-Post columnist Murray Mandryk called the new 

Legislative Assembly calendar, and I quote “a magnanimous 

thing, and it may even be historic,” Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we had made significant, significant improvement to 

our rules, Mr. Speaker. We had made significant improvement 

to how we wanted to move forward in this Legislative 

Assembly, how a greater era of co-operation and consultation 

would bring forward better outcomes for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Those were all things that the now government supported when 

they were in opposition. But today when they’re the 

government, Mr. Speaker, do they have any concern about any 

of this? No, Mr. Speaker. They’ve decided, when they had the 

opportunity to work with the opposition and to come forward 

with some proposal to move, to get through this, this situation 

where they couldn’t manage the hours, that they could come to 

us and work with us. Mr. Speaker, did they try? The answer’s 

no. The only proposal they made was the proposal to 

unilaterally amend the hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious, very serious abuse of our 

parliamentary process, Mr. Speaker. It’s an abuse in how we as 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

parliamentarians are able to in fact rely upon the rules to ensure 

fairness because, Mr. Speaker, you can only rely upon the rules 

to ensure fairness if all parties are going to play by the rules, 

that when the first time you have a problem, you’re not 

unilaterally going to change the rules to your own advantage. 

And that’s what we see today. The first time this government 

has a problem, they will unilaterally change the rules to ram 

through their agenda, Mr. Speaker. They will ram through an 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. They will ram through an agenda that has 

legislation that has no meaning. They will ram through an 

agenda with legislation that has no meaning, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn’t need to be passed in this sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, in this session. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, they will ram through a Bill that has implications 

three and a half years from now that could pass this fall and still 

allow the government to say they’re keeping their word and still 

allow the government, Mr. Speaker, to implement that 

legislation three years or more before it’s required, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a piece of legislation in their priority 

Bills that’s been in place for more than 30 years — never been 

implemented, Mr. Speaker, and has no fear of being 

implemented by the current government. Mr. Speaker, their 

demand to get rid of that piece of legislation in this sitting of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, has absolutely no impact on the public, 

Mr. Speaker, and absolutely no impact on the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is what you would call, Mr. Speaker, 

abuse of power. And, Mr. Speaker, when you have a 

government that’s prepared to abuse their power in their own 

self-interest, Mr. Speaker, well then we have a very serious 

problem with our parliamentary democracy in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now quote from Beauchesne’s Rules 

and Forms of the House of Commons of Canada, 6th Edition. 

First chapter, Mr. Speaker, it talks about the principles of 

parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like the members to 

listen very carefully as we’re talking about the principles of 

parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Section one says this: 

 

The principles of Canadian parliamentary law are: 

To protect a minority and restrain the improvidence or 

tyranny of a majority . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that. The first principle of 

parliamentary law in Canada is: 

 

To protect a minority and restrain the improvidence or 

tyranny of a majority; to secure the transaction of public 

business in an orderly manner; to enable every Member to 

express opinions within limits necessary to preserve 

decorum and prevent an unnecessary waste of time; to 

give abundant opportunity for the consideration of every 

measure, and to prevent any legislative action being taken 

upon sudden impulse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first rule of parliamentary law is to make sure 

that the majority does not abuse the minority, Mr. Speaker. And 

I talked about that earlier. That’s the foundation of 

parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker. And what do the members 

opposite think is happening today with their rule change, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are using their majority to abuse. Mr. 

Speaker, they’re using their majority to abuse the minority, Mr. 

Speaker. Now that is very clearly, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

not what was intended in our parliamentary democracy — not 

intended in the first principle in parliamentary law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Constitution Act, I want to just quote from the 

Constitution Act: 

 

Without further elaboration, Canada thus was ensured a 

responsible cabinet system with the assumption that there 

will always be recognizable government with a legislative 

program. If the electorate so wishes, a system also 

presupposes an opposition ready and willing to attack the 

government in an attempt to have its legislation altered or 

rejected [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the parliamentary system and our Constitution, 

both anticipates a government and an opposition and has roles 

for them, Mr. Speaker. And roles that are to be fulfilled within 

the rules of that Legislative Assembly or parliament, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, beyond the vast legacy of tradition implanted in 

Canada by the preamble to the Constitution Act, one section 

above all affects procedure. Section 18 permits the adoption in 

Canada of all of the privileges of parliament current in the 

British House of Commons. Few of these are of greater 

importance than the right to regulate the internal proceedings of 

the House or more specifically to establish binding rules of 

procedure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The reason that we have established binding rules, Mr. Speaker, 

is so that all members of this House have to adhere to the same 

rules, Mr. Speaker, and so that rule changes should be made in a 

consulted, co-operative manner, Mr. Speaker, through both 

opposition and government, Mr. Speaker, and that rule changes 

should not be made unilaterally by one party or the other, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to do so is an abuse of the majority power in 

section 1 of the rules, Mr. Speaker, of parliamentary law. Mr. 

Speaker, that’s why we put in place an all-party committee that 

had equal number of members of government and opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. And we put rules in place; rules we all agreed to. 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we have a government who because of 

their own inability to manage the agenda cannot implement 

their agenda in the timely manner in which they’d like. So, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they will unilaterally change the rules to 

try to force through their agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is that fair to the people of Saskatchewan? Is it fair, Mr. 

Speaker, to the minority interest in the opposition, Mr. Speaker? 

Mr. Speaker, those are things that are still in question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under section 7 of the Written Rules, it says: 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Standing, Sessional and Special Orders are the rules and 

regulations which the House has agreed on for governance 

of its own proceedings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agreed on a set of rules that we all agreed we’d 

live within. We all agreed, Mr. Speaker, and I want to stress 

that — we all agreed. Both the government and the opposition 

agreed that we could live with the rules which we established, 

that we could live within those rules, and that we’d work to 

make those rules work in the interests of fairness and 

parliamentary democracy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we made those rules to create a balance, a balance 

between the interests of the opposition and the minority with 

that of the majority, Mr. Speaker, the government. The 

government’s always a majority. 

 

And when you don’t follow those rules, Mr. Speaker, and when 

you don’t adhere to those rules or when you try to unilaterally 

change those rules, Mr. Speaker, you’re abusing your power. 

It’s abuse of power, Mr. Speaker, and that goes to the 

incompetence of this government. If they have to abuse their 

power in order to pass their agenda, Mr. Speaker, are they 

competent? And I say not, Mr. Speaker. I say not. I say any 

government that would have to abuse its power to pass its 

agenda because they cannot manage their own affairs is not 

competent, Mr. Speaker, and that’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, they should seek resolution outside changing 

the rules. Mr. Speaker, they should work with the opposition to 

find some resolution aside from changing the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and they haven’t tried. They haven’t 

tried. I would challenge the Government House Leader to try to 

work through some resolution to this issue without changing the 

rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they should try to be co-operative and 

consultative, Mr. Speaker, but will they? The answer is no. Mr. 

Speaker, they believe they can be heavy-handed because they 

have the majority. Do they care about the fundamental 

principles of fairness? Do they care about the history of 

parliamentary democracy in Canada or, in fact, the 

parliamentary democracy or legislative democracy in this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When they were opposition, they cared, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when they were opposition, they cared. Mr. Speaker, 

when they were in opposition, they worked with the 

government and the government worked with them. But today, 

Mr. Speaker, when they’re the government and they have the 

majority, do they have any interest in working co-operatively 

with others? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. They have 

absolutely no interest in working co-operatively with the 

government. Mr. Speaker, they have no interest in working with 

the opposition, to work co-operatively with us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it says under section 10 that “Sessional and 

Special Orders are normally moved by the Government after 

consultation with the Opposition parties,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well there was no consultation with the opposition parties here. 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government who decided unilaterally 

they knew what they were going to do without consultation of 

the government, without consultation of the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. They just unilaterally decided they were going to do 

what they were going to do, Mr. Speaker — unilaterally 

changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, without consultation with the 

opposition. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it says very clearly in the precedent and 

tradition of the Parliament of Canada, which in fact affects 

every legislature in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want this 

material they can have it after, Mr. Speaker, to read. Mr. 

Speaker, they’re more than willing to have it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, I see that 

we’ve just had the arrival of a guest in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

I’m pleased to introduce Gren Smith-Windsor who is the acting 

deputy minister of Health in the province of Saskatchewan. I’ve 

known Mr. Smith-Windsor for some time, and in fact I think 

he’s married to the sister of a constituent of mine. So I would 

ask all members of the Assembly to welcome Gren 

Smith-Windsor to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 

like to continue on with my comments about precedents and 

tradition in our legislative and parliamentary processes in 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, on page number 6 it clearly goes on to 

say: 

 

Custom and precedent are basic to the parliamentary 

system. Parliament, and the manner in which it works, has 

developed over centuries and the written rules are relative 

newcomers to the procedural field. Indeed, increasingly, 

the written rules are being used, not to codify existing 

practice, but rather to trim and adjust historic traditions to 

modern needs. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s very true. Mr. Speaker, it goes on to 

say that: 

 

Parliamentary Law is something quite different from the 

ordinary Civil Law or Common Law. Parliamentary Law 

is based on centuries of tradition and precedents which 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

have marked the evolution of parliamentary freedoms 

from the time that the first . . . [parliamentarians] were 

governed under the Divine Right of Kings to the stage of 

parliamentary sovereignty which we have now have 

acquired [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So it’s very important, Mr. Speaker, and it goes on to talk about 

those long-standing traditions. It’s very important, Mr. Speaker, 

that when we collaboratively and co-operatively put in place 

rules that we all agree that we can in fact live by and that we 

agree that shouldn’t be changed unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, that 

we follow through with that, Mr. Speaker. And did we see that 

in this particular situation, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not. What 

we see today, we see a government who has unilaterally and 

high-handedly decided that because they have the majority 

number of votes, Mr. Speaker, that they are just unilaterally 

going to change the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that people understand the 

historical perspective of this before I talk about the next issue. 

And it talks about unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker, unanimous 

consent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, section 18 says, “Within the 

ambit of its own rules, the House itself may proceed as it 

chooses; it is . . . common practice for the House to ignore its 

own rules by unanimous consent.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is from “Proceedings in Parliament” and 

parliamentary law in Canada, Mr. Speaker. It says that it is 

“common practice for the House to ignore its own rules by 

unanimous consent,” Mr. Speaker. Does unanimous consent 

imply unilateral actions by one party, Mr. Speaker? It doesn’t. 

Mr. Speaker, unanimous consent talks about co-operation. It 

talks about consultation. It talks about working in tandem with 

the opposition to move forward its agenda. But do we have a 

government that’s prepared to do that, Mr. Speaker? No we 

don’t. Section 18 on “Proceedings in Parliament” very clearly 

says, “Within the ambit of its own rules, the House itself may 

proceed as it chooses; it is . . . common practice for the House 

to ignore its own rules by unanimous consent.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about the rules being changed by 

unanimous consent. And in the past, Mr. Speaker, that’s how 

it’s worked in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, that is what is 

intended under parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker, that rules be 

changed by unanimous consent. Mr. Speaker, but today we 

have in Saskatchewan a government that doesn’t believe in the 

parliamentary traditions or parliamentary law in Canada, that 

believes that it can unilaterally change the rules without 

consultation and without agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read this one more time for the members 

opposite because this should be important if they believe in the 

traditions and parliamentary law in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And 

this is found in the library here. It’s found in, Mr. Speaker, in 

Beauchesne’s. It says, unanimous consent. It’s under the topic 

“Unanimous Consent,” section 18, Mr. Speaker, “Within the 

ambits of its own rules, the House itself may proceed as it 

chooses; it is a common practice for the House to ignore its own 

rules by unanimous consent.” 

 

[20:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite who believe in the 

important role which they play, and they believe in the 

important role of this legislature, I think they should think about 

that. Mr. Speaker, they could have come to us and tried to 

negotiate some provisions. They could have tried to come 

forward with some proposal that allowed them to continue with 

their agenda, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is very serious. I 

think members should consider this because I know there are 

members over there that adhere and find the rules of this 

institution and its foundations as important as I do. Mr. Speaker, 

it says unanimous consent. That is section 18 of the proceedings 

of parliament which this Assembly also must adhere to. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not doing that. 

 

We have a unilateral rule change in front of us, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that that is in the best interest 

of this legislature. I don’t believe it’s in the best interest of a 

new government to show that they’re not prepared to live by the 

rules which they’ve agreed upon, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly 

don’t believe, I certainly don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, that it 

speaks well for us and our future or the future of this 

government because, Mr. Speaker, when you’re not prepared to 

live by the rules, Mr. Speaker, then what are you prepared to 

live by? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re in this situation because the new 

government put forward an ambitious agenda — an agenda that 

they don’t have to pass in this session, but they’ve chose that 

they will regardless and they’ll damn the torpedoes to do it. 

And, Mr. Speaker, to do so they will break long-standing 

parliamentary traditions and long-standing parliamentary laws. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to make sure that all members 

opposite get a copy of section 18 about unanimous consent, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think it’s something that, if they value this 

institution, if they value the principles of fundamental 

democracy, they have to read that. 

 

You know, they can laugh about it and members opposite, some 

of them are laughing about it over there. But Mr. Speaker, we 

have a parliamentary democracy in Canada. We live in one of 

the greatest countries in the world because of our democracy 

and because of our parliamentary traditions and because of the 

rules that have allowed us to adhere to our values in our 

parliamentary system, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s shameful to 

want to change them just to ram through an agenda that has no 

impact if it takes a month or two — if it takes a month or two 

— to complete. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say regularly, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

speaking through you although some members opposite — 

because this is very difficult for them to deal with; I can tell — 

some members actually care. I believe they care even though 

they pretend not to. They care because, Mr. Speaker, there are 

members on that side that I think very strongly believe, very 

strongly believe in the principles of democracy. They may not 

understand them, Mr. Speaker, because many of them have 

probably never taken the time to read some of these pieces of 

rules, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to ensure that we get them 

across to the members. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re in this situation because the 

government opposite is not able to get their agenda through, 

Mr. Speaker. And they’re not able to do so because they didn’t 

plan well. Mr. Speaker, that goes to their fundamental 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

competence, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not the only one or 

members on this side are not the only ones that are questioning 

today the government’s competence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to read from the Star Phoenix, Mr. Speaker, of March 

29, 2008, Mr. Speaker. It says, “Rather than appear to be 

competent managers of the public purse, Premier Brad Wall’s 

team has been extravagant in its spending, ham-handed in its 

communications strategy and incompetent in its delivery,” Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s a direct quote from the Star 

Phoenix, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re dealing with today. 

We’re dealing with a ham-handed approach, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

clearly showing its incompetency, Mr. Speaker. And rather than 

work with the opposition which is what is anticipated on our 

parliamentary rules, we have a government that’s just 

unilaterally going to do what it wants to do — damn the 

torpedoes and without care for what the outcomes are, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve got to think beyond what’s in front 

of them today. They have to think about what, they have to 

think about what the long-term implications of any government 

— any government — abusing the rules means for 

parliamentary democracy in this country and this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from the 

Leader-Post on March 29, 2008. Again, Mr. Speaker, this is 

from the Leader-Post. It’s under a title: “Avoiding suggestion 

of Devine influence.” And, Mr. Speaker, it says, “How do you 

express a conservative’s government natural inclination to build 

without drawing the inevitable comparison with the Devine 

government and the debt it built,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this again goes to . . . we see a direct 

comparison, Mr. Speaker, to the abuse of majority power by the 

Devine government of the 1980s and the abuse of this 

government in moving forward a unilateral change to the rules, 

Mr. Speaker — a government that believed that they could do 

anything because they had the majority, Mr. Speaker. And we 

see the same thing today. And, Mr. Speaker, there are people 

already questioning that this government is headed down the 

same philosophical and decisional path of the previous right 

wing, conservative government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker, which ended in absolute terrible tragedy and 

results for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again want to quote from The StarPhoenix. It’s 

about Station 20. These are articles from the March 29, 2008, 

Mr. Speaker, and it goes to talking about decisions that the 

government makes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it goes to, Mr. 

Speaker, to their ability to make decisions, Mr. Speaker, which 

is what this is fundamentally about, Mr. Speaker. It goes to 

what this is fundamentally about — a government who is not 

willing to work within the rules, Mr. Speaker, and to make 

unilateral decisions. Mr. Speaker, Station 20 was another 

unilateral decision. 

 

And how do people feel about those unilateral decisions being 

made by government? That’s what this all about, Mr. Speaker. 

So I would like to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

It’s too bad we cannot try something new to help a 

neighbourhood in need. It would not to take very long for the 

province to get a return on the $8 million investment if it 

helps only a handful of kids in the area to lead productive 

lives instead of the taxpayers of the province supporting them 

with welfare or housing them in jail. This province will never 

be in a better financial position to try to be innovative and 

progressive. Too bad we cannot think outside the box [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the exact same . . . Mr. Speaker, this is the 

exact same problem we face with this rule change, Mr. Speaker. 

They can’t think outside the box. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rather than work with the opposition and come up 

with some innovative solution to the problem that they can’t get 

their legislation through, Mr. Speaker, rather than working with 

somebody — they won’t work with the people at Station 20 in 

Saskatoon and they won’t work with the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker — they decided that they will just do whatever they 

want to do, however they want to do, whenever they want to do 

it, Mr. Speaker. And how does that meet the needs of the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan? How does that meet the 

children in the inner city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker? And how 

does this unilateral rule change meet the needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

How does it meet the needs of those stakeholders who like to 

have input into decisions, Mr. Speaker? And how does this help 

the people of Saskatchewan when you have a government make 

unilateral rule changes, Mr. Speaker, that are contrary to the 

principle of unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the same Station 20 project, Mr. Speaker, we 

have individuals that say, I hope we’ve all learned a valuable 

lesson when it comes time to vote in the next election, Mr. 

Speaker. People who voted for the Saskatchewan Party who 

have already, have already decided, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

the unilateral heavy-handed approach by this government is not 

in the interest of ordinary people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we see this coming from people about the decision of 

Station 20 in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. And what’s the 

difference in that and the unilateral rule change, Mr. Speaker, 

without consultation of the general public, Mr. Speaker? What 

is the difference, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what 

are people going to say out there about the rule changes, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are continuing to make fun 

of this discussion, Mr. Speaker. They don’t take it seriously, 

Mr. Speaker. So I think I need to go back, Mr. Speaker, and 

once again — once again — talk about, Mr. Speaker, the rule, 

the rule of parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m going to go back to once again remind the members, 

remind the members of the long-standing practice, Mr. Speaker, 

and the parliamentary law which would . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I would like to 

remind the member that, when speaking to this topic, I am 

giving some broad range tying it in but repetition . . . Again I’m 

giving you a broad interpretation, but to re-quote the same 

article more than once, I will rule on that. 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

I recognize the member for Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, okay, I won’t, I won’t 

re-quote the article, Mr. Speaker. But it’s very simple, Mr. 

Speaker. The members opposite are always referring to the fact 

that it’s funny. They think it’s funny that they unilaterally 

change the rules, Mr. Speaker. I want to, Mr. Speaker, to 

indicate to all members of the House that . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

standing? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. I’d like to introduce an individual seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery, a Mr. Glen Billingsley. Glen’s a public 

servant, lives here in Regina, is very active in the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union, very active in local 1101. 

 

But where I know Glen best from is the Regina Folk Fest. And 

I’ve seen this guy work at the Folk Fest in the thunder . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. The member 

has asked respectfully for leave to introduce a guest, and leave 

was granted respectfully. I will ask the member to introduce his 

guests and take his seat. Thank you. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Indeed I am, Mr. Chair of Committees. So I’d 

like to say a big welcome to Mr. Glen Billingsley to his 

Legislative Assembly. He pays very active attention to the 

public affairs in this province, is very active in his community 

as a whole, and I’d like to wish him a very big welcome to this 

place. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Glen 

Billingsley to his Legislative Assembly. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Chair of Committees. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — As I was indicating prior to the introduction of 

the guests, Mr. Speaker, it’s very common in our parliamentary 

system in Canada for legislatures or the Parliament of Canada, 

for the House to in fact to change its own rules, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s very common for the House or the legislature to change its 

own rules, but, Mr. Speaker, it’s common, it’s common with 

unanimous consent. 

 

It’s not common and it isn’t routine practice, Mr. Speaker, for 

one party or the other to unilaterally change the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s certainly not common for the majority, Mr. 

Speaker, for the majority to use its power to change the rules, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact section 1 of parliamentary law very clearly says that the 

most fundamental principle of our parliamentary democracy 

and the laws that surround our parliaments, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the tyranny of the majority using its power to abuse the 

minority is the fundamental, fundamental basis of our 

parliamentary law, that the majority should not be allowed — 

should not be allowed — to use its power to abuse the minority, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what a unilateral rule change does, and 

that is why rule changes have been done commonly in 

parliaments and in legislatures by unanimous consent of all 

members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have that situation here today. If 

this was a request to change the rules, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the . . . I would like to make 

. . . ask the Page to make a copy of this for the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, because I think it’s that important. Mr. 

Speaker, this is very, very important about section 18 and 

unanimous consent. Mr. Speaker, I would like the copy to be 

made for the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, so that they 

understand that it is common practice for the rules to be 

changed, but it’s common practice through unanimous consent. 

And that isn’t what we’re faced with today, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it is very common practice for that to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite have asked for copies of that, 

and I’d like to make it available to them, and then I’d like to 

have my copy back, Mr. Speaker, for further reference, further 

reference tomorrow or perhaps the next day as we continue this 

debate. And, Mr. Speaker, and I hope they take the opportunity 

to read it and take the opportunity to reflect upon it, Mr. 

Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, it would not have been, it would 

not be there, Mr. Speaker, if it was not intended to be acted 

upon. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s now time to have a discussion about, what’s 

the real impact of this, Mr. Speaker. Why did the government 

feel it necessary to propose such a rule change, Mr. Speaker? 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the government again to 

consider working with the opposition to find some way to deal 

with this problem, Mr. Speaker. To work co-operatively with 

us, Mr. Speaker, that is what is anticipated in our rules of order, 

Mr. Speaker. That is what’s anticipated in parliamentary law in 

this country, Mr. Speaker. It is anticipated that the government 

and its majority would work with the opposition in minority to 

resolve the problem, Mr. Speaker. And it’s even anticipated, 

Mr. Speaker, that rule changes should only occur through the 

unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we’d like 

to work with the government, and I think there is, I think there 

is a possibility of finding some resolution to these issues. But, 

Mr. Speaker, they have to be open minded. 

 

You can’t come . . . Mr. Speaker, it’s like . . . you know, I had 

an opportunity many years ago in my life to attend at Queen’s 

University, a two-week course on collective bargaining, 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

probably a decade ago, Mr. Speaker, a little more than a decade 

ago. And, Mr. Speaker, they used the analogy of people coming 

to the collective bargaining table with so many tools in their 

tool box, Mr. Speaker. But if you only come with a 

sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker, that’s the only tool in your tool 

box is a sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker, you can only expect to get 

one result, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the government came, the government came 

with only one tool in their tool box right now, Mr. Speaker, they 

came with a sledgehammer. It’s our way or the highway, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we urge, we urge the government 

to reconsider. We urge the government to consider its options, 

Mr. Speaker. And we urge the government to consider coming 

forward with a proposal that meets both side’s needs. 

 

That is in the spirit of what’s intended in our rules, Mr. Speaker. 

Now what’s in the spirit of what’s intended in the parliamentary 

precedents in this country, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, we 

would expect the opposition, or the government, pardon me, to 

work with the opposition, to try to find a resolution to the 

problem, not to come and say their only resolution is a motion 

that’s going to unilaterally change the rules. And better than 

that, Mr. Speaker, they’re telling us it’s in our interests, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s in our interests to just let them unilaterally change 

the rules, so they can run all over the opposition. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s for their interest alone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rather than working with the opposition in a co-operative 

manner, Mr. Speaker, they have unilaterally decided just to be 

high-handed, Mr. Speaker, use their sledgehammer — the only 

tool they brought, Mr. Speaker — to use the only tool they 

brought, their sledgehammer and say, hey, it’s our way or the 

highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear members opposite saying very 

derogatorily just to shut up and let them do their business. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an attitude, Mr. Speaker, and fundamentally 

a poor attitude. If that’s their attitude, Mr. Speaker, I think 

members of this House should be ashamed. I am surprised. Just 

shut up and let us do what we want. That’s their attitude, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes they’re the government and yes they were 

elected to govern, but they were also elected to use good 

judgment, Mr. Speaker. They were also elected to show that 

they had the ability to show good judgment, that they had the 

ability to compromise, that they had the ability to work with 

others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And how are they demonstrating any of those abilities to work 

with others, to work co-operatively, to bring an agenda forward 

and move it forward in a co-operative manner, Mr. Speaker? 

When they’ve had that opportunity, what have we seen, Mr. 

Speaker? We have seen absolutely none of that. We have seen 

absolutely none of that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 

seeing a continual heavy-handed approach — that we were 

elected government on November 7 and get the heck out of our 

way, that we have a divine right to do anything. 

 

Well the last time we saw a divine right it was led by a guy 

named Devine, and what did it result in for the province of 

Saskatchewan? Total disaster, Mr. Speaker, total disaster. Both 

financial disaster, Mr. Speaker, this province went in debt 

billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s the last 

time we saw that type of heavy-handed attitude, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government has an opportunity, as it has 

two or three times in the last month, to admit they made a 

mistake, Mr. Speaker, and to approach the opposition and come 

up with a compromise which meets both sides’ needs, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, will they consider that? No, Mr. 

Speaker, they won’t consider doing things in a co-operative 

manner because they think they’ve got a divine right just like 

the last government did in 1982 that was led by a guy named 

Devine. But, Mr. Speaker, they don’t understand that they don’t 

have a guy named Devine running the government right now. 

Mr. Speaker, their idea of a divine right was his individual 

rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government now should exercise its 

opportunity to try to work with the opposition. Mr. Speaker, it 

should understand that under the principles of unanimous 

consent should only rules be changed. Mr. Speaker, the House 

should only uphold its rules under the principles of unanimous 

consent. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if any of the members 

opposite took those rules, Mr. Speaker, and looked at it and 

they read it. But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that they 

have the opportunity to read that, Mr. Speaker. And they have 

the opportunity to consider what it means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it means that we need to work together. It means 

that the government should work with the opposition to find a 

solution to this problem. They should attempt to find a 

resolution that meets both sides’ needs, Mr. Speaker, rather than 

unilaterally trying to change the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say, I’m going to say right now that 

we are prepared to entertain and enter into those discussions, 

Mr. Speaker. Our House Leader would be more than willing 

and more than happy to meet with the members of the 

government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, if the Government House 

Leader wanted to meet now, I’m sure that our House Leader 

would be prepared to meet now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As we’re debating this issue, they could be working on a 

solution, Mr. Speaker. They could be working on a solution to 

try to resolve this, Mr. Speaker. But it can’t be my way or the 

highway, Mr. Speaker. It means you have to enter this 

discussion open minded. You have to be prepared to 

compromise. You have to be prepared to find a resolution that 

meets the needs of both the government and the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. It can’t be one way. The world doesn’t work that way, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nowhere, nowhere does a relationship flourish and 

move forward when you have a unilateral, one-sided approach, 

Mr. Speaker. We need to work together, and the government 

needs to learn that they need to work together. When they were 

in opposition, they understood the need to work together 

because they didn’t have the power. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they keep telling us we lost the election. They 

tell us we lost the election; we need to know our place, Mr. 

Speaker. Well we understand we lost the election, but the rules 

didn’t change because we lost the election, Mr. Speaker. The 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

rules only changed because we have a heavy-handed 

government who thinks they can unilaterally bring forward a 

proposal to change the rules, Mr. Speaker — no consultation, 

no desire to work with the opposition. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s not just a desire not to work 

with the opposition. Maybe they don’t have the competency to 

work co-operatively with the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, maybe they don’t have the abilities. Maybe it goes to 

their fundamental incompetence, Mr. Speaker. Maybe it’s not 

that they don’t want to work with us; maybe they don’t know 

how. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know how to work with the opposition. We 

worked with them when they were in opposition, and we found 

resolution to problems. We found creative ways to continue to 

move the agenda forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen no desire of that from this 

government. Mr. Speaker, all we hear from this government is, 

you lost the election on November 7, and we can do whatever 

we want whenever we want, Mr. Speaker. That’s their attitude. 

Mr. Speaker, this is an embarrassment for the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s an embarrassment for the 

country of Canada, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, most 

importantly it’s an embarrassment for the government opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no government — no government — is so big that 

they don’t have to listen to others. No government is so big that 

they don’t have to work with others. Nobody is so important 

that they don’t have to listen to others. And nobody is so 

important that they don’t have to work with others, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see an approach today that 

members opposite aren’t prepared to work with the opposition. 

The members opposite aren’t prepared to work with the citizens 

of Saskatoon on Station 20, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite want to govern in a manner which is high-handed, Mr. 

Speaker, that clearly shows the only tool that they have in their 

tool box at the moment is a sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that isn’t good for the province of Saskatchewan. 

It’s not good for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s certainly not good for this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they continue to laugh, Mr. Speaker, and yell 

across that you lost the election, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this isn’t a laughing matter. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hope, I hope the members opposite in fact 

have taken the time to read the principles of unanimous consent. 

And I hope the Government House Leader has taken the time to 

read the section on unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker. I hope 

he’s taken the time to not only read it but consider it. Consider 

what it means, Mr. Speaker, and consider what it means 

because, Mr. Speaker, if he considers what it means, if he truly 

cares what it means, Mr. Speaker, then he will reconsider, Mr. 

Speaker. Then he’ll reconsider his position, Mr. Speaker, and be 

willing to meet with the Opposition House Leader in an attempt 

to find some resolution to this impasse. And they will not 

decide to proceed unilaterally, Mr. Speaker. They’ll decide to 

work co-operatively, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? They may pass this 

motion, Mr. Speaker, and they may ram through their agenda, 

Mr. Speaker, but people won’t forget that. People will not 

forget that. People will not forget that, Mr. Speaker. People will 

not forget that. It may not have an impact this year. It may not 

have an impact next year, Mr. Speaker, but it will have an 

impact, Mr. Speaker, because we’ll continually remind the 

people of Saskatchewan the attitude this government brought 

forward — the attitude that this government displayed, Mr. 

Speaker, and their willingness to subject both the opposition 

and the people of Saskatchewan to their belief that they’re 

above the law, Mr. Speaker, that they’re above, Mr. Speaker, 

they’re above the rules of the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they can do whatever they want to do. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this already, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have seen numerous examples of this attitude, 

Mr. Speaker. This is just one more rock in the backpack, Mr. 

Speaker, one more rock when they’re putting on their backpack. 

And eventually that backpack will get awful heavy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t funny but the members opposite think 

it’s funny. And because they think it’s funny, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s all the more reason, Mr. Speaker, that we need to 

continue, we need to continue to reinforce the fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that this type of unilateral action offends the very principles of 

our parliamentary democracy. It offends the very principle of, 

Mr. Speaker, of our institution, the very principle which we all 

should be defending, and above all else, Mr. Speaker, that 

officers of our parliament should stand up and defend, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What’s their agenda, Mr. Speaker, when they’re willing to 

circumvent, Mr. Speaker, the rules of this Assembly? What are 

they trying to do that they’re afraid to face head-on, Mr. 

Speaker? Why do they insist that they have to pass legislation 

that has no impact for years in the future? Why are they afraid 

to work with the opposition to try to come to some compromise 

to move forward the agenda in a co-operative manner, Mr. 

Speaker? Why are they afraid of all these things? 

 

Mr. Speaker, why won’t they work with the opposition? We’re 

not unkind, unsympathetic human beings, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

willing to work with you, and I’d like to reiterate, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re willing to work with the government to try to find a 

resolution to their situation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they have to be willing to work with us. They 

have to be willing to work with us before you’re going to find a 

solution to the problem. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what 

this institution stands for and the principles of our parliamentary 

democracy are more important than any of us. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they should be willing, they should be willing to 

re-examine their position, to re-evaluate why they took this 

position, Mr. Speaker, and come forward with a resolution. 

Come forward with a willingness to work with the opposition to 

find resolution. Mr. Speaker, anything short of that, anything 

short of that shows a total disrespect for our traditions, our 

institution, and for the rules which we are responsible to 

adhering to. 

 

[21:15] 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are starting to say that my 

old ticker isn’t going to take this for another hour. Mr. Speaker, 

I’ll do another hour and 15 minutes today and seven hours 

tomorrow and five hours on Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, because 

I believe. 

 

I believe fundamentally in the institution which we all serve. I 

believe in the principles of this very institution, Mr. Speaker. 

But what I cannot accept, Mr. Speaker, is that the members 

opposite, the members opposite do not care, that the members 

opposite do not care about the fundamental principles of this 

institution and the fundamental principles of our democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a minute or two now to talk about 

where I think we need to go. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite, the government, have got themselves in a real pickle 

here. You know, they’ve now moved forward with a unilateral 

motion to try to change the rules. We’ve now tabled for them 

the principle of unanimous consent and what it means. Some of 

the members opposite have had the opportunity to read it. One 

of the members opposite held it out and just threw it in the 

garbage. Mr. Speaker, that shows what he knows and 

understands about the principle of unanimous consent. 

 

But there’s a reason why it exists. There is a reason why it 

exists. There’s a reason why it’s in print. And there is a reason 

why, there is a reason why, Mr. Speaker, that rules have not 

been changed or amended without unanimous consent by the 

House. There’s a reason for that, Mr. Speaker. That’s because 

the rules are there to ensure balance, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

fairness. It’s a fundamental principle of our democracy. And, 

Mr. Speaker, for it to be changed unilaterally is a breach of that 

fundamental principle of our democracy. Mr. Speaker, we want 

the members opposite to consider that and to take this 

opportunity to re-evaluate what they’re doing because, Mr. 

Speaker, they have other options available to them. 

 

This is the type of decision that shows that the government is 

very limited in their skills, extremely limited in their skills and 

abilities, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they have a need, a 

fundamental need, Mr. Speaker, they have a fundamental need 

to accomplish something here. But they have other means to do 

it, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, all we’re asking the 

members opposite is to re-evaluate their position, to have the 

Government and the Opposition House Leader meet and respect 

this institution and try to find some resolution to the problem, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had citizens of our province, citizens and 

founders of our country, our citizens die, die to protect our 

democracy. They’ve died in the First and Second World War, 

Mr. Speaker. They’ve died in the Korean War to try to ensure 

the democratic rights of other people around the world. Mr. 

Speaker, we have today Canadian soldiers fighting for the 

democratic freedoms of citizens around the world. Mr. Speaker, 

we can’t forget that people have given their lives so that we in 

Canada live in one of the greatest countries in the world, Mr. 

Speaker. We live in a country that has achieved its greatness 

because we have a parliamentary democracy which we believe 

in. We have principles which we have adhered to for not 10 

years, not 20 years, but hundreds of years, Mr. Speaker, in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we have a government in Saskatchewan 

who wants to throw a lot of that tradition away, Mr. Speaker, 

who, when you provide them with rules, when you provide 

them with the traditions of our parliamentary system, Mr. 

Speaker, they just laugh at them. They have no respect, they 

have absolutely no respect for the rules of our Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. They have no respect for the parliamentary tradition of 

this country, Mr. Speaker, and very little or no respect for their 

own, their own traditions when they were in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We are asking no more than they asked when they were in 

opposition. We’re asking not one thing more than they asked of 

the government when they were in opposition. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I will tell you they received consideration, Mr. 

Speaker, and they got the very things that we are asking for 

when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government today that will continue to 

yell across, Mr. Speaker, continue to say things like, you know, 

you lost the election, Mr. Speaker. We understand that. But all 

those things show a lack of respect for our parliamentary 

system. They show a lack of respect, Mr. Speaker, for the 

traditions of our Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have the motion we have 

before us today, Mr. Speaker, because the members opposite 

don’t have respect. They don’t have any respect for our 

parliamentary traditions. They don’t have any respect for the 

rules which they negotiated and which they agreed to, Mr. 

Speaker. They don’t have a fundamental respect for what they 

said they believed in, Mr. Speaker, and they spoke highly of 

just a year or two years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s amazing. It worked when they weren’t the government, but 

as soon as they’re the government, the rules don’t work, Mr. 

Speaker. So it’s not the rules that are the problem then, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s the government. If the government can’t make the 

rules work, then it’s the government, Mr. Speaker, not the rules. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite continue to show their 

respect — or disrespect, pardon me — for the process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did we have any attempt by the government to 

work with the opposition on a resolution of this issue? The 

answer is no, Mr. Speaker. We’re now about seven or six hours 

into debate, Mr. Speaker, which in my earliest . . . the first hour 

of my comments, Mr. Speaker, I offered the opportunity for the 

Government House Leader to meet with the Opposition House 

Leader and try to find some resolution. Over the last five hours 

they couldn’t have been looking for a solution to the problem, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s been no attempt to find a resolution to the 

problem. They see only one resolution to the problem, Mr. 

Speaker, to use their majority to abuse the minority. Mr. 

Speaker, they want to use their majority to abuse the minority, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is fundamentally wrong. Mr. Speaker, 

that is fundamentally, fundamentally against, Mr. Speaker, 

fundamentally against the number one principle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like once again — I won’t be quoting, but once 

again I’d like to refer back to the principle of parliamentary law, 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

Mr. Speaker. And section 1 of parliamentary procedures that 

talks about parliamentary law says very clearly, the 

fundamental problem, the fundamental principle of law of our 

democracy is that the majority should not use its power, Mr. 

Speaker, the majority should not use its power to abuse the 

minority. And that’s exactly what this motion does, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why it goes on in section 18 to say that rules 

are routinely changed but through unanimous consent and why 

unanimous consent is used, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because section 1 says that the majority should not use its 

power to abuse the minority. That’s tyranny. It uses the word 

tyranny, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 

we’re seeing today. Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a majority use its 

power to unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker, with 

disrespect for the rights of minority, jamming it through this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has an option. And once again I 

urge them to use that option, to negotiate some other form of 

resolution to this issue rather than jamming through a rule 

change that should only be done through unanimous consent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the members opposite they 

do not have unanimous consent for this rule change. If your 

House Leader or your leadership has told you that the 

opposition agrees with this unanimous change, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to assure the members opposite, we do not. We do not and 

we will not ever agree with a government who wants to 

unilaterally change the rules to ram through an agenda without 

consideration of the needs of the opposition or the minority. 

 

There are minority and majority laws in this country, and 

principles that have been long established both in parliamentary 

law and in common law, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve been 

established for a reason. They’ve been established to ensure that 

the majority gets to move their agenda forward, Mr. Speaker, 

because the majority should always in the end be able to move 

their agenda forward, Mr. Speaker; but, Mr. Speaker, it should 

not be at the expense of the minority and without balance and 

fairness attached to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this rule change has neither of those. It has 

not balance and it has not fairness. 

 

Were we consulted, Mr. Speaker? The answer is no. Are we 

prepared to work through the issue? The answer is yes, Mr. 

Speaker, but they are not prepared to work with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are getting tired obviously. 

They’re saying I should sit down. Mr. Speaker, I’ve got days 

left in me, Mr. Speaker, absolute days left in me, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, by this time tomorrow night, by this time 

tomorrow night I should be about halfway through my remarks, 

Mr. Speaker. Not quite halfway, as my learned colleague says, 

about this time tomorrow night. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let’s not get anxious. I’ve got lots more to say, 

and I know the members opposite would just love — love — to 

see me go at this for another day. They’re waiting with bated 

breath, Mr. Speaker, to hear what I have to say next, Mr. 

Speaker, but I’m just going to quickly take a drink of water, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, as I continue my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

once again talk about where the resolution might be on this 

issue. I want to help the members opposite because, you know, 

Mr. Speaker, they didn’t come forward with any real resolution 

to this problem other than the heavy-handed approach with the 

one tool they have in their tool bag, the sledgehammer, saying 

my way or the highway, Mr. Speaker. The big hammer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if any of them took the time to 

go talk to their parents, their mother and father, or perhaps their 

grandparents about, you know, the importance of working 

co-operatively with others — this province was founded on 

co-operation, Mr. Speaker — they would know that this type of 

approach doesn’t sit well with the pioneers of our province. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that has been the approach of this 

government. Mr. Speaker, the government’s been in power for 

now four months, Mr. Speaker, and they continue to show that 

they have very little imagination, very little creativity, and very 

little ability to work with others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see this in working with the founders and the community 

coordinators on the Station 20 West project in Saskatoon. Are 

they willing to meet with them, work with them? The answer is 

no. They just unilaterally decide they’re going to take away $8 

million and when more than 2,000 — when more than 2,000 — 

residents of Saskatoon meet and rally on getting that funding, 

Mr. Speaker, what do they say? They don’t care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I heard them say again they won the election. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it might surprise them but we’re a little 

more intelligent than that. We know they won the election, Mr. 

Speaker. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? They didn’t win the 

right, Mr. Speaker, to abuse others. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 

win the right to be abusive, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are 

principles. There are principles and values which a government 

must adhere to, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, when they’re 

always yelling they won the election, Mr. Speaker, that goes a 

lot to attitude. That goes to attitude, Mr. Speaker. It goes to the 

way they fundamentally think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, winning the election doesn’t give them the power 

to do anything, any time, anywhere, exactly how they want to 

do it, Mr. Speaker. There are still the people of this province 

that have a right to be consulted. They have a right to be 

consulted and they have a right to ask questions through their 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. Our parliamentary democracy has a 

very well-reasoned and -founded role for the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s built on the principle of the government 

bringing forward legislation and the opposition questioning that 

legislation, amending that legislation, pushing for changes to 

make it the best it can be, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, if 

they don’t allow that process to occur, Mr. Speaker, then 

they’re subverting the process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that process is important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It’s important to the opposition. And I can tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, when they were in opposition they saw that 

process very, very seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members who weren’t here when they were in 

opposition continue to make comments and laugh about the 

importance of the process, Mr. Speaker. Those members who 

served in opposition understand the importance of process and 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

the right of the opposition and the role of the opposition. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I wish, I wish that today those members would 

spend the time and talk to some of the members who weren’t 

elected before about the importance of that role, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it would be helpful if those members would 

take into consideration how they felt when they were in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, and they would have the same 

consideration, Mr. Speaker, for the members on this side as we 

gave them when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Leave is granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you and through 

you, I would like to introduce to all the members in the House a 

guest sitting in your gallery, Dwayne Yasinowski. Dwayne was 

born in Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. He spent his first eight 

years in Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

If we could just get Dwayne to give us a hand there. Thank you 

very much. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1975 he moved to Lemberg 

where his parents operated a small business and a farm. 

Dwayne graduated from high school and remained in Lemberg 

for a number of years helping operate the family business and 

farm. Mr. Deputy Speaker, after graduation Dwayne spent a 

year back in Lemberg working in the family business. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — This is the second 

time I have addressed this. The member has asked respectfully 

for leave to introduce a guest. It is expected that he will 

introduce his guest. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — In the fall of 2001 he enrolled in the 

graduate studies program at the University of Regina where he 

specialized in Western Canadian history. It was at this time that 

Dwayne began to take a more active interest in the provincial 

politics. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. This will be 

the last time I stand without . . . I will ask you to introduce your 

guest. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — In the fall of 2006 Dwayne was hired by the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] and went to work in the minister 

of Health’s office. He worked with the former minister of 

Health until November 2007. Dwayne is currently employed in 

the NDP caucus . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Saskatoon Fairview will introduce his guest shortly. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Okay. I’d ask all members to welcome 

Dwayne Yasinowski to his legislature. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I now want 

to go to what I think is some of the fundamental problems that 

the government has with, Mr. Speaker, their need to change the 

rules unilaterally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the fall when this government was elected on 

November 7, we had a short fall session and they introduced six 

priority Bills. Mr. Speaker, those six priority Bills at that time, 

they knew at least two of those Bills, three of those Bills, 

perhaps four of those Bills would be controversial. Mr. Speaker, 

they knew at that time that they would have a very difficult time 

getting their legislative agenda through without adequate time, 

Mr. Speaker. They should have known and fully expected that 

this opposition would ask and vigorously debate some of that 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We told them very clearly of our intent to vigorously debate 

some of these Bills, Mr. Speaker. They knew in the fall of 2007, 

Mr. Speaker, they knew the rules. They knew that 20 hours of 

debate was required on each of those six priority Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, and they continued to introduce further legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and they offered no time in the fall of 2007 to debate 

these Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We told clearly the Government House Leader, we told the 

minister responsible for Bills 5 and 6, the minister responsible 

for Bill No. 2, that we would have issues with those Bills, Mr. 

Speaker. They should have known that the opposition wanted 

considerable time to vigorously debate those Bills. To say that 

they didn’t know that and didn’t understand that in any way, 

Mr. Speaker, would be a clear misrepresentation of the facts, 

Mr. Speaker. We clearly outlined Bills 2, 5, and 6 were Bills 

that would require debate. We know and we all know, as 

members of this Assembly, that those Bills would require 20 

hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government should have organized its 

legislative agenda and its priorities to provide those 20 hours of 

debate within the rules. To not do so, Mr. Speaker, is a 

fundamental, fundamental, Mr. Speaker, a fundamental 

showing of their incompetence, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they 

knew, they knew prior to making the decision. Mr. Speaker, I 

think I have the floor. I can’t even hear myself with members 

shouting across the floor, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

government knew that Bills 2, 5 and 6 were going to require 20 

hours of debate. Mr. Speaker, they knew that estimates requires 

75 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. They know and should have 

been able to figure out the amount of time that would be 

required in order to pass their agenda, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

simple calculation. 

 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what did we see? Mr. Speaker — 

and the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know this — 

what did we see, Mr. Speaker? We saw a legislative calendar 

that was to see us to return to this Assembly on March 3. Mr. 

Speaker, we saw a legislative calendar that saw this House open 

on March 3. In fact members of this Assembly were notified 

that we would be returning on March 3. And how were we 

notified, Mr. Speaker? We were notified because we were each 

sent a calendar, Mr. Speaker. We were each sent a calendar with 

a shaded area, saying that this Assembly would reconvene on 

March 3. Members of this side of the House understood what 

that meant. That meant we would return on March 3. Is that 

what happened? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. The answer is 

no. We returned on March 10, Mr. Speaker. We returned on 

March 10, Mr. Speaker, because the government wasn’t ready 

to return on March 3. 

 

And my question is this, my question is this: why wasn’t the 

government ready? Why I do this, I do this, Mr. Speaker — and 

I’m going to tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

this, Mr. Speaker — we didn’t start March 3 because the 

Premier was in New York. He was opening the stock exchange. 

And he was in meetings in New York, Mr. Speaker. He wasn’t 

doing his business here at home, Mr. Speaker. And we didn’t 

open this House for a week because the Premier was running 

around New York with the Minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs, Mr. Speaker. Well that, Mr. Speaker, if that’s the 

reason, it’s shameful. Mr. Speaker, if that is the reason, it is 

shameful. Because if the Premier doesn’t want to be here, and 

the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs don’t want to be here, 

Mr. Speaker, to do the business of this House and to adhere to 

the rules which they agreed to, Mr. Speaker, that should be their 

number one priority. That should be their number one priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

going to acknowledge the work, Mr. Speaker, if the members 

opposite wouldn’t be trying to shout me down I would like to 

take the opportunity to acknowledge that the trip to New York 

accomplished some positive things. But this isn’t about the trip 

to New York, Mr. Speaker. It’s about both should be able to be 

done, Mr. Speaker. Both should have been able to be done. It 

takes planning, it takes understanding the rules, and it takes 

forethought. It takes consideration, Mr. Speaker, and that didn’t 

occur. 

 

The needs of the opposition weren’t considered. The dates were 

unilaterally changed from the 3rd to the 10th, Mr. Speaker. 

Unilaterally. There was no consultation, Mr. Speaker. And that 

is what has caused this problem, Mr. Speaker. And then you 

have a Government House Leader who didn’t structure it to sit 

the Monday and Tuesday nights of the first two weeks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Prior to the budget being tabled, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t sit 

Monday and Tuesday nights and we lost hours of debate. We 

lost hours of debate. Mr. Speaker, we lost enough hours of 

debate to pass one piece of legislation. And then we have a 

government decide they got to change the rules. And they think 

we should just sit back and take it, Mr. Speaker. That we should 

just sit back and take it, Mr. Speaker. Well I don’t know who 

they think they’re kidding, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know who they 

think they’re kidding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it took 14 hours out of the debate, Mr. Speaker — 

a minimum of 14 hours out of the debate, if not longer. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that is shameful. That is shameful that they can’t 

use their agenda and the time appropriately to get their 

legislation through, Mr. Speaker. And then when they find out, 

when they decide they have a problem, when they decide they 

have a problem that they should have known all along, do they 

question their own House Leader and their own internal 

operations? No. They decide that they’re going to use a 

heavy-handed, unilateral approach and change the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s shameful. That is absolutely shameful that 

they would do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Do they want to work co-operatively? The answer is no. Today 

I’ve put out the olive branch at least a dozen times. At least a 

dozen times today I’ve said and offered that we, our House 

Leader would be willing to meet with their House Leader to 

look for some form of resolution. And have we had any uptake, 

Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not. 

 

Now who’s running the agenda over there? Yes, well when I 

say who’s running the agenda they say, we are. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that goes to their attitude. Mr. Speaker, was this a 

decision made collectively by all members of the government or 

was this a decision made by the Premier? And if it was a 

decision made by the Premier, then maybe the Premier should 

answer to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is not fundamentally right to unilaterally 

change the rules of this Assembly and the principles of 

parliamentary democracy because they can’t manage their own 

affairs and then blame it on somebody else — and then blame it 

on somebody else. This time they don’t have any officials to 

blame, thank goodness. Thank goodness they don’t have any 

officials to blame like the Minister of Social Services did, Mr. 

Speaker. They can only blame themselves. And, Mr. Speaker, 

blame themselves they should. Blame themselves they should, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This shows fundamental incompetence, Mr. Speaker. This is the 

root of the problem, Mr. Speaker. This is the root of the 

problem, Mr. Speaker, that they can’t manage their own affairs, 

Mr. Speaker. So what do they got to do? They got to blame 

somebody else. In this case they’re trying to blame the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, have they tried to work with the opposition and 

resolve the problem? The answer is no. They have not tried to 

work with us to resolve the problem. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

challenge them and I challenge the Premier. I challenge the 

Premier. If our two House leaders can’t work together, I 

challenge the Premier to work with the Leader of the 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker. And they say no, they’re not going to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an attitude problem. That has nothing to do 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And he says, yes. Well they’re 

admitting they got an attitude problem. It has nothing to do at 

all with the real problem, and that’s that they can’t manage this 

House, Mr. Speaker. And they can’t manage this House so it’s 

somebody else’s problem. 

 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, it goes to where this government comes from. Mr. 

Speaker, it goes to where this government comes from. Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t care about parliamentary tradition. They 

don’t care about parliamentary rules. They don’t care about 

their own deals on the rules in this province. They don’t care 

about anybody but themselves. And, Mr. Speaker, if that’s what 

they care about, Mr. Speaker, then they should be ashamed of 

themselves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s members opposite laughing over there. 

There’s members opposite saying, they’re the government; we 

forget we lost the election. Well, Mr. Speaker, we understand 

that. But I want to point out to the members opposite, in eight 

years that I’ve been elected not once did we, when we were 

government, have to change the rules to get our agenda through. 

Not once in the eight years I’ve been elected did we have to 

change the rules to get our agenda through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we didn’t show the level of incompetence we’ve 

seen in the first four months of this government, and they 

should be ashamed of that. Mr. Speaker, they thought they were 

ready to govern. Mr. Speaker, they’re showing it daily that 

they’re not. Mr. Speaker, they’re not ready for prime time. Mr. 

Speaker, they’re only ready to play second fiddle in opposition. 

They did that pretty well, Mr. Speaker. But when it comes to 

running the show, Mr. Speaker, they can’t do it. They thought 

they could do it, Mr. Speaker. They could be in opposition, but 

they’re not ready for the prime time. They’re not ready to be 

government, obviously, Mr. Speaker, because they’re showing 

their incompetence. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite knew that 

Bills 2, 5, and 6 would be controversial and would need to be 

debated for 20 hours. What’d they do about it, Mr. Speaker? 

They shortened the session by four days. They don’t meet 

evenings for the first two weeks. Mr. Speaker, whose fault is 

that? Who made those decisions? I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker 

— the opposition didn’t. So why should the opposition be 

deprived of its rights under the rules, Mr. Speaker, deprived of 

its rights under the rules because this government doesn’t have 

the competence to bring their agenda forward? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government has decided that they’ll 

unilaterally try to rush something through, with or without any 

co-operation from the opposition, with or without any care for 

what the outcomes are, Mr. Speaker. And what does that say, 

Mr. Speaker? We haven’t seen a government like that since 

1982 — since 1982, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a member or two over there that can 

remember the 1980s well. There’s a member or two over there 

that fundamentally probably agree with what happened in the 

1980s, Mr. Speaker — although the people of Saskatchewan 

don’t remember the 1980s very fondly. And I hope, for the sake 

of the province, Mr. Speaker, that this government learns from 

this mistake and never again has to change the rules because 

they’re not able to get their own agenda through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government that has indicated that 

they’re prepared to go to war on labour issues with the labour 

unions of this province. The Sask Party needs to assure that 

Bills 5 and 6 are passed this session, they think. Why do they 

need to assure that? Mr. Speaker, we’ve operated this province 

for more than 100 years without Bills 5 or 6, without essential 

services legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to point out what the members 

opposite should see as obvious. If they did have a labour 

dispute that was problematic, Mr. Speaker, they can do what the 

previous government had to do, what the NDP government of 

Saskatchewan did more than once because they had to do it. We 

used back-to-work legislation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

used back-to-work legislation if we had to. 

 

We didn’t presuppose outcomes of labour disputes, Mr. 

Speaker. When we needed to, we used the hand of government. 

But we didn’t use it in a manner that was presupposing what 

collective bargaining should be about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate again that we made it very clear 

in December, we made it very clear in December our opposition 

to some of these Bills and that we were going to debate these 

Bills vigorously and that we wanted to debate these Bills 

vigorously, Mr. Speaker, and that we had serious concerns. And 

we asked the opposition then to send Bills 5 and 6 — in 

December — we asked them to send Bills 5 and 6 out for 

consultations. Mr. Speaker, those consultations could have been 

done before the spring, Mr. Speaker. Did they do that? No. 

They rejected that because they don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, in 

consulting anybody. They don’t believe in consulting the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They don’t believe in consulting 

anybody, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s never been more evident than now, when they’re 

going to unilaterally change the rules, when the rules are 

changed in this House only through unanimous consent, Mr. 

Speaker. It doesn’t speak to consultation, Mr. Speaker. It 

doesn’t speak to the fundamental principles that this Assembly 

has worked under for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I once again urge the Government House Leader 

to meet with the Opposition House Leader and try to find some 

resolution to this issue, Mr. Speaker, to take a step backwards, 

Mr. Speaker, and try, and try to find some resolution, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, sometimes taking a step backward allows 

you to move four steps forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say for 16 years we went 

backwards and so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker. They want to 

blame everybody else, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to take 

into consideration that they’re the root of their own problem. 

Mr. Speaker, they don’t want to consider that they’re the root of 

their own problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing — nothing — should be so fundamentally 

important to them that they cannot take the time to consider 

what’s best for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we adhere to 

our parliamentary practices, our traditions, and our rules, Mr. 

Speaker, because they’re there to protect all members of this 

Assembly. They’re there to protect the principles of our 

democracy, Mr. Speaker, and when you want to unilaterally 

change those, you’re subverting that principle. You’re 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

subverting that democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite need to take time to 

consider what they’re actually doing here. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

have tried today to — through various quotations, some of 

which we’ve sent over to members opposite — to let them 

understand that what they’re doing is an abuse of their power. 

And when a government is prepared to abuse its power, Mr. 

Speaker, that is the most fundamental abuse there is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, parliamentarians should oppose abuse of power by 

the majority on its principle. All members . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — All members of this Assembly should oppose the 

abuse of majority power on its principle, Mr. Speaker. The 

number one principle of parliamentary law in this country is 

that the majority should not abuse their powers. They should 

not abuse their power over the minority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a fundamental, fundamental principle, Mr. Speaker; a 

fundamental principle that they are prepared to laugh at, Mr. 

Speaker; a fundamental principle that they are prepared to 

ignore. And, Mr. Speaker, they should oppose it on principle. 

They should oppose this motion on principle. Members of the 

government should oppose such a motion ever coming forward 

on principle, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and if you don’t 

oppose, if you don’t oppose the motion I guess on principle, 

Mr. Speaker, then you’re showing you don’t have fundamental 

principles, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not about working long hours, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re prepared to do whatever work’s necessary, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s not about working long hours at all. They 

missed the whole point. They missed the whole point, Mr. 

Speaker. Do you think I’d be standing on my feet for seven 

hours today, if it wasn’t more important than simply, simply, 

Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t more important than working long 

hours, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, this is far more important 

than simply working long hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is about the principle of democracy. It’s about 

the fact that the majority should never abuse their power, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the members 

opposite have an opportunity to re-evaluate this, Mr. Speaker. 

They have an opportunity tomorrow to come forward with a 

proposal to the opposition, that the opposition can agree with 

and, Mr. Speaker, we can immediately start working on the 

important business of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we can start 

working on the estimates, Mr. Speaker. We can start preparing, 

Mr. Speaker, officials to answer questions, and members on this 

side can prepare their questions and we can start estimates 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. We can come to some resolution, Mr. 

Speaker. If not, this debate could go on for days. 

 

Or do we have a government that will use closure? Do we have 

a government that will even once again use its abusive power to 

move closure on the debate talking about the fundamental 

principles of democracy? Mr. Speaker, do we have a 

government that will do that, Mr. Speaker? Do we have a 

government that will abuse the principle of democracy once 

again by moving closure, Mr. Speaker? And if the government, 

if the government will do that, Mr. Speaker, then they have no 

respect at all for our parliamentary process, Mr. Speaker. But I 

don’t put it beyond them, Mr. Speaker. I don’t put it beyond 

them to use closure, Mr. Speaker. It’s within their nature, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s in their nature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government cannot get their legislative 

agenda through without using the sledgehammer that they have 

in their tool box, if it’s the only tool they have, Mr. Speaker, 

then, Mr. Speaker, I’m concerned about the well-being of this 

province over the next four years. Because they’re the 

government for the next four years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to once, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to review for the members opposite and I’d like them — 

somebody from the government — to come and tell me later 

personally why these Bills have to pass immediately and why, 

why, Mr. Speaker, it’s so important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start with Bill 1 again. Because I 

think it’s very important to talk about these pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. Because that is what this Bill, what 

this motion is about. It’s a motion to extend the hours so they 

can pass these Bills. Well let’s, Mr. Speaker, I would like the 

government to explain to me why these Bills have to pass. All 

of them. And as I have pointed out earlier and I’ll point out 

again, Mr. Speaker, that four of these Bills could pass easily 

within the parameters and the hours that we have without a 

change to the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker, is An Act respecting Saskatchewan’s 

Growth and Financial Security. Mr. Speaker, today this Act 

does the exact same thing as the fiscal stabilization Act does 

with one exception, Mr. Speaker. And that one exception allows 

them to use the assets from Crown sales in the General Revenue 

Fund and spend as part of those budgetary expenditures. 

Previously that was not allowed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will acknowledge that in order to make their budget balance 

this year, it’s required, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and you 

know they have members chirping over there that we ran 

deficits, Mr. Speaker. Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, they 

stood in the House and said we had the 15th balanced budget 

this year, Mr. Speaker, admitting the last 14 were balanced. So 

the member opposite doesn’t even know what he’s talking 

about. Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t be bragging about the 15th 

balanced budget if the other 14 weren’t balanced before it, Mr. 

Speaker. So they again they’re showing that they have no 

fundamental competence, no fundamental ability to talk, to 

know what they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, this Bill they can pass, Mr. 

Speaker. They have the time to pass this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

because without it their budget isn’t legal. And I think that’s 

pretty important to any government to have a legal budget, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d agree with the members opposite. That’s pretty 

important. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they can pass this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and they 

might not even need 20 hours. Have they tried? The answer is 

no. They haven’t tried. They haven’t discussed any hours that 

may be needed on each Bill. Had they approached the 

government . . . or approached the opposition on that, asking? 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

The answer is no. Yes, well . . . No, we didn’t have any 

discussions on hours, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 

come and ask us. 

 

Bill No. 2, Mr. Speaker, An Act respecting Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now this Bill puts in place a new 

entity, Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But if this Bill 

didn’t pass immediately, what would the impact be, Mr. 

Speaker? Because this Bill could be passed retroactively and 

have application from any day that the government picks — any 

day the government picks — and make it legal. But, Mr. 

Speaker, they have time remaining within the existing rules to 

pass four Bills. So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 2 can 

pass. Bill No. 2 can pass and Enterprise Saskatchewan can 

become legal this session, Mr. Speaker. That’s fine. 

 

Let’s deal with Bill No. 3. Bill No. 3, An Act to repeal The 

Potash Development Act, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for the 

information and notification of members opposite, for members, 

for the notification of members opposite, this piece of 

legislation has been in place since the 1930s and never been 

acted on. Mr. Speaker, if this Bill, if this Bill is not repealed, 

Mr. Speaker, till the fall of this year, who would care? Who 

would care? Well, the minister responsible would care, and he’s 

the only one. He’s the only one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how urgent is that Bill? Why the panic button on a piece of 

legislation that’s been in place for more than 30 years? Why the 

panic button? Don’t ask me. So, Mr. Speaker, if that piece of 

legislation didn’t pass till this fall, it’s only symbolic, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know what? It would only be an issue if the 

minister was going to act on this piece of legislation, and I think 

hell will freeze over first, Mr. Speaker. I truly do. So I don’t 

think there’s any worry of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 4, Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, this is the Bill that puts in place fixed election dates. 

The first fixed election date is going to be November . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say this very slowly and very loudly so the 

members opposite understand. The next election date is set as 

November 7, 2011. Mr. Speaker, this is March the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — April. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Mr. Yates: — Pardon me, April 7 — I need glasses, Mr. 

Speaker — April 7, 2008, Mr. Speaker. That’s three and a half 

years or more from now, Mr. Speaker. So how urgent is this 

Bill? If this Bill passed in the fall, Mr. Speaker, does it make 

any difference? None. It makes no difference if this Bill did not 

pass until the fall, Mr. Speaker. It makes absolutely no 

difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to now talk about Bill No. 5 

— the Bill that the opposition Health critic said prior to the 

election, they didn’t need, Mr. Speaker, and the Bill that the 

leader of the opposition, then premier said they had no intention 

of doing. So, Mr. Speaker, but they knew this was a 

controversial Bill. 

 

We told them last year this is a controversial Bill. We asked 

them to send it out for public hearings. But, Mr. Speaker, they 

didn’t do that. But, Mr. Speaker, because they have the time to 

pass four Bills, they could pass this Bill too. They could leave 

Bills 3 and 4 until the fall because they have no impact. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, finally, finally, finally, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 

6. Bill No. 6 is about An Act to amend The Trade Union Act, 

Mr. Speaker, and they . . . Hey, Mr. Speaker, in all fairness, 

they told us they were going to do this. They’ve been saying 

this for eight years they were going to do this so this is no 

surprise, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t surprise anybody in this 

province that they were going to amend The Trade Union Act. 

In fact if they didn’t do this, I would have been surprised. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that this is Bill No. 6 and that they want do 

this, is anybody in Saskatchewan surprised? No, Mr. Speaker, 

not one single person’s surprised. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . I just want to take a quick drink, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation . . . they can pass four 

Bills. They can still pass four Bills and get 20 hours of debate, 

so do you know what, Mr. Speaker? If this is their biggest 

priority, they can pass it. Mr. Speaker, lo and behold, they can 

pass Bills 1, 2, 5, and 6. Let 3 and 4 go to the fall, pass their 

estimates, and get their agenda through. 

 

Do I have to explain this to them one more time? They can pass 

Bills 1, 2, 5, and 6 and the estimates in the time that’s 

remaining and get their agenda through. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s the problem? What’s the problem, 

Mr. Speaker? The problem is they can’t manage their affairs. 

They can’t manage the House, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

so I’ve tried to help them. I’ve tried to explain how they could 

get their agenda through. I’ve tried to offer them the 

opportunity to try to negotiate something with us, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ve tried to help them. Mr. Speaker, they keep indicating to me 

they’re beyond help. They don’t understand. I don’t know what 

to say. Mr. Speaker, I actually don’t know what to say. 

 

You try to help them. You try to tell them how they can do it. 

You try to give them some guidance. You let them know that 

we were able to manage it for eight years when we were in 

government — the House. I’m trying to give them a hint or two, 

trying to tell them how to do it. Mr. Speaker, they still can’t 

catch on. They still don’t catch on. I don’t know what else I can 

do. Mr. Speaker, I guess I’m not a very good teacher. Mr. 

Speaker, I have to conclude that either they can’t learn or I can’t 

teach. Mr. Speaker, I have to conclude that either people can’t 

either . . . they can’t learn or I can’t teach, Mr. Speaker. It’s one 

or the other. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they knew full well that Bills 2, 5, and 6 were 

going to be contentious last fall. They could have started the 

session a week earlier, Mr. Speaker. We could have debated 

those Bills in the evenings of week one and two, a Monday and 

Tuesday night. But did we do any of those things? The answer 

is no. So all of a sudden because they don’t do their job, it’s 

everybody else’s problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are prepared to spend thousands of dollars of 

taxpayers’ money on extending the hours and paying overtime 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

on a daily basis to employees of the Legislative Assembly — 

tens of thousands of dollars in overtime. Mr. Speaker, they’re 

prepared to spend additional money because they couldn’t 

organize their own thoughts, Mr. Speaker, that they couldn’t get 

their act together, Mr. Speaker. But whose problem is that, Mr. 

Speaker? It’s the people of the province of Saskatchewan’s 

ultimately because they pay. The taxpayers pay. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, is that fair? Is that fair, that the taxpayers 

pay? Mr. Speaker, it is not fair, Mr. Speaker, that the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan would pay. And, Mr. Speaker, rather than 

attempting to meet and negotiate some sort of deal that would 

allow them to move their agenda forward with the opposition 

today, during the last six and a half hours or seven hours of 

debate, Mr. Speaker, did they make any attempt to do so? The 

answer is no. They’ve decided that they’re going to ram through 

a high-handed, heavy-handed approach; that they’re going to 

use a sledge hammer approach to move forward the agenda with 

or without, Mr. Speaker, with or without any co-operation; and 

with or without, Mr. Speaker, any consultation with the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And is that fair, Mr. Speaker? Is it the right thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker? The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. The answer is 

fundamentally no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to revert to 

introduction of guests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Leave, leave is not 

granted. I recognize the member for Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ve now, 

Mr. Speaker, we have now seen another example. We have 

never . . . we have now seen another example of . . . we’ve 

never seen in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, we’ve never seen, 

we have never seen in this legislature leave being denied for 

any member. Now, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

talk about . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. Order. I will 

ask the members . . . Order. Order. This is the last time I will 

call order. I recognize the member for Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this debate has been about the abuse of power — the 

abuse of majority, the abuse of the majority over the interest of 

the minority, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, sadly, sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, sadly, Mr. Speaker, we just saw another example. 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, we just saw another example. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

the behaviour of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the 

behaviour of the members opposite was not only inappropriate, 

Mr. Speaker, but it set a new low. It set a new low in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. It’s a new low now that we all have to 

live with. We’ve seen a government that will use its power to 

abuse the minority at every opportunity, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s sad, that is very, very sad. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at some point, this government’s going to 

need co-operation. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite are power hungry, and the power’s gone to 

their head, Mr. Speaker. And they’re prepared to use the 

majority to abuse the minority, Mr. Speaker. And when you see 

that in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, it is fundamentally wrong. 

It is fundamentally wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read from, I’d like to 

read from a passage from the parliamentarian, Mr. Speaker, the 

Canadian parliamentarian. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read from 

the Canadian Parliamentary Review, volume 31, number 1, 

spring 2008. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read from an 

article called “Observations on the Theory and Practice of 

Parliamentary Government,” Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Point of order. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I realize 

that you, Mr. Speaker, were engaged in some conversation, but 

I wish you’d paid attention to the member from Kindersley just 

now. 

 

The rules very clearly state, when a motion is under discussion, 

no member shall use provocative or threatening language. The 

threats from the member from Kindersley are unacceptable, 

unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, unacceptable. He points, he points 

over to this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and he says, you 

wait your turn. You wait your turn, he says. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley has to be called to 

account. He has to apologize, and he has to do it right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Melfort. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, clearly the member opposite didn’t hear the exchange 

that was going on. And clearly it was meant as barter across the 

floor in a way that is quite common, given the spirit of the 

evening. And certainly, given the record of that opposition, it 

was quite appropriate. I would urge you to find the point not 

well taken. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — As I was in 

conversation, I will have to reserve my decision until I can look 

at Hansard. I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I tried to indicate previously, I’d like to read from 

an article contained in the Canadian Parliamentary Review, 

spring edition 2008, which all members of this Assembly would 

receive. I’d like to read particularly from the observations, an 

article on “Observations on the Theory and Practice of 

Parliamentary Government” in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it says: 

 

In our first year of Political Science classes we learned 

that parliaments were “talking places” — the buildings in 

which first nobility, and then elected officials, developed 

solutions to public policy problems [Mr. Speaker] and 

debated the issues of the day — and of course the odd 

scandal too [Mr. Speaker]. While this may be a simplified 

and perhaps optimistic reading of the function of 

legislatures, it is also the reading which informs many 

proposals . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. I’m having 

difficulty hearing the member for Regina Dewdney. I would ask 

that we keep the side conversations down. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’d once again like to read this 

passage that talked about what this institution is about and 

what’s the purpose and practice of this Assembly, and in fact 

every parliamentary and Legislative Assembly in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it talked about . . . It’s written by an Ashley Cochran and 

Heather Cochran, Mr. Speaker. They’re two interns in the 

British Columbia legislature, Mr. Speaker. They’re interns who 

are watching daily the proceedings of the legislature of British 

Columbia. So, Mr. Speaker, like our legislature, they’re 

observing daily what’s happening and they’re reflecting upon 

their . . . what they have viewed and what their reflections upon 

that Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think it’s speaks to every Assembly in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. And in the second paragraph says: 

 

In our first year of Political Science classes we learned 

that parliaments were “talking places” — the buildings in 

which first nobility, and then elected officials, developed 

solutions to public policy [issues and] problems, and 

debated the issues of the day — and of course the odd 

scandal too. While this may be a simplified and perhaps 

optimistic reading of the function of legislatures, it is also 

the reading which informs many proposals to reform and 

renew . . . [the] fundamental [of the] democratic 

institution. This reading also speaks to our collective 

desire for parliament to be places for discursive 

engagement among our elected representatives, [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental . . . One of the fundamental 

responsibilities we have as legislators is to debate the issues of 

the day, Mr. Speaker, to have informed discussion about those 

issues that confront us as parliamentarians or as legislators in 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, today we’re debating an issue. We’re 

debating an issue that is about changing the rules of this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s about changing 

the rules of our Assembly unilaterally without consultation, 

without consideration, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s without 

consultation or consideration of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are rules that govern our parliamentary 

traditions in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve outlined those rules 

previously, Mr. Speaker, and it’s clear that the practice has been 

that those rules can be changed by unanimous consent. Mr. 

Speaker, that is not the case today. We don’t have unanimous 

consent, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t had the opportunity to 

discuss that. We haven’t looked at other options, and now we 

have a government that’s going to use its majority power to 

unilaterally change the rules that are normally and routinely 

done by unanimous consent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Now what gives this government the right to step outside 

parliamentary tradition and practice of unanimous consent and 

unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker? That’s the question 

they have not yet answered, Mr. Speaker. And why do they 

need to change the rules, Mr. Speaker? What is the compelling 

public policy issue that drives the change in rules, Mr. Speaker? 

What is that issue, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well we don’t have that issue, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have not heard a compelling, driving issue from the members 

opposite that would say that the rules should be unilaterally 

changed at this time or ever, Mr. Speaker. What has been by 

unanimous consent in the past, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite think they have the divine right to change unilaterally. 

And why do they think they have that, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Speaker, why do they think they have that right to change those 

rules unilaterally? And why do the members opposite think that 

winning an election gives them the right to abuse parliamentary 

tradition and practice, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, did they see that occur, did they see that occur 

from the previous government? The answer is no. The previous 

government never did it, Mr. Speaker, because the previous 

government respected parliamentary traditions. Mr. Speaker, 

and they say the previous government got kicked out of power 

too, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, if the general public of 

this province knew and understood that the new government 

was going to abuse powers — abuse rights, Mr. Speaker — 

would they have been elected? Well I don’t know the answer to 

that and nor do they, Mr. Speaker. Nor do they, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I’ll tell you this. Even a government that’s elected by a 

large majority that does the right things for the people but does 

them in a wrong way will be held accountable by the people 

eventually. It will be held accountable by the people eventually, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are here to represent the people. We are all 

elected to represent the interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — We won the election. 

 

Mr. Yates: — You won the election. We accept that. We accept 

that you won the election, Mr. Speaker. But Mr. Speaker, that 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

doesn’t give you the unilateral right to change the rules. It 

doesn’t give you the unilateral right to abuse parliamentary 

processes and our parliamentary practices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do they try to work with the opposition? No. 

When they were in opposition, did they work with the 

government? Did they negotiate with the government? Yes they 

did because they had a government willing to work with them, 

Mr. Speaker. They had a government willing to work with 

them, Mr. Speaker. But do we see that today, Mr. Speaker? The 

answer is fundamentally no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see, what we see is members still yelling 

from their seats, we won the election. Mr. Speaker, they say 

they won the election so they can do whatever they want, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s their attitude; that’s their approach. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a fundamentally wrong attitude and a 

fundamentally wrong approach. We don’t disagree they won the 

election. We don’t disagree they have a right to pass the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. We just disagree that they have the 

right to high-handedly and unilaterally change the rules to do it 

in a time frame that isn’t allowed within the rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so what they say, if the rules don’t meet my 

needs? Change the rules, Mr. Speaker. And don’t do it in a way, 

in a time-honoured tradition of parliamentary practice and do it 

by unanimous consent or do it by working with the opposition. 

No they don’t do that, Mr. Speaker. Instead they take a 

high-handed approach, and they unilaterally change the rules of 

the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They move a motion to unilaterally 

change the rules of the Assembly and ram through legislation 

they wouldn’t otherwise be able to do, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s high-handed, Mr. Speaker, that’s derogatory, 

and it’s not in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan and 

it’s certainly not in the best, long-term interests of this 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker, I hope some members of this 

Assembly take the time to think about that because, Mr. 

Speaker, maybe some of them should get off their high horse 

and think for a little while about the institution which we all 

represent. Mr. Speaker, we all represent an institution that’s 

bigger than any of us. We represent principles and values that 

are more important than any one of us individually or more 

important than all of us collectively, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 

here for our own self-interest; we’re here for the interests of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re not saying, Mr. Speaker, we’re not saying as an 

opposition that they don’t have a right to pass their legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. We acknowledge they have the right to pass their 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, what we say is they have to pass it 

within acceptable rules. They have to pass it within the rules 

they agreed to, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have the right to use 

high-handed, unilateral approaches. They don’t have the ability 

to say, if the rules don’t meet my needs right now, my 

immediate need — like a child they need it right now — that we 

can change the rules to meet that immediate need. 

 

They don’t need to have instant gratification anymore, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re not children. They need to understand that 

they can pass the rules within or pass their legislation within the 

rules, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, when they don’t 

understand that, Mr. Speaker, when there’s no discipline, when 

there’s no orderly conduct, Mr. Speaker, things break down. 

And when they start to break down, you’re on the road to the 

bottom. And, Mr. Speaker, all we’re asking the members 

opposite is to consider that. Try to work through a process that 

isn’t unilateral. Try to work with the opposition and work with 

the people of Saskatchewan to show that you’re bigger than 

what you’re portraying today — that you’re bigger and you can 

operate within the rules and that you can work with others and 

you don’t have to show that bully mentality, and that you have 

more tools than a sledgehammer. Mr. Speaker, that’s all we’re 

asking you. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s fundamentally important. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s fundamentally important. The rules . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you and through 

you to the rest of the Assembly, sitting in your gallery, I’d like 

to introduce Bob Bymoen, president of the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees’ Union. So I ask all members to 

welcome Mr. Bymoen to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going to give credit where credit is due. They have 

learned something. They have learned something. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important to give credit where credit is due. And I 

appreciate that the members opposite who may not have 

understood the long-standing traditions of this Assembly and 

assemblies now do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I want to continue my 

debate, Mr. Speaker, as I’d like to continue my debate on this 

very, very important issue about the fundamental principles of 

our democracy, it’s nice to learn that they’ve learned. It’s nice 

that they’ve learned. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we approach the end of this evening, as 

we approach the end of this evening and we wrap up my debate 

today, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to summarize my comments today 

in short. I’d like to summarize it in this way, Mr. Speaker — 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

that we have before us a problem that’s here as a result of the 

incompetence of the current government, Mr. Speaker. They 

knew very clearly from this opposition that there would be 

opposition to a number of the Bills that they were bringing 

forward as priority Bills, Mr. Speaker — primarily Bills 2, 5, 

and 6, Mr. Speaker; the Bills putting in place Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and the Bills putting in place essential services 

and amendments to The Trade Union Act. They knew ahead of 

time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we expected, we expected as members of the 

opposition to follow the parliamentary calendar that was sent to 

all of us and that we would be returning on March 3 to start 

deliberations in this House on that legislation. Lo and behold, 

Mr. Speaker, we get told that we’re not starting till March 10. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we lost 25 hours of valuable debate, 25 

hours of debate that would have allowed the passage of at least 

one of these controversial Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, I just want to summarize that in the first 

week and second week we did sit, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t sit in 

the evenings, taking away another 14 hours of debate for a total 

of 39 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker, which would have allowed 

the passage of two additional Bills, Mr. Speaker . . . or two 

Bills, two Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, we also took time off between Easter. We 

took a week off at Easter, Mr. Speaker. We could have sat then, 

Mr. Speaker, if they needed more time. No, but we needed to 

take a . . . We worked two weeks; we had to take a week 

holidays, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and that is in the rules; I 

will acknowledge that’s in the rules. But, Mr. Speaker, if they 

can unilaterally change the rules here, why didn’t they ask us, if 

they were going to have difficulty, to sit that week, Mr. 

Speaker? Did they approach us as the opposition and ask us? 

The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. They made no effort. They 

made no effort to work with us, Mr. Speaker, co-operatively. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they made zero effort, Mr. Speaker, to work 

with us co-operatively now on this proposed rule change. 

 

So when they discovered miraculously — although they knew 

going into this — that they would have trouble passing their 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, and that their agenda was at risk, Mr. 

Speaker, did they work with the opposition to try to find a 

solution to the problem, Mr. Speaker? Did they agree to send 

Bills 5 and 6 out to public consultations as an example, Mr. 

Speaker? No, they didn’t. No, they didn’t. They refused to send 

Bills 5 and 6 to public consultations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now that, Mr. Speaker, what would that do, Mr. Speaker? It 

would simply mean that the legislation wouldn’t pass until the 

fall. It means Bill 5 and 6 would not pass until the fall, Mr. 

Speaker. But in the meantime, we would have the opportunity 

to consult with labour and business about trying to improve 

those Bills, to get in place Bills that truly dealt with the 

problem, Mr. Speaker, with full consultation of those who 

would be affected by it. But are they prepared to do that, Mr. 

Speaker? The answer is no. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, we end in this impasse. We end in an impasse 

now that we have a government that’s going to abuse their 

majority power to pass a resolution to abuse the minority 

interest, Mr. Speaker. And as I clearly indicated, the principle 

of unanimous consent for rule changes is a long-standing 

tradition and practice in parliaments in Canada, in both the 

Parliament of Canada and legislatures in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But do they want to adhere to that rule, Mr. Speaker? No, they 

don’t. Do they try to reach any type of arrangement with the 

opposition? No, they didn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what do we have? Let me finally summarize this, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re at an impasse. And today on at least 13 

occasions that I can reflect upon, Mr. Speaker, I offered, I 

offered that our House Leader would meet with the Government 

House Leader and try to find some resolution to the impasse. 

And I can tell you that my House Leader, Mr. Speaker, the 

Opposition House Leader is more than willing — more than 

willing — to meet with the government to try to negotiate some 

resolution to this impasse, Mr. Speaker, a resolution that 

protects both the interests of the majority and the interests of the 

minority, Mr. Speaker, which is what our parliamentary 

tradition is about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, are the members opposite interested? 

Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m very happy to see, Mr. Speaker, that we have nearly a full 

house tonight, Mr. Speaker, in the last five minutes of my 

speech, Mr. Speaker. They are so, so enthralled by this, Mr. 

Speaker, that they all came to the House, Mr. Speaker, for the 

last five minutes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the member from 

Kindersley who said I couldn’t do a full day, Mr. Speaker — 

the member from Kindersley told me I couldn’t do a full day, 

that he’s had to do it and how difficult it was, Mr. Speaker — I 

hope, I hope the member from Kindersley now acknowledges 

that I did what he couldn’t do, Mr. Speaker, do a full day in the 

House, the whole day, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Kindersley couldn’t do it, but I could, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there is a reason for that, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe fundamentally in what I’m speaking about, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, at this time tomorrow night, 

when I’m concluding my remarks tomorrow night, Mr. Speaker, 

I hope he acknowledges, Mr. Speaker, that on Wednesday 

night, I will conclude about that same time of night, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hope this government, this government will 

not use or abuse their power and move closure on this motion, 

Mr. Speaker. I hope that they will consider the interests of 

minority rights, Mr. Speaker, and the fundamental principle 

about abuse of minority rights, Mr. Speaker, which is the 

number one parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker, that the majority 

should not abuse its rights to abuse the minority, Mr. Speaker. 

And I hope the members opposite will not abuse their rights, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tonight as we close, Mr. Speaker, this day, I once 

again want to offer to the Government House Leader that the 

Opposition House Leader is prepared and willing to meet to try 

to negotiate some resolution to this impasse in the best interests 

of both the government and the opposition, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, and they say they have no interest, Mr. Speaker. Well 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

they have no interest because, Mr. Speaker, they’ve used the 

heavy-handed approach in this entire issue, Mr. Speaker. They 

came to the table with only one tool in their tool box, Mr. 

Speaker, a sledgehammer. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to 

nail their agenda through regardless what. 

 

Do they care about the interests of parliamentary tradition, Mr. 

Speaker? Do they care about the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan or the interests of the minority? And the answer’s 

no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we’re concluding tonight, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it should be clear to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that we have in place a government today that 

will abuse its power, that will abuse its majority, Mr. Speaker, 

and will do so in a heavy-handed manner without looking at the 

interests of stakeholders in the province of Saskatchewan, 

without looking at the interest of the opposition in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Speaker, will act unilaterally without 

thought, without consideration for the needs of others, Mr. 

Speaker, and in only, their own self interest, Mr. Speaker, and 

not in the interests . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It now being 10:30, 

this House stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 625 

  Van Mulligen (point of order) .................................................................................................................................................. 635 

  Gantefoer (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 635, 653 

  The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan) (point of order) ................................................................................................... 635, 653 

  Taylor (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 653 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McCall ............................................................................................................................................................................... 637, 643 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 640 

  Iwanchuk ........................................................................................................................................................................... 648, 655 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


