




















































Hansard: November 20, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 16A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1765 

 November 20, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you I’d like to introduce four 

visitors in the Chamber today, if they could just give a wave. 

Larry Carlson, Barb Butler, Dr. Robert Capp, and Terry Foulds 

are all here from the Saskatchewan Brain Injury Association. 

 

We’re going to be having a recognition of volunteers later on 

this day in the Assembly so I’d like all members right now to 

formally welcome them to their Chamber, and as I said, later on 

we’ll more formally recognize the great work that they do in 

this province. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

distinct pleasure today to introduce a number of members of the 

Veterans in United Nations Peacekeeping, North Saskatchewan 

Chapter, who are in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. These 

Saskatchewan peacekeepers, Mr. Speaker, are here today to 

view proceedings that will take place after question period. 

 

I would like to take a moment to introduce these dedicated and 

committed individuals, Mr. Speaker, starting with John McKay, 

his affiliation is army — John. Malcolm MacPherson, 

affiliation army; Janet Bennett, affiliation air force; Dave 

Robinson, affiliation army; Kirk Thompson, affiliation army; 

Ken Lowther, affiliation air force; Mike Titus, affiliation army; 

William Dubinski, affiliation army; John Bradley, affiliation 

army artillery; Pat Furlong, affiliation air force; Gene Bennett, 

affiliation army; Ray Jacob, affiliation army; and Donna 

Thompson, affiliation air force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each of these individuals have represented Canada 

in a peacekeeping role through the United Nations somewhere 

in the world and, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome 

them to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

the member from The Battlefords and on behalf of the 

government again welcome our guests. Some of you I may have 

served with or been on the same base with in the past, and it’s 

very nice to see you here today. And again, welcome to the 

Assembly. We’ll be talking more later. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the Assembly several people who are guests today in the 

west gallery. These folks are from various arts organizations in 

our community and are joining us today to observe the 

introduction of Bill No. 68, The Arts Professions Act. 

 

I would like to introduce Mr. Ken Sagal. Ken is the Chair of the 

board of directors of the Saskatchewan Arts Board. He has been 

an active member of the board since 2001 and a valued 

community volunteer for more than 25 years. Jeremy Morgan 

who has been the executive director of the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board since 1997. Ruth Smillie who is well known in our city 

as the CEO [chief executive officer] and artistic director of the 

Globe Theatre; Andrew North who moved to this great province 

a few years ago to become the general manager of the Globe 

Theatre. 

 

Marnie Gladwell, executive director of Saskatchewan Arts 

Alliance, a member organization that works to promote the 

growth of the arts and culture industries in Saskatchewan; Terry 

Fenton, a member on the board of the directors of the Arts 

Alliance and a writer and artist himself; next to him his wife, 

Sheila Fenton. 

 

Also from the Saskatchewan Arts Alliance, seated on the floor 

of the House is Sheila Roberts, a committee member and 

long-time advocate for Saskatchewan artists. She is 

accompanied by her husband, Joseph Roberts. And I am very 

pleased to welcome Jack Semple in the Speaker’s gallery. He 

hardly needs an introduction, Mr. Speaker, as he is renowned 

throughout Canada and North America as a virtuoso guitarist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and hon. members, please join me in welcoming 

these valued citizens to their Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to join the minister in welcoming our fantastic cultural and 

artistic guests to the Assembly today. It is a distinct pleasure to 

have them join us here today. It’s nice to be able to see all these 

familiar faces again, as well as Jack sitting up in the other 

gallery as well. So welcome to the legislature and I hope that 

you have a successful and ongoing future with the arts that 

you’re involved in. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations, the member from Saskatoon Silver 

Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

and through you, I am pleased to rise today to welcome to the 

Assembly some of Saskatchewan’s finest. I am referring to 

volunteer firefighters and first responders. 

 

With us today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

recognize — and I’d ask if they would stand as I read their 

name — Dale Wagner, president of the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Firefighters Association. Dale has also been a 

volunteer firefighter and first responder for 35 years. Larry 

Zadvorny who is the first vice-president of the association; Ken 

Dobra who is the executive director of the association; Colin 

King, deputy fire commissioner, operations; Garth Palmer, 

president of the fire chiefs association; and last but certainly not 

least, Duane McKay who is Saskatchewan’s fire commissioner. 

 

I had a great conversation with Duane last night and I know he 

was a colleague of a person on my office staff and so I heard 

first-hand about some of the great things that he has done as 

well. 

 

These individuals have been active volunteers, firefighters, first 

responders, and trainers for many years. They represent, Mr. 

Speaker, more than 6,000 Saskatchewan residents from all 

across the province who give of their time to volunteer as 

firefighters and first responders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are here today to join in with the introduction 

of changes to The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008. This 

Act is administered by SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] and it outlines the law regarding road use in 

Saskatchewan. One of the amendments to the Act will allow 

municipalities to designate vehicle owners owned by volunteer 

firefighters and first responders as emergency vehicles. This 

change will allow Saskatchewan municipalities to designate 

their volunteer firefighters and first responders to operate their 

vehicles as emergency vehicles when responding to emergency 

situations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in welcoming these fine 

individuals. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

wish to join with the minister in welcoming our guests to their 

Legislative Assembly. I’ve had the opportunity to work with 

most of these gentlemen over time and we do very much 

appreciate the work that you do on behalf of citizens in our 

province. Without the dedication of the many volunteers who 

help make our province much safer, our province would be a 

much less safe place. 

 

So thank you very much for all the work you do year after year 

on behalf of the people of this province. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, in your west gallery, I’d like to welcome a grade 7 

class from Saskatoon Greystone Heights, as well as their 

teacher, Michelle Pantel, and chaperones, Brad Ashdown, 

Heather Groat, Huw Rees, Lisa Hupka, and Tom Plishka. 

 

I’ll see the students a little later today. I hope they enjoy their 

day in the legislature. And I would invite members of the 

gallery to welcome them to their gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

concerning the issue of the overreliance on education funding 

on our property taxes. And it really speaks to the pleas to the 

government that they would address this situation when they 

have such surplus revenues and resources at their disposal. And 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

child care. It is well known the inadequate access to quality, 

affordable child care is a major roadblock for parents accessing 

the labour force. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by the residents of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable housing for 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

Saskatchewan seniors. This is a major concern for many people 

in Saskatchewan as this winter approaches. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present on behalf of Saskatchewan’s senior citizens. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary 

education. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Regina Students’ 

Union, the University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union, and 

the First Nations University of Canada Student Association. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Universal Children’s Day 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the father of 

two beautiful daughters, I am pleased to call attention to 

Universal Children’s Day. In Canada we celebrate this event on 

November 20 in commemoration of the adoption of the 

Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 1959 and the Convention 

on the Rights of the Child, 1989. 

 

This day reminds us of the important contribution and role 

children and youth play in our society, their potential for the 

future, and their right to be safe. The UN [United Nations] 

Convention on the Rights of the Child addresses the basic 

human rights and protection every child and youth under 18 

years of age is entitled to. 

 

Our government’s taking measures to ensure the safety, health, 

happiness of our children in Saskatchewan. For example, we 

have increased annual funding to 1.12 million for integrated 

Internet child exploitation unit to address sexual exploitation 

over the Internet. Through the creation of a new active families 

benefit, we are helping families with the cost of their kids’ 

participation in culture, recreation, and sport. 

Mr. Speaker, there is an African proverb that states, “It takes a 

village to raise a child.” On this day, I would like to encourage 

everyone in this Assembly to take a moment to listen to the 

words and thoughts of a child or young adult. They have a lot to 

contribute to our province and they deserve to be heard by all of 

us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Holodomor Memorial Day 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on May 7 of this year, this 

Legislative Assembly unanimously passed third reading of Bill 

40, The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) 

Memorial Day Act. Mr. Speaker, as in Ukraine, the Bill 

recognizes the fourth Saturday in November each year as its 

annual day to commemorate the innocent victims of the 

1932-1933 Holodomor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Ukrainian Holodomor commemorates the lives 

of millions of innocent men, women, and children who were 

eradicated by starvation in the heart of Europe’s breadbasket. 

Mr. Speaker, there are many Ukrainians like myself who have 

watched documentaries, read, and listened to the stories of the 

Holodomor. But so much more must be done to understand this 

period of Ukrainian history. For us in Saskatchewan, Bill 40 is 

one such very important step. 

 

[10:15] 

 

On November 22 there will be many commemorative services 

throughout the world, Canada, and here in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the Ukrainian Canadian Congress has organized two 

such special commemorative services in Saskatoon and Regina, 

which will be followed by educational presentations on the 

Holodomor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must continue to educate. We must continue to 

remember — remember the history, tell the story of the 

attempts to destroy the national consciousness and the attempts 

to quash the aspirations of independence through starvation. We 

do this, Mr. Speaker, not only so that history might not repeat 

itself, but for the flame of human rights which we all so deeply 

cherish. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Arts Councils Celebrate 40th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Moose Jaw 

earlier this month, the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 

Councils celebrated 40 years at art. This is a unique 

Saskatchewan organization working to bring a variety of 

performing and visual arts to communities across the province, 

from Hudson Bay to Bengough, from La Ronge to Swift 

Current and Estevan. 

 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

Two hundred and fifty delegates met to celebrate their 40-year 

anniversary and to plan the 2009-2010 season. They auditioned 

a variety of 15 different performing artists at the Mae Wilson 

Theatre and attended a variety of workshops. Thanks to their 

efforts, dozens of communities enjoy live musical and theatrical 

performances, visual art exhibitions and workshops, and other 

special events. 

 

Forty years is indeed a milestone to celebrate. The 

Saskatchewan Arts Councils have come a long way since their 

modest beginning in 1968, now with 46 art councils and 97 

associated members bringing performing and visual arts to 

Saskatchewan communities each season. 

 

Congratulations to the Organization of Saskatchewan Arts 

Councils for 40 years of bringing people and arts together 

across the province, and for giving artists the opportunity to 

showcase their talent in Saskatchewan, and for ensuring that 

arts are an integral part of the lives of Saskatchewan people. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

National Child Day Observed in Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, November 20, a.k.a. [also known 

as] today, is National Child Day. As it states on their website, 

it’s a day to remember that children need love and respect to 

grow to their full potential. It’s a day to marvel at their 

uniqueness and all they have to offer. It’s a day to celebrate the 

family and think about how adults affect the development of 

children close to them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we all know well the importance of early 

learning as it pertains to childhood development, and we’re all 

aware of the positive effect early learning has on outcomes later 

in school and in life. 

 

In Prince Albert, National Child Day is celebrated at an event 

called “Sing and Play With Us.” Children from licensed child 

care centres throughout Prince Albert will gather at city hall 

from noon till 1 o’clock to share songs and demonstrate the 

learning activities they participate in daily. The public is invited 

to watch and encourage our children 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, National Child Day has been celebrated 

since 1993. This is a day set aside for reflection upon the United 

Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child and Convention 

on the Rights of the Child. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating the children of licensed daycare centres of Prince 

Albert and extending our appreciation to the organizers of this 

local event. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle. 

 

Dress For Success 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member of 

Saskatchewan Rivers and I had the pleasure of attending the 

Dress for Success event earlier in Regina this week. It was a big 

success. One of the highlights of the event was a donation of 

$23,000 worth of shoes from Marler Shoes. 

 

Dress for Success Regina is a relatively new program in the 

Queen City, having officially opened its doors in February of 

this year. It’s an affiliate of an international non-profit 

organization, Dress for Success Worldwide founded in New 

York City in 1996. 

 

The program helps economically disadvantaged women on a 

referral basis. Referral agencies include a variety of non-profit 

government agencies such as shelters, job-training programs, 

and educational institutions. 

 

And how does it work? Dress for Success works on a donation 

model. The program accepts relatively gently used women’s 

business attire. The clothing is often used to outfit women who 

are going for job interviews. Dress for Success volunteers also 

provide encouragement and support that will assist in 

developing a client’s self-esteem and confidence. 

 

According to Winn Spenst with SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute 

of Applied Science and Technology] career enhancement 

program, this has a lasting effect on women. We want to thank 

Barbara Hildebrandt and her hard-working team of volunteers 

for making this so successful. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Historians Take Note 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, when historians look at the 

last year in Saskatchewan politics, they will note the current 

Saskatchewan Party government assumed office in the midst of 

a tremendous surge of economic activity which had begun 

under the previous NDP [New Democratic Party] 

administration. The historians will note that before the 2007 

election, the population of Saskatchewan was growing because 

of in-migration, housing prices were escalating rapidly, and 

more people were working at higher wages than ever before. 

 

The historians will note the incoming government was flush 

with cash, with more to come. They will note the financial 

community had upgraded the province’s credit rating to a very 

high level well before the election. There may even be a 

curiosity footnote about the new Premier calling the fiscal 

situation stark before proceeding on a spending spree. 

 

The historians will also note, contrary to their stated position in 

opposition, the new government embraced a fiscal stabilization 

fund to help it weather any future economic downturn. The 

historians may also make note of other policy reversals by the 

Saskatchewan Party such as lowering the fuel tax. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, members. I recognize the member 

from Regina Douglas Park. 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Historians may also make note of other 

policy reversals by the Saskatchewan Party such as lowering the 

fuel tax — great idea in opposition, bad in government; rebate 

for home heating costs — great idea in opposition, bad in 

government; 80 per cent cost of living indexation for retired 

government workers — great idea in opposition, bad in 

government; support for the livestock industry — great idea in 

opposition, bad in government. Mr. Speaker, I could go on and 

on, but I see that my 90 seconds are up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Forthcoming Apology 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Murdoch Carriere’s victims deserve an apology. For far too 

long the depth of their pain and suffering has been ignored. It is 

time to take a step in the right direction and do what is right for 

these nine brave women who decided to break their silence and 

come forward. 

 

On Monday, Mr. Speaker, this Assembly will apologize to 

Murdoch Carriere’s victims. For years, Mr. Speaker, they were 

harassed at work by their supervisor, a senior government 

employee. They were afraid to come to work. Their pleas for 

help fell on deaf ears. 

 

These women had the right to expect their employer to provide 

a safe, harassment-free workplace. Their employer, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, failed them. These women had 

the right to expect honesty from their employer about Murdoch 

Carriere’s employment status. Their employer, the Government 

of Saskatchewan, failed them. For that, they are owed an 

apology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when these courageous women broke their silence 

and told their story, they thought they would be able to get 

closure and move forward. That was not to be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A great man once said, Mr. Speaker, that the time is always 

right to do what is right. It is time, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call oral questions, I just want to let 

our guests know that we really appreciate you coming to your 

Chamber, but just to remind you that guests are not to 

participate in any form in the debate on the floor. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Enterprise 

and Innovation has finally revealed the membership of his 18 

sector teams. When you look at the names, 160 people or so by 

my count, it makes you wonder about its composition — one 

representative of the working men and women in this massive 

new bureaucracy, and there are 28 women out of the 160 people 

on the sector teams. 

 

To the minister: how can he build such a massive bureaucracy 

and at the same time manage to make it so unrepresentative? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I’d 

like to point out to the member — and I do appreciate the 

question finally after all of these weeks — that we haven’t 

created any kind of a bureaucracy. What we’ve done with the 

sector teams is engage the people of the province in economic 

decision making. And I know that that’s a foreign concept to 

the member, who doesn’t appear to be listening, but I’d ask him 

to try and understand this new way of thinking where we 

actually engage the public in decisions that affect them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, this seems like a pretty big and 

expensive new bureaucracy. All told it will cost close to $1 

million over a four-year period for these teams to meet, and of 

course the provincial budget is transferring more than 8 million 

into this Enterprise Saskatchewan budget, what The 

StarPhoenix once called a “highly nebulous entity.” 

 

To the minister: how will Saskatchewan people benefit from all 

the money being spent on this minister’s new bureaucracy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate the question. And once again, Mr. Speaker, I point 

out that this is a totally foreign concept to those members 

opposite — engaging the experts from the public on largely a 

volunteer basis. 

 

The board members give up their day, probably once a month 

I’d suspect, over the course of the next year or so. And they get 

paid the fabulous and extravagant sum of $110 a day for that, 

plus a little bit of money at the government rate for travel, 

whatever’s required. The total cost of this, including support, 

staff support for a year is estimated to be about $350,000. I 

think that’s a pretty small price to pay to get public input from 

experts in their field. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people were told 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

that Enterprise Saskatchewan would be nimble, quick, and able 

to respond quickly to economic issues as they arise. Of course 

we were also told by the Premier that it would take a month to 

get started, not a year. It seems that people over there aren’t 

either nimble or quick. 

 

In the year we’ve been waiting for the minister to build this 

bureaucracy, the crisis in forestry has worsened. Eight mills 

have now closed. Three have announced layoffs in the last three 

weeks. In the last year, the only action the minister’s managed 

on this file is to create a forest sector team that’s met a grand 

total of once. 

 

To the minister: if Enterprise Saskatchewan isn’t able to address 

critical economic issues like forestry in a timely fashion, what 

exactly is its point? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for this question as well. And I wonder if he really 

wants to continue along this line. But the sector teams have 

been announced now for I think, what, a week? The fact that 

most of them have only met once should not be particularly 

surprising. He complains about the fact that it may take a month 

to get actual recommendations from these teams. Those 

members, Mr. Speaker, were in power for 16 years, and they 

didn’t even ask. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Unbelievable lack of insight there. The 

minister recently described Enterprise Saskatchewan as the 

ultimate participation model for private sector involvement and 

said it has been tasked to develop strategy and recommend 

action to move Saskatchewan forward on a sustainable growth 

agenda. You would think the mandate would involve nuclear 

industry development, but that’s been left to the Uranium 

Development Partnership. Regulatory modernization has been 

left to a council. It doesn’t even speak to clean coal. 

 

If Enterprise Saskatchewan’s being left out all of these major 

decisions, again what is its point? Has it made any 

recommendations to government yet, and if so, does the 

government intend to act on those recommendations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

I appreciate that question from the member as well. Although I 

really, I question the member’s understanding of what 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and the UDP [Uranium Development 

Partnership] are all about. The UDP is specifically put in place 

to make recommendations on how Saskatchewan can be further 

involved in the nuclear cycle. And of course that doesn’t 

preclude Enterprise Saskatchewan from dealing with any matter 

in the economy. And clearly the member has issues with that, 

understanding that simple fact or wanting to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Seniors’ Drug Plan 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One year ago almost to 

the day, this government announced that they were cutting the 

universal seniors’ drug plan that our NDP government had 

created. On November 3 of this year, the government provided 

information that 2,172 seniors were denied coverage as a result 

of this government’s decision to impose means testing on the 

seniors’ drug plan. On that same day, the government provided 

information that said the forecasted administrative costs for the 

2008-09 for means testing is expected to be $335,000. 

 

To the minister: how does he justify spending over 300,000 for 

the sole purpose of denying some seniors coverage under the 

plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, first of all what that member needs to know is that the 

senior drug plan was not cancelled. She’s absolutely false in her 

first statement. The senior drug plan was not cancelled. 

 

What happened was there was a means test put on the top. 

Sixty-four thousand income and above no longer receive the 

drug plan so we could put 14-year-olds and below — thousands 

of children that may have had trouble, their parents finding the 

money to put their children on the prescription drug that was 

needed. That youth were put on at a break-even level. There 

were some costs in administration, Mr. Speaker, but it was a 

small cost for the benefit of young children throughout this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The average cost of 

covering a senior under the drug plan is $1,000 a year. In other 

words, it would cost 2 million a year to cover all seniors. That’s 

the universal part. Actually since you wouldn’t need to have the 

means testing bureaucracy in place, it would only cost about 

$1.7 million. This government has $2.3 billion surplus and 

another 1.4 billion in their election slush fund. To cover all the 

seniors in the province would cost this government less than 

one-third of one per cent of all their surpluses. 

 

To the minister: why is he being so stingy when he’s sitting on 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

a mountain of money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recap, you 

know, just some recent history. Just prior to the 2007 election, 

when the hopes of that former government were fading quickly, 

all of a sudden a universal drug plan was going to be the 

saviour. In fact that was the key plank in their platform. They 

introduced it before, and that was going to save their election 

promises. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, for 28 days we campaigned on the fact that 

there needed to be a means test so that young people could 

receive the benefit of inexpensive drugs, Mr. Speaker. We 

campaigned on it for 28 days during the election, and I think the 

results are in, Mr. Speaker — 38 members on this side and only 

20 on that side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All seniors are asking 

for is for the government to spend one-half of one per cent of 

the surplus, or less than one-half of what they spent on 

severances for public servants that they fired without cause. 

Surely that money would have been better spent on seniors. 

Why is it okay to spend 2 million on political staff for 

ministers’ offices and not cover every senior under the drug 

plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I still really haven’t 

heard from that government when, you know, or that opposition 

when we increased the senior income plan. They never really 

applauded that, even though it hadn’t been touched for 16 years. 

That’s where part of the surplus has gone. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, the infrastructure deficit left in this 

province by that former government would take every cent of 

any surplus that was ever left behind, Mr. Speaker. If they start 

talking about spending money and spending the surplus, how 

many millions, in fact billions, have they spent just in one 

week, Mr. Speaker? That’s why they’re sitting on that side. 

Prudent spending, looking to the future, Mr. Speaker, dealing 

with infrastructure problems — that’s what this government is 

doing. Our priorities are straight. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Government’s Performance 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

throughout this session the Agriculture critic has been raising 

almost on a daily basis the plight facing the livestock industry 

in this province. Mr. Speaker, we have an industry in trouble. 

We are going to lose an industry without some intervention by 

provincial and federal governments. 

 

Thus far we’ve had the response from our Minister of 

Agriculture that there is going to be nothing from the province. 

Yesterday in the federal Throne Speech the words cattle or 

livestock industry were not even included, though we had been 

assured that the Premier had raised this with the Prime Minister. 

No mention from the federal government. 

 

Now yesterday we were told that we should be consoled 

because the Minister of Agriculture was going to speak to the 

Minister of Agriculture from North Battleford, Saskatchewan to 

find a solution. So I’m asking today the Minister of Agriculture: 

how did you make out on the phone call yesterday afternoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 

yesterday on the public record, it is a disappointment that there 

was no mention of the cattle sector and the troubles that it has 

been undergoing now for several years, really since BSE 

[bovine spongiform encephalopathy]. And so, Mr. Speaker, we 

have raised this issue with the national government. I can also 

say that the Minister of Agriculture will now be discussing 

these issues with the federal Minister of Agriculture later this 

day. 

 

But I would also say this, Mr. Speaker. Since coming into 

office, within weeks of being sworn in, we implemented a loan 

program, a $90 million loan program for the cattle sector and 

the hog sector — I think the first province to react. Mr. Speaker, 

we kept our commitment with respect to property tax in the 

budget, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Agriculture is under way 

with improvements to crop insurance that have been long 

overdue. We’ve dealt with the drought issue in terms of new 

water infrastructure programs. We’re not finished yet, Mr. 

Speaker. The assurance is this: that when rural Saskatchewan 

needs to be heard, they will be heard by this government — 

unlike their experience was under the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier now says we ought 

to stand by. We ought to stand by and wait for some further 

action. Mr. Speaker, when, when the cattle industry and the 

livestock industry in this province faced a BSE crisis, the 

provincial government reacted with a BSE recovery program. 

Today we have a government that does nothing, does nothing 

for our cattle industry, and seems not able to influence the 

federal government to do anything. 

 

The same story is being told in forestry. We’ve got forest 

workers in Big River, in Carrot River, in Hudson Bay, in 

Meadow Lake, in La Ronge, and Prince Albert who are without 

work today. We don’t need to hear from the minister what they 



1772 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

won’t do. We need to hear today what this government will do 

for the forestry workers in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister in charge of 

forestry: when will they act to support the working families in 

the forest industry of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the Leader 

of the Opposition asks only one question about the cattle issue, 

Mr. Speaker. Did you notice that? Here’s some more facts of 

the matter in terms of support for rural Saskatchewan and the 

comparison and contrast between this side and that side. 

 

In the last election a year ago, clearly the cattle industry was 

under stress in the province. This is not a new development. 

And so when they came with their property tax promise in the 

last campaign, Mr. Speaker, how much was there for rural 

Saskatchewan? Nothing. How much has there been from our 

government? Forty-six million dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to forestry, there is a member asking 

a question that was going to risk $100 million of taxpayers’ 

money, Mr. Speaker, for the Domtar project — money that I 

think everybody understands would be gone today. What we 

need is to sit down with the forestry sector, as we have been 

doing with the minister, and mapping a way forward. The entire 

industry is in trouble in North America but, Mr. Speaker, the 

good news is that here in the province of Saskatchewan we are 

still creating jobs at a record pace. There is still opportunity for 

people in all sectors of the economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago — the Premier’s right 

— there was difficulty in the forestry sector, and there was a 

provincial government willing to work with communities, 

willing to work with workers to make a difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — That’s what we had. We had a cattle industry 

in trouble, and we had a provincial government that would 

stand up for that industry and would stand up with real, hard 

cash and would fight a federal government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got other issues in this province facing 

Saskatchewan families, particularly around questions of 

affordability around housing, around the situation where if 

people can find housing, they now can’t afford it. Mr. Speaker, 

the only sensible things that that Minister Responsible for 

Social Services and this government has done, the only sensible 

things they’ve done it with money left behind by the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The minister talks, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

talks about opening housing projects, every one of them 

commissioned under the NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they will do nothing for the cattle 

industry. They’re doing nothing for the families affected in the 

forestry sector. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Social Services: what will she 

do for families facing housing issues in this province? What 

will she do that’s new, that’s different, that’s new? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 

talking about all the things that the NDP did. Let me tell you 

something, Mr. Speaker. Did the NDP increase at historic rates 

the Saskatchewan employment supplement when people needed 

it and when they were sitting on a half billion dollar surplus? 

No, Mr. Speaker. Did they increase the low-income assistance 

for seniors when they were sitting on a half billion dollar 

surplus? The answer is no. Did they take the opportunity to 

drop 80,000 low-income people from the tax rolls? The 

answer’s no. Did they take the opportunity to increase the 

low-income tax credit for those who pay no tax but need some 

relief from their government at this time? The answer is no, Mr. 

Speaker. The answer is no. 

 

This government is taking action. What we’ve seen this week 

from the opposition is a long list of problems they have with 

their former government, with themselves. They need to get in a 

time machine, go back and oppose their own government. As 

for us, we will continue to fix the problems left behind by the 

NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when the former 

New Democratic Party government raised the minimum wage 

and intended to index it, they voted against it. When we 

introduced the HomeFirst program, the broadest, the broadest 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I mean, Mr. Speaker, the revisionist history 

that comes from the government benches today tells me they 

haven’t caught on. They are now the government, Mr. Speaker. 

They are now the government and it is their responsibility to 

deal with issues facing Saskatchewan people. 

 

Well we all know one thing they did do almost immediately 

upon their election, and that was to rob the money from the 

inner city of Saskatoon that was dedicated to the creation of 

Station 20 West. We know they did that, Mr. Speaker. Now we 

know, now we know through some access to information that 

$250,000 had already been spent — in terms of architectural 

fees, in terms of legal fees — in the preparation for the building 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1773 

of Station 20. 

 

My question I guess is to the Minister of Social Services and 

the Minister of Health: have they reconsidered that ill-advised 

decision, that ill-advised decision particularly in light of the 

health disparities report that we now have from Saskatoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve heard from 

the NDP over the last little while is all of the things they 

intended to do but they just couldn’t get around to it, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s a big, long list of these things. 

 

And even though they were sitting on their own mountain of 

money, about a half billion dollars at any given particular time 

. . . All the things they intended to do. You know, we were just 

going to get to increasing the rental allowances but we didn’t 

get to it, but we were intending to. We were going to increase 

the seniors’ income assistance program, but we didn’t get 

around to it for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. We intended to build St. 

Mary’s School in that member’s riding because it’s what’s 

needed in that riding, but we didn’t get around to it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Maybe what happened a year ago is the people of the province 

intended to vote for the NDP, but chose something better 

instead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, am I mistaken? Am I mistaken? I 

do not believe that I heard . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I may be mistaken, but I do not 

believe that I heard this Premier mention the words Station 20 

West in his response. It’s a very direct question. Has this 

government — given, given the resources they have, given that 

$250,000 already expended on the building of Station 20 — 

have they today reconsidered their ill-advised decision to cancel 

Station 20? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the shorter answer is no. We 

stand by that decision, Mr. Speaker, and I want to point 

something else out additionally. What we have done is 

reconsidered the actions of the previous government when it 

comes to that particular neighbourhood, when it comes to that 

member’s constituency. For a very long time, for a very long 

time it was pretty clear that that neighbourhood, that 

constituency, those parents involved in that neighbourhood 

needed a new school at St. Mary’s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll tell you what we did reconsider. We reconsidered their 

decision to year after year deny that project. We have funded 

that project. It’s moving forward and well received right in that 

member’s riding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we saw a federal 

Throne Speech that now threatens federal funding to social 

programs in this country, that had no mention of the cattle 

industry, only a vague reference to the forestry industry — 

which would be particularly of interest in Saskatchewan — but 

it had a very specific, a very specific commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

And that was the commitment of the Harper government to 

create a North American cap and trade program for emissions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of the 

Environment because in July of this year, in July of this year the 

Minister of the Environment said, and I quote: 

 

There are two proposed initiatives: the federal Liberals’ 

“Green Shift” plan and the cap & trade system proposed 

by several other provinces. 

 

Note these words, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Both would cost Saskatchewan hundreds of millions of 

dollars without substantially reducing GHG emissions, if 

at all. 

 

Is it the fact, according to the Minister of the Environment, that 

this new federal Conservative plan is going to cost quote “. . . 

Saskatchewan hundreds of millions of dollars . . .”? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let me just say this. I 

think here the hon. member and I agree. I am very concerned 

about what was referenced in the Speech from the Throne 

yesterday, what is contemplated by a continental cap and trade 

system. 

 

However I would say this, Mr. Speaker. Our government for 

some time, since our government was formed, has been 

working with the national government on an equivalency 

agreement, on an equivalency agreement to ensure that any 

levies generated from caps stays in the province so that we can 

actually focus on the answers — carbon capture, carbon 

sequestration, and not simply shifting the emissions around. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to make that case to 

the federal government. And I know the hon. member has some 

more questions about this issue. I look forward to answering 

them because this is an important debate for the province. 

 

I will say this. This government will stand up for the interests of 

the economy of Saskatchewan. We will not, Mr. Speaker, be 

supporting initiatives, fiscal measures that are about moving 



1774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

emissions around, not about sound environmental policy, and 

threaten the strongest economy in the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier says that he is 

going to stand up for the interests of Saskatchewan in Ottawa. 

Well he said he was going to do something about the cattle 

industry. Nothing in the federal Throne Speech. 

 

He said that this province opposes cap and trade and that we 

need an assurance that any cap and trade funding would stay 

right here in the province. Nothing in the Throne Speech — in 

fact just the opposite. He recognizes we’ve got a problem in the 

forestry in this province. Nothing in the federal Throne Speech. 

He surely recognizes that we have some housing crisis issues in 

this province. Nothing in the federal Throne Speech. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier is, I guess to the 

Premier: how is this new relationship with Ottawa working so 

far? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, very, very quickly: $10 

million more for the synchrotron the NDP couldn’t get; a 

quarter billion dollars more for a clean coal project in our 

province the NDP couldn’t get; $31 million for early childhood 

intervention and child care that they apparently forgot to ask 

for, Mr. Speaker; and millions more in infrastructure, more 

work to be done. 

 

But I will say this: when I left for question period here this 

morning . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The markets may have changed, but before 

I left the office for question period today our dollar was down 2 

cents, oil was down $3, and the market was off 400 this 

morning. Mr. Speaker, the point of the Government of 

Saskatchewan to the feds and to anyone else that’s listening is 

this: until an economist can look us in the eye and say cap and 

trade — and however it’s being proposed, in whatever 

manifestations they’re talking about — until they can tell us it 

will not add more trouble for an already troubled North 

American economy, we don’t support it. 

 

We will continue to move forward in terms of carbon capture 

sequestration, actually doing something about CO2, Mr. 

Speaker. But the position of the province of Saskatchewan is 

this is not what is needed right now in the North American 

economy. What is needed is more stable policy, the likes of 

which we’re working hard to bring forward right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I call members to order. Government 

members will come to order. The Minister of Highways will 

come to order. And if I have to, I’ll go down the row. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 

sur l’éducation 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 67, 

The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that 

Bill No. 67, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 be now read 

the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/ 

Loi sur les professions artistiques 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 68 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport has moved that Bill No. 68, The Arts 

Professions Act be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1775 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 69, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 69, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations has moved that Bill No. 72, The Traffic Safety 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers 

Recognition Day Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that Bill No. 602, The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

that Bill No. 602, The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day 

Act be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has asked 

for leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. The member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers 

Recognition Day Act 
 

Mr. Taylor: — It’s a real pleasure to bring forward Bill 602, 

The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act, Mr. Speaker. 

Earlier today I had the pleasure to introduce a number of United 

Nations peacekeepers who have joined us in the Assembly 

today, Mr. Speaker. At this time before my formal remarks, I 

want to pay tribute to one of those in the gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Jack McKay of Dundurn. 

 

Mr. McKay was in The Battlefords on August 9, earlier this 

year. The Battlefords hosted one of two UN peacekeeper 

recognition days held this year in the province of 

Saskatchewan. This day, a ceremony of remembrance dedicated 

to all peacekeepers who serve their nation, especially those who 

paid the ultimate price, Mr. Speaker, took place on Main Street 

at the cenotaph in the city of North Battleford. During that 

ceremony, Mr. McKay made it very clear to me that although 

there were ceremonies in the province, there was at that time no 

official recognition of the role peacekeepers have played in our 

history. And I volunteered, Mr. Speaker, to check things out 

and to correct this if at all possible. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are here today because Mr. McKay was 

correct, and the Saskatchewan legislature was and is in a 

position to correct this oversight. The Bill in front of us today 

allows Saskatchewan to join our national government and 

governments in other provinces in honouring and respecting the 

role that United Nations peacekeepers have played, are playing, 

and will play in the future. And we thank Mr. McKay for his 

commitment and for speaking so forthrightly about the need for 

Saskatchewan to do this. 

 

I also want to thank my colleagues on both sides of the 

Legislative Assembly who have agreed to allow this legislation 

to proceed through all three stages and pass today, ensuring that 

what we want to achieve, Mr. Speaker, we will indeed achieve. 



1776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

And next year on August 9, United Nations peacekeepers and 

their families throughout Saskatchewan will have this very 

special day to call their own. So to my colleagues in the 

Chamber, especially members of the government, I say thank 

you for making this happen. 

 

Very simply put, Mr. Speaker, Bill 602 recognizes the 

contributions and sacrifices of United Nations peacekeepers 

now living in Saskatchewan. It is important to honour those 

who served us in direct conflict and equally important to honour 

those who served us in the pursuit of peace, to honour those 

who selflessly contribute to international peace and security. 

And this is especially important here in Canada because the UN 

peacekeeping force is a Canadian innovation for which former 

prime minister Lester B. Pearson won a Nobel Peace Prize. 

 

I was pleased to work with UN peacekeepers in Saskatchewan 

to establish specific legislative recognition for those who have 

kept and still keep the peace on our behalf. There will always be 

a role for peacekeeping in the world, Mr. Speaker, and 

Saskatchewan people need to be acknowledged for the courage, 

commitment, and compassion that it takes to play that role. 

 

I also want to acknowledge that Canada’s federal members of 

parliament have already passed similar legislation, also through 

private members’ legislation, Mr. Speaker, establishing August 

9 as a day of national recognition for UN peacekeepers. 

 

To do proper justice to the circumstances we find ourselves in 

today, let me quote from a couple of these members of 

parliament who spoke eloquently in favour of the national day. 

For example, Brent St. Denis of Ontario, an Ontario Member of 

Parliament, said August 9: 

 

. . . would be a heritage day which would allow for 

Canadians who do reflect upon those things to remember 

the tremendous work Canadian peacekeepers have done in 

the past and to remember those in the present who are still 

involved in that traditional role they continue to play on 

our behalf, a role they conduct with great bravery, with 

tremendous intelligence, with tremendous ability, and at 

. . . times, with tremendous restraint. 

 

He added, and I concur completely, Mr. Speaker, “If ultimately 

the objective of all our work as parliamentarians all around the 

world is indeed to have a more peaceful world, then there will 

always be a role for peacekeeping.” Another Ontario Member 

of Parliament, Mr. Bryon Wilfert, said: 

 

The United Nations under the Security Council gives the 

power and the responsibility to take collective action 

when it comes to peace and security around the world. For 

this reason, the international community looks at these 

type of operations where Canadians and others have 

played such an important role in the past. I mentioned [he 

went on to say] that over the last 43 years we have seen 

Canadians participate in many theatres and also assist 

other countries in the art and the role of peacekeeping. 

When Canadians wear their blue berets or their blue 

helmets, people know that peacekeepers are there to 

improve the quality of life for individuals in very difficult 

situations. They are there to assist in the peace process. 

 

And finally, Mr. speaker, let me quote from Betty Hinton, the 

parliamentary secretary to the Minister of Veterans Affairs who 

said: 

 

For more than 50 years our peacekeepers have gone to the 

far corners of the world to help preserve peace. Their 

courage has given Canada a well deserved reputation for 

standing up for the values of freedom, tolerance, respect, 

dignity, and the rule of law. We can only imagine the 

gratitude of those whose lives have been saved by the 

intervention of Canadian peacekeepers. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, some may ask why August 9 was chosen 

as this special day of recognition. Again quite simply, Mr. 

Speaker, it is August 9 that resonates for us as a day of 

recognition because it was on August 9, 1974, that nine 

Canadian peacekeepers serving with the United Nations 

Emergency Force in Egypt and Israel were in a Canadian Forces 

Buffalo transport aircraft that was shot down as it prepared to 

land at Damascus on a regular resupply mission. On that day, 

Mr. Speaker, there were no survivors. This represents the 

greatest loss of Canadian lives in a single day on a 

peacekeeping mission. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today we set in place provincial legislation to 

honour these wonderful men and women who, if they weren’t 

born and raised in Saskatchewan, they now make Saskatchewan 

their home or whose families continue to make Saskatchewan 

their home. Today we set in place legislation that will ensure 

that every August 9 from this point forward will give 

Saskatchewan people reason to take pause and think about the 

role that peacekeepers have and continue to play in our world. 

 

Today we celebrate an idea that had its genesis in 1956 in a 

conflict in the Suez that ultimately led to the creation of the UN 

peacekeeping force and that to this day serves the interest of 

peace throughout the world. And for those who are watching 

current events today, the largest UN peacekeeping force in the 

world today is on mission in war-torn lands of Congo in Africa. 

 

Today we thank our peacekeepers. I am pleased I could play a 

small role in this regard and wish success and safe return to all 

of those who are working through the United Nations in a 

peacekeeping capacity. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

that Bill No. 602, The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day 

Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m very pleased to speak to this Bill and thank the member 

from The Battlefords for bringing this Bill forward. 

 

Peacekeeping has a long history, Mr. Speaker. The member 

from Battleford talked about peacekeeping from ’56. That’s 

when it became officially designated as peacekeeping. But 

actually from the UN, United Nations, it was established in 

May 1948, and over the years the peacekeeping has evolved to 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1777 

meet the demands of different conflicts and changing political 

landscapes. It has proved itself to be an efficient and 

cost-effective international instrument to restore peace in 

post-conflict situations. 

 

Canada’s involvement as peacekeeping actually goes back into 

the late 1940s, although back in the later ’40s, in the earlier 

days of peacekeeping, it was called observer status or missions. 

We were involved back, post-Second World War. In 1950 to 

’53, Canada joined other UN nations to resist aggression during 

the Korean War. And we had a number of our Canadians that 

actually took place in the Korean War, and possibly some of 

our guests today were involved with the Korean conflict. 

 

But during the Suez crisis also is when, as my colleague from 

Battlefords mentioned, that a proposal was put forward by 

Lester B. Pearson that a multinational UN peacekeeping force 

be sent to the Suez to separate the warring parties. And that is 

when official status of peacekeeping was announced in Canada. 

 

And Canada is one of a handful of nations to which the United 

Nations can regularly turn to obtain peacekeeping advice and 

expert peacekeepers. Canada has participated in the 

overwhelming majority of peacekeeping operations mandated 

by the United Nations Security Council. Tens of thousands of 

Canadians have served in more than 40 separate peacekeeping 

missions, but Canada’s contribution to peacekeeping is not 

without risk. More than 100 Canadians have died in 

peacekeeping operations and hundreds more have been 

wounded. Canada has been at the forefront of peacekeeping 

operations around the world. Police and civilians have all 

played prominent roles in separating warring factions. 

 

I’d like to just talk about some of the conflicts that Canada 

troops have been involved with — troops, police, and civilians. 

And I’d like to talk just briefly about a few of them that we are 

familiar with. 

 

Cyprus from 1970 — it was the early ’70s, I guess — the 

Cyprus conflict between the Greeks and the Turk Cypriots, and 

here Canada sent troops in to be the buffer between these two 

warring factions. And it’s a very tense situation for our troops 

in there, Mr. Speaker, because both the Greeks and the Turks 

are members of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] 

and yet we had another NATO country sitting in between of 

them separating two warring factions. 

 

And one of the issues in peacekeeping — and I’m sure my 

colleagues would recognize this — is the rules of engagement. 

And this was one of the things that I had to deal with in my past 

life is how some of our peacekeepers were involved with such 

stringent rules of engagement. 

 

We have to look to places like Somalia, what happened in 

Somalia. We hear the press talk about what happened and none 

of us condone what happened to the young lad and how it 

happened. But we really have to take stock about our rules of 

engagement. We put our men and women in positions where 

you can be shot and killed and we don’t . . . I mean, we don’t 

appreciate that, but how do you defend yourself? And that’s 

always been a problem, whether it’s in the high seas, in places 

like Somalia, or in the air. And I’ve operated in a couple of 

those theatres, Mr. Speaker, and I know it’s extremely, 

extremely difficult and extremely hard on our troops. 

 

We look at places like Rwanda and we know in hindsight now 

what happened in Rwanda. It was actually genocide. There was 

800,000 people in Rwanda killed. We lost a number of 

peacekeepers in Rwanda. But again, what were the rules of 

engagement? I know General Dallaire had said there should be 

military action taken place, and in fact the UN disagreed. And 

now we know that all of these people were killed and it was 

genocide. So when I talk about rules of engagement, I know our 

people had a very, very tough time because of the rules of 

engagement. 

 

And we go to other theatres of operation. Like we had a number 

of people sent to Vietnam. In fact, I was ready to board the 

plane to go to Vietnam in a peacekeeping role. But you put 

yourself into that environment, and how do you operate under 

such stringent rules of engagement? So that, Mr. Speaker, I 

understand and appreciate what our people have gone through. I 

totally support the Bill. I totally support our peacekeepers. 

 

And putting it back into Saskatchewan, I know we’ve had a 

number of Saskatchewan people that have been involved in 

peacekeeping. I know we’ve had a number of people from 

Saskatchewan that have died in peacekeeping operations. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I would just stand and applaud all of our members 

that are here today to witness this Bill. And I fully support Bill 

602. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member for The Battlefords that Bill No. 

602, The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate that Bill 

602, The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act is 

referred to the Committee of the Whole and request leave for 

the said Bill to be considered in the Committee of the Whole 

immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — Said Bill stands referred to the Committee of 

the Whole. And the member has requested leave for Bill No. 

602, The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act to be 

considered in Committee of the Whole immediately. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 

 

Clerk: — Committee of the Whole. 



1778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair of the House for the 

House to go into Committee of the Whole. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers 

Recognition Day Act 
 

The Chair: — I call this committee to order. The first item of 

business is Bill No. 602, An Act to recognize National 

Peacekeepers Day in Saskatchewan. Clause 1, short title, The 

National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act. Is clause 1 agreed 

to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to.] 

 

[Preamble agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the advice 

and consent of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enacts as follows: An Act to recognize National Peacekeepers 

Day in Saskatchewan. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move that the 

committee report the Bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 

No. 602, An Act to recognize National Peacekeepers Day in 

Saskatchewan without amendment. Is that agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I move that the committee 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It is moved by the member from The Battlefords 

that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. Is that carried? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 602, The National Peacekeepers Recognition 

Day Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third time? I 

recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I move this 

Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has 

requested leave for Bill No. 602, The National Peacekeepers 

Recognition Day Act be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers 

Recognition Day Act 
 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I move that 

Bill No. 602 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for The 

Battlefords that Bill No. 602, The National Peacekeepers 

Recognition Day Act be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Clerk Assistant: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — At the next sitting of the House. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

question 109 through 124. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 109 through 124 tabled. 

 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1779 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Viability of Saskatchewan Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be moving a 

motion that, just to get it on the Table, I want to say what it is. 

The motion is: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government not to impose 

ideologically driven restrictions on Saskatchewan’s 

Crown corporations and allow them to operate in a 

manner that will best ensure their long-term strength, 

viability, and ability to deliver the best possible, lowest 

cost service to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be moving that at the end of my remarks. 

 

What we are living through in Saskatchewan is the beginning of 

the end of Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. The Sask Party 

government claim that they are the keepers of the Crown 

corporations, and they claim to be with Saskatchewan people. 

They claim that their goal is to provide gas, power, insurance, 

and telephony services at the lowest possible cost. 

 

What the Sask Party does not get, what they don’t get is that 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations have evolved and continue 

to refine their operations so that they can deliver those services 

for the best long-term good of all Saskatchewan people. That is, 

that’s what they were doing until the sell-off started with the 

election of the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our Crowns have survived through interesting times, to put it 

mildly. SaskPower, for example, has operated through times of 

drought, and these are challenging years when the revenue 

stream from hydro was diminished, and it drove the cost of coal 

and fuel up as the higher cost replacement was used. 

 

SaskTel has operated through arguably the biggest fundamental 

changes possible. SaskTel of as little as 15 or 20 years ago 

would not . . . You’d hardly recognize it as the same 

corporation. In those days, SaskTel relied hugely on 

long-distance revenues and every year that continues to 

plummet, but now we see SaskTel operating a vastly expanded 

list of services. In addition to the land phone, they have cell 

phones, internet services, home security, TV and movies and 

entertainment, and much, much more. 

 

SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, has developed infrastructure like gas 

lines and storage caverns. They deliver gas over a system that 

has more kilometres of pipeline than anywhere in the world, 

and they do a better job than any company in the world — full 

stop, period. 

 

SGI has operated through adversity. The very nature of 

insurance is you have adversity, but that’s their business, Mr. 

Speaker, and they know that they have to spread the risk, if you 

like, as far as they can. And that’s how they protect individual 

Saskatchewan policyholders. 

 

While the New Democrats were in government, these Crown 

corporations were seeking opportunities to earn dollars and 

experiences for employees outside of the borders of 

Saskatchewan. We were providing job growth experience far 

and wide through venues like, Mr. Speaker, venues like 

SaskPower has an investment in MRM [Muskeg River mine] 

cogen just 75 kilometres north of Fort McMurray. It’s a very 

good 172-megawatt cogeneration project that . . . A little note 

before I get to the money of it. A little note, Mr. Speaker, that 

84 per cent of the available energy is captured and used in the 

form of electricity and steam for the extraction of oil up in the 

Fort McMurray area. The normal for a gas electrical generation 

plant is, you’ll realize, a 33 per cent value of return of the 

available energy. So it’s 84 per cent return versus a more 

normal 33 per cent. 

 

Just also ATCO [ATCO Power] is the partner with SaskPower 

on this project. And ATCO speaks very, very glowingly about 

that, and yet this government wants to sell it off. This is an 

operation, Mr. Speaker, that’s returning close to a million 

dollars a month to SaskPower, and it’s something that can help 

cushion SaskPower’s drop in income on years where we might 

have a drought, that sort of thing. So every dollar or every 

million dollars that we can earn out of Saskatchewan is a 

million dollars we don’t have to earn out of the pockets of 

SaskPower customers. 

 

SaskTel has technology literally worldwide. They’ve got 

involvement in a great many things. Some of the investments 

that the now government moan about are investments that were 

investments in switching operations that gave SaskTel 

customers access to Asia at a much more reasonable cost than 

what we would otherwise have if we were simply paying for 

services elsewhere. 

 

In energy, I’ve already mounted the case of Heritage Gas in 

Nova Scotia and how that is bringing money into the coffers for 

SaskEnergy and providing opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people in the management of Heritage Gas in Nova Scotia. 

They have other operations in Chile, and those are also doing 

very, very well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SGI, just in its last report, SGI was quite proud that $9 million 

earned out of province — in insurance, out of province — $9 

million returned directly to the bottom line of SGI. And that’s 

$9 million that cushioned the earnings, if you like, and it took 

the pressure off of SGI to raise the rates for Saskatchewan 

consumers of insurance. 

 

And these are good things, Mr. Speaker, when we can have job 

growth experiences out of province and bring revenue into 

Saskatchewan from out of province. This is a wonderful, 

wonderful thing. That’s what we believe in as New Democrats, 

and it’s what clearly the now government, the governing 

Saskatchewan Party, don’t believe in. 

 

They also have a fundamental change. And I want to just refer 

to May 7 of this year when the Minister Responsible for CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] said that the 

build, own, and operate model of electrical generation that 

SaskPower has had for decades now is not something that this 

government — meaning the Sask Party government — is 

interested in. No more, they say. 

 



1780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

Another quote from that same minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

October 28. The quote is, “We’re not boxing them into a narrow 

window, we’re boxing them into Saskatchewan.” 

 

And of course he was referring to the Crown corporations. 

 

But what is the reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The reality is the 

Sask Party, one of the first things they did is commissioned a 

report from KPMG, a $250,000 report, or $25,000 a page, 

which wouldn’t even be half bad if they’d listen and, you know, 

read the report and follow it. But of course they don’t. 

 

In this KPMG report, Mr. Speaker . . . And I urge people to read 

the entire report, to get it. It’s not that huge a report. It’s 

reasonably well done. I have no quarrel with KPMG in what 

they’ve done. But KPMG showed that of the total investments 

that have been bought, operated, and sold, of those total 

investments that were completed, the return on investment to 

the people of Saskatchewan, to the Crown corporations, through 

the Crown corporations, a return of investment — 41.6 per cent. 

Those words never crossed the lips of government members. I 

haven’t heard it once from government ministers or members of 

the government, Mr. Speaker. A 41.6 per cent return on 

investments of the investments that we saw from start to finish 

while New Democrats were in office. 

 

The Sask Party are saying, well there’s going to be a negative 

return. And they pull out some numbers that are based on if you 

take some valuation of the company today as opposed to 

Heritage Gas that is growing in value. If you were to sell it at 

fire sale depressed rates, you could show a loss, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. You could show a loss. And that’s what they’re 

determined to do because they’re philosophically hide-bent on 

destroying Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in the KPMG report one of 

the things that they say is that quote: 

 

Based upon our scope of review we concluded that 

strategic objectives were substantially or partially 

achieved in over eighty percent of the Investments. 

 

Over 80 per cent of the investments. That’s a pretty darn good 

record to have the goals substantially achieved in over 80 per 

cent of the investments. And that’s according to the 

commissioned study that the Sask Party had commissioned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly our Crown corporations have a great 

potential, and they have served Saskatchewan incredibly well. 

These investments that have been made out of province should 

not be simply thrown away. It would be like throwing the baby 

away with the bath water, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is not 

something that should be done lightly. And I submit that by 

selling off at fire sale prices these assets that the Crown 

Corporations have developed out of province, that it’s going to 

harm the long-term viability of our Saskatchewan Crown 

Corporations and the government will then sell them. 

 

I want to use a few quotes here. I’m going to quote from Paul 

Martin who’s the editor of SaskBusiness magazine, and the 

quote is fairly short but, quote: 

 

Historically, the Crowns have had success when they 

invested abroad. They’ve lost some money from time to 

time but the plus and minus weighs heavily in favor of 

external investment. SaskTel’s foray into the British cable 

and phone business alone netted more than has been lost 

in all the outside ventures. 

 

That’s from Paul Martin, a very respected SaskBusiness 

magazine editor. The Leader-Post has an editorial saying, and I 

quote: 

 

Forcing the Crowns to put all their eggs in the tiny 

Saskatchewan basket could threaten their economic 

viability. We trust the government will proceed cautiously 

on this file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the KPMG report, let me . . . This is pretty 

important. And this is part of why I urge people to read the 

entire report, because it does paint a picture way different than 

what the Minister Responsible for CIC would have us believe. 

The quote from KPMG report is, quote: 

 

KPMG believes that its analyses must be considered as a 

whole and that selecting portions of the analyses or the 

factors considered by it, without considering all facts and 

analyses together, could create a misleading view of the 

process underlying our findings. 

 

In other words, look at the entire report. I’ve already pointed 

out one part that the government has never mentioned, the 41.6 

per cent rate of return on investments that were concluded while 

New Democrats were in government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party claimed to be on the side of the people. This 

government claims to be on the side of the people. And yet one 

of the first things they did is walked away from the lowest cost 

utility bundle, a promise that had been delivered to 

Saskatchewan people and had been kept for four years. And the 

plan was to continue it indefinitely. First thing they did, 

cancelled the lowest cost utility bundle. Now they’ve replaced it 

with words like, oh well, we’ll deliver the lowest reasonable 

cost that we possibly might be able to, depending on . . . well 

we’ll see how it goes. 

 

Well there’s small comfort in that. We’ve already seen home 

heating costs rise. We know that the minister has said that 

SaskPower is going to be raising its rates before very long. We 

know there is upward pressure. Because of their actions, there’s 

upward pressure on our Crowns. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much more that I want to say about our 

Crown corporations, but this is a timed debate, therefore I have 

to make my motion so it’s on the floor. And I move: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government not to impose 

ideologically driven restrictions on Saskatchewan’s 

Crown corporations and allow them to operate in a 

manner that will best ensure their long-term strength, 

viability, and ability to deliver the best possible, lowest 

cost service to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move that, and I’m very much looking 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1781 

forward to my colleagues on this side in their thoughtful 

notions, thoughtful speeches on this very important motion. It 

will be interesting to hear how the government can possibly 

defend the sell-off at fire sale prices of the Crown corporations. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move this motion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 

from Regina Coronation Park: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government not to impose 

ideologically driven restrictions on Saskatchewan’s 

Crown corporations and allow them to operate in a 

manner that will best ensure their long-term strength, 

viability, and the ability to deliver the best possible, 

lowest cost service to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to have the opportunity to rise in the Assembly and take 

part in this debate. I think we’re going to have a spirited debate 

this afternoon — this morning I guess it is — and, Mr. Speaker, 

I won’t go through the motion. The member just read it out so 

I’ll get into the content of my remarks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say that I’m a little surprised at this 

motion. Quite frankly I can’t follow the members opposite’s 

rationale for this sort of motion. To try to defend a policy that 

. . . and without pre-empting what members on this side are 

going to say about it, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t want to steal 

part of their speech, but just a hint. The record was bad, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know members are going to speak on that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to look at this motion in two parts. 

Let’s look at the first part. The first part talks about urging the 

government not to impose ideologically driven restrictions on 

the Crowns. Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at what the member’s 

referring to. I believe from his comments he’s referring to the 

Minister for Crown Corporations, the Saskatchewan-first policy 

that was announced a few weeks ago, I think it was at the end of 

this last month, and look at what policies are in place in this 

new framework. It’s investing, our Crowns investing within 

Saskatchewan. That’s the first major plank. And also to stop 

out-of-province investments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s kind of the crux of what we’re discussing right now. And 

obviously the member, you know, he’s taken a position on what 

he thinks that will do to the Crowns. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

how did members opposite respond when this policy was first 

announced? Well the October 23 Leader-Post, and I quote, 

“Opposition Leader Lorne Calvert said that as premier in 2003 

he had already directed the Crowns to focus first on investing in 

Saskatchewan . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I guess this is the ideological driven position 

to restrict the Crown. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 

Opposition, the former premier, had already directed the 

Crowns to do this. And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, my 

hon. colleague opposite who moved this motion, what did he 

say in this Chamber in response to this policy, Mr. Speaker? I 

will refer members to page 1409. This is from October 28 in 

response to a ministerial statement. He said, and I quote, “Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, today’s reannouncement of a now 

five-year-old policy, the Sask-first policy, is just that — it’s five 

years old.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, which is it? Is the Sask-first policy an 

ideologically driven restriction on the Crowns that they claim is 

intended to weaken it? Or is it the same policy they adopted 

five years ago as government, Mr. Speaker? Which is it? You 

can’t have it both ways. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it kind of reminds me, kind of reminds 

me of John Kerry. You know, he voted for the war before he 

voted against it. It’s very similar. This party opposite, they 

voted in favour of this policy and now they’re against this 

policy. You know I’m not sure, I’m not really sure what 

members opposite even, if they even know what this motion 

speaks to. I mean if this actually came to a vote today, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we might have members over there voting in 

favour of it and members over there voting against it. Some 

might just even stand up and vote present, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

sure if they even know what the policy is talking about. 

 

Now let’s look at the second part of the motion, Mr. Speaker. It 

talks about allowing, urging this government to allow the 

Crowns to “. . . operate in a manner that will best ensure their 

long-term strength, viability, and ability to deliver the best 

possible, lowest cost service to Saskatchewan people.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members behind me are saying that that 

speaks to I think what our platform is saying, Mr. Speaker. So 

obviously we’re in favour of this. But I think it’s important to 

look at the record, Mr. Speaker, of the opposition opposite. 

Now how much credibility do they really have when we’re 

talking about long-term strength, viability, and ability to deliver 

service to Saskatchewan people? 

 

Well we know the record. It’s a record of, by and large, failures 

and losses outside of the province. We have almost a half a 

billion dollars that was spent outside of the province with a 

target return of 22 per cent that actually had an overall rate of 

return of negative 15 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re looking at investments made by Power — Intel 

across Canada, in Australia, Chile, Mexico; Retx.com in 

Atlanta, Georgia. That’s one that members . . . Nashville. And I 

think other members are going to want to speak more to that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what actually was happening to the people of 

Saskatchewan when the members opposite were losing millions 

around the world, Mr. Speaker? How does a negative 15 per 

cent return outside of this province lead to long-term strength? 

How does it lead to long-term viability? How does it lead to the 

ability of the Crowns to deliver service at the lowest cost, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

It doesn’t. Because, Mr. Speaker, at the same time that 

members opposite were involved in a government that was 

losing money outside of the province . . . I look here from 1994 

to ’96, NST Network Services building fibre optics. And by 

1997 all had been lost, Mr. Speaker. But in 1997 SaskEnergy 

was raising rates here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From 2001 to 2005 we had Navigata, and I know members on 



1782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

both sides of the House know the history of that, and, you 

know, losing money year after year. And yet we have within 

our province our utilities raising rates. Now, Mr. Speaker, how 

did providing services to the people of Halifax, how does that 

help people in Halbrite? How did losing money in Georgia help 

provide services for people in Goodwater, Saskatchewan? How 

did losing millions in Chile help my constituents in Coronach, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

I only have a couple of minutes left here, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve 

gone through the two main points that I want to make. One is 

this: in the last probably three weeks, this party opposite has 

taken all sorts of positions on this policy. First they took credit: 

well this is a five-year-old policy; we did this five years ago. 

What’s the big deal? Now they’re saying it’s, you know, just 

the worst thing. Actually, Mr. Speaker, it is the beginning of the 

end. I mean let’s not inflate the rhetoric, but this policy, 

according to the member opposite, is the beginning of the end 

even though they adopted it five years ago, Mr. Speaker. I’m a 

little bit confused. 

 

And then looking at the record of what happened in this 

province when rates were going up while members opposite 

were losing millions upon millions out of province and out of 

country, now, Mr. Speaker, why would they be opposed to 

investing in Saskatchewan? Do they not have confidence in the 

economy of this province, in the people of this province? 

 

I mean I know members opposite — largely from Regina and 

Saskatoon — they get good cell service here. You know, they 

get good . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And well one from 

Prince Albert, but he’s got about three years left, Mr. Speaker. 

But, you know, but maybe they should consult their rural 

members. Maybe they should talk to their rural caucus, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I guess they don’t. And I know members 

opposite were in my constituency this summer. Did they ask 

how the cell service was near Trossachs? I don’t think so, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So one thing that this motion really speaks to is a lack of 

confidence that the members opposite have in this province, in 

this economy. And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, they have no 

contrition for losing millions and millions of dollars out of 

province and out of country while people in this province have 

been asking for years for better service, for a bus route to 

service northern Saskatchewan which we finally got, thanks to 

our minister on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. Now that 

we’re getting increased cell service, Mr. Speaker, no contrition 

absolutely from members opposite. Not surprising though, not 

surprising. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly pleased to be able to put my 

comments on the record. I look forward to the 

question-and-answer period, look forward to asking some 

questions and perhaps getting some answers from members 

opposite. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join into this debate and say what a pleasure it is to do so on 

behalf of the good folks in Regina Northeast. I want to enter 

into this debate in support of the motion so eloquently moved 

by my colleague from Coronation Park. 

 

This is an interesting debate, Mr. Speaker. It is a debate on the 

Crown corporations who have provided us great service, 

top-notch service to the people of Saskatchewan at competitive 

prices over many, many years. I think we should take a moment 

to take a look at the history of the Crowns and to wonder why it 

is that Crown corporations have done so well in this province, 

have served this province so well and continue to do so. 

 

Perhaps it’s because of the experiences of our forefathers and 

pioneers who settled and developed this great province of ours. 

When they moved here, they faced great adversities — extreme 

climates, conditions from extremely sub-zero weather in 

January to extremely hot Julys to the isolation of the province 

being a landlocked province having distances to ports to trade 

for goods. I think they soon found out that if they were going to 

survive and prosper in those kinds of conditions, in many cases 

they could only do so if they worked together — if they worked 

together for the common goal. And they did so, and this is why 

with this province grew. 

 

But this is also why the Crown corporations were established 

here, because it was soon identified that we could prosper in 

this province but could only do so if we worked together in a 

co-operative atmosphere in a way that ensured that we were 

able to have the strengths to compete in a competitive basis 

with international forces. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was just an announcement made 

yesterday by the Minister Responsible for STC [Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company], which I applauded. It was an 

announcement of the expansion of the services of STC, an 

expansion of the services of a Crown corporation. And this 

would not have been done, this service would not have been 

provided to the four communities in northern Saskatchewan, 

had it not been a Crown corporation willing to provide those 

services. Because Crown corporations have as their calling card, 

I guess you would say, their first mandate is to provide services 

to the people of Saskatchewan. And often they do so in some 

cases with cross-subsidization. 

 

And I applaud the minister’s announcement yesterday — the 

expansion of STC, the expansion of those services to those four 

northern communities. I think that was a great job, Mr. Speaker. 

But it’s done so because of a Crown corporation. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The Crown corporations can only survive if they continue to 

stay strong, and they can only stay strong through expansion. In 

the world of business today it’s common knowledge that 

companies and corporations who survive do so by growing, do 

so by expanding, and they have to do that in profitable areas. 

They don’t expand into areas which are non-profitable. They 

have to expand into profitable markets. And the Crown 

corporations are no different. And we’ve seen that happen, 

we’ve seen that happen in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Probably the best example of that that comes to mind is the 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1783 

recent experience with Saskatchewan Government Insurance. I 

believe it was last year’s report that indicated that 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance, a profit of about $35 

million of which $9 million came from outside of 

Saskatchewan, came from their investments outside of 

Saskatchewan. That was $9 million that was not provincial 

dollars. That was $9 million came from outside of 

Saskatchewan, came to this province to cushion the costs on 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

It came at an advantageous time, a time when we had 

experienced some tremendous summer storms which had put a 

lot of pressure on SGI, but this cushioned it. Nearly one-third of 

the profit of SGI came from outside of Saskatchewan. And I 

think that’s wise investments. It’s wise investments to help the 

people of Saskatchewan cushion those costs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting, it’s interesting to see some of 

the language that’s being used by the members opposite. It’s 

interesting because I think the language that they use reflects 

their intentions, reflects their ideas, and perhaps maybe even 

reflects what we may see coming from that government over 

there in the very near future. 

 

For example, on health care the Sask Party is now referring to 

patients in our health care system as customers — not as 

patients, as customers. Mr. Speaker, this Alberta-style language 

certainly leads one to believe that Saskatchewan people could 

soon be paying for health care services here in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen the Minister Responsible for 

Education looking at entering into discussions with the private 

sector on P3 [public-private partnership] constructions of our 

schools. The P3 system has not worked in any other jurisdiction 

for the students, nor has it worked for the education boards. It’s 

only worked for the private investor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see this government has, I suppose as a 

prelude to their intentions of privatization of the Crowns, trying 

to find some justification to move in that direction, so they 

commission a report — a report which cost $25,000 a page, by 

the way. But it’s interesting. That very same report — the report 

that they asked for and the report that they paid for — that 

report says that of the four Crowns that are currently investing 

out of the province, three of them are right now showing a 

profit. Two of them are actually outperforming the investment 

targets. 

 

And when you look at the information contained in that report, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s quite eye-opening. You look at the section on 

page 7 of that report. It indicates that the targeted return on 

investments by the Crown corporations was 27 per cent, but the 

actual return on investment was 41.6. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

outperforming, outperforming the targets, and yet this 

government over here wants to get rid of the Crowns. 

 

That’s a question, Mr. Speaker, that I just can’t fathom, why 

they would do so. The Crowns have a track record of benefiting 

the people of Saskatchewan, working for the people of 

Saskatchewan, providing services for the people of 

Saskatchewan that would not be affordable otherwise, but yet 

this government here wants to get rid of the Crowns. And this is 

just the first step into that process. 

We’re seeing that happen. Now they’re setting the stage, they’re 

setting the stage, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not saying they’re 

going to sell the Crowns. No, no. I don’t think they’re going to 

take an ad out in the Toronto Globe and Mail and say the 

Crowns are for sale. I don’t believe that’s going to be the case. I 

think what they want to do is, they want to strangle off the 

revenue streams to these Crowns. They want to strangle those 

revenue streams off so they weaken the Crowns to the point 

where they can no longer compete, can no longer provide 

service to the people of Saskatchewan at a competitive price or 

even less than a competitive price, Mr. Speaker, and that’s their 

long-term plan. 

 

I believe that they want to strangle this off. And yet there’s no 

evidence that the Crowns are in any difficulty. The Crowns are 

not doing anything but good for the people of this province. 

Most recent article in the Saskatchewan Business magazine, by 

. . . Paul Martin’s the editor. Historically, and I’ll quote: 

 

Historically, the Crowns have had success when they 

invested abroad. They’ve lost money from time to time 

but the plus and the minus weighs heavily in favor of 

external investment. SaskTel’s foray into the British cable 

and phone business alone netted more than has been lost 

in all the [other outside investments] . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just one indication of the strengths of the 

Crown corporations. It’s one indication of the positive good that 

they do on behalf of Saskatchewan people. Bringing money into 

this province from out of this province simply lessens the 

burden of taxation, lessens the burden of responsibilities of 

Saskatchewan citizens. And yet for whatever reason, for 

whatever reason this group over here, men and women over 

here who are the Government of Saskatchewan today, want to 

strangle that off. They want to strangle that off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the KPMG report believes that you need to 

look at the entire report and take into consideration the entire 

investment package of the Crown corporations to fully 

understand that they are the best vehicle Saskatchewan has 

going, to ensure that we continue to have quality services, 

quality services at affordable prices for the good people of this 

province. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what Saskatchewan people deserve, 

and that, Mr. Speaker, I would hope would continue in this 

province, but I am fearful. I am fearful of the hidden agenda of 

that minister, fearful of the hidden agenda of that government 

over there who wants to strip away the Crown corporations. 

Wants to strip away the ability of the Crown corporations to 

continue to serve Saskatchewan people in the fantastic and 

profitable way they have in the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am very pleased to speak on the motion put forward 

today. I find that the Crowns and the issues around it have been 



1784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

fairly polarized, and there has been a lot of misinformation that 

has been put out there for a long time. And I think having an 

open and responsible debate on this issue is the right thing to 

do, and this is the right Chamber to have that debate in. 

 

The member that put forward the motion started his speech off 

with saying, it’s the beginning of the end, and, Mr. Speaker, I 

challenge that member. I think that is some misinformation. 

Let’s turn that around and say, maybe it’s just the end of the 

beginning and there are greener days ahead, Mr. Speaker. I am 

certain that there is. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, of particular interest in the motion was the 

line “ideologically driven.” Now, Mr. Speaker, again that’s 

some pretty charged-up language. Some might call it rhetoric. 

Now what brings it back for me is the old line that hope beats 

fear, and I think in this case, hope in this province is trumpeting 

over fear every time. And I would like to tell you a few ways in 

which we see that on the ground here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Lloydminster, my home riding, not three years 

ago, the lady that now works as my CA [constituency assistant] 

started a petition. And in Lloydminster, because we live on the 

border, some of our gas is delivered through ATCO Gas to 

residents who live in Saskatchewan, and there were some 

concerns over rebates and how Alberta does stuff and how 

Saskatchewan does stuff and the people were caught in the 

middle. 

 

Now this lady went around with a petition, and she got people 

in Lloydminster to sign their names, to come out to meetings, 

and our Crown corporations said, you know, we can do this; we 

can supply the gas to the people in Lloydminster who live on 

Saskatchewan side. Now, Mr. Speaker, the willingness to work 

with our Alberta partners, ideologically that is something that 

this government has said very clearly we will do, and we will 

do into the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to point out that, you 

know, the people of Lloydminster very much access the uses of 

our Crown corporations through SGI. Now over the past few 

years it’s been very common that people of higher incomes 

would migrate to the Alberta side to take advantage of their 

lower income tax, but younger families would stay on the 

Saskatchewan side because if their kids were coming up to the 

driving age, it would be advantageous for them to have their 

kids start driving in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our government — and hope beats fear — 

our government said, you know, we understand, but we think 

it’s not fair that you have to leave Saskatchewan to get lower 

income tax. So we said, why don’t we just be responsible and 

lower our income tax across the entire province so that people 

don’t have to leave? So those young families can raise their 

children, they can earn a living, and when their kids start 

driving, become 15, 16 years old, they can access a Crown 

corporation, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and those 

families will stay in Saskatchewan. 

 

After their kids leave home, the mother and father, the model is 

they would then go to Alberta. Now they won’t. They will stay 

in Lloydminster on the Saskatchewan side. And I’m very 

pleased that our government stands to that. 

Mr. Speaker, ideologically driven decisions . . . You know, our 

government has been very vocal that generating power, our 

Crown corporations have relied very heavily on coal — and 

pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Where in the past there 

hasn’t been a willingness, for ideological reasons, to look at 

nuclear or any other options, our government said, you know, 

ideologically let’s not get weighted down with that. Let’s take 

an honest-to-goodness look at the options. 

 

Now the CIC has funded a group of people that have expertise 

in this area through the whole value chain of nuclear, uranium 

mining, enrichment. You know, no decisions have been made, 

but we haven’t been stuck by ideological points of view to the 

point that we won’t look at the options. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to point out a couple 

other initiatives that I think are just terrific. One is the STC has 

announced that they have partnered with a private sector 

individual. They’ve partnered with a private sector individual to 

provide service to communities in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there hasn’t been a new bus route by STC in 

over 30 years. You know, hope beats fear that we can partner 

and get the benefits of the private operator. And these people in 

these four towns — Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, La 

Loche, and Beauval — are going to start getting bus service. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that gives me great pride to stand on this 

side of House and say, my government was not ideologically 

opposed to a solution that saw these people benefit. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that’s very, very positive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about the focus our 

government has said that we would like to see the Crowns on 

Saskatchewan. Now ideologically let’s not get weighted down 

with that. The world is looking at Saskatchewan as the best 

opportunities. Now we on this side of the House say, they’re 

right; Saskatchewan is the best place in the world to be looking 

to invest money, to be building infrastructure, to be reaping the 

rewards when we see that our neighbours to the south, our 

fellow provinces to the east are not doing particularly well 

today. They’re all looking at Saskatchewan as a leader, as 

somewhere where we want to invest our money. Now I think 

that is positive. I don’t care what ideological bend you have. I 

am proud to live in Saskatchewan, and I am proud that we are 

going to invest our money here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned a little 

bit about the fact that 50 per cent of our power generation is on 

coal, and it’s the lignite coal. It is a very high emitter of 

greenhouse gases, and that’s a reality. Our province is rich in 

coal. And we have utilized those resources in the past, and we 

will continue to utilize those resources going into the future. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a responsible government looking at that, 

and with the realization that the world is changing and maybe 

we should be looking at a little greener solutions, one of those 

solutions — and just one, Mr. Speaker; there are many — but 

one is clean coal. Now we have built positive relationships with 

our federal colleagues and we have said, we would like to have 

a demonstration plant here in Saskatchewan. You know, do 

something positive, you know. 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1785 

And that government in Ottawa — who we are respectful with 

and they are respectful with us — they said, we think that that is 

a good idea. We are willing to put $240 million into this project 

to help your government, your Crown corporations move 

forward with this. Our government said, that is terrific. We 

think we should also partner with the private sector because 

everybody is involved in Saskatchewan. We think if they can 

bring something to the table which offers benefit, which helps 

this project move ahead, we are not going to just outright say no 

because of our ideological bend, Mr. Speaker. Now this project 

is something that is one — one — of the many things that we 

can move forward with, but it is something that we are looking 

at today. 

 

[12:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say, as I was doing the 

research for this 10-minute speech that I’m allowed to give 

here, that going through and seeing some of the projects that 

under our government’s tenure have been accomplished by our 

Crown corporations, I would just like to point out that in my 

riding, and what are important to me . . . And there’s a list of 24 

new areas which got cell coverage since we took government, 

one being Turtle Lake — not in my riding, but utilized by many 

of the people in my constituency. As I say, there’s 24 spread all 

over the province for the good of the people of Saskatchewan. 

Our Crown corporations are doing a heck of a job, Mr. Speaker 

— a heck of a job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wireless Internet service, we have put it into 18 

more communities in the last year. Again in my riding, the 

community of Onion Lake, Mr. Speaker, it’s just a short half 

hour north of Lloydminster, and those folks are very pleased 

that our Crown corporations are looking out for their needs. 

And that is great. 

 

Maidstone — again not in my riding, but very close — now has 

high-speed Internet. And Silver Lake, not far from my very 

home, Mr. Speaker, now has high-speed Internet service. And I 

think that is something I’m going to be very proud of, and I will 

be bringing forward and bringing up as often as I can in my 

local community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to wrap up, I would just like to highlight a couple 

of the points I’ve already made. Most importantly is, let’s get 

above ideological bends. Let’s get above it. Let’s do what is 

right for this province . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Let’s not make decisions based on, you 

know, you lean left; you lean right. Let’s do what the people of 

Saskatchewan want us to do, and let’s recognize this province’s 

strengths. Let’s invest in the future, and the future is here, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m proud to be in the government right now, and I’m 

proud that we are investing here. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t think there’s much doubt, Mr. Speaker, that we would be 

debating the issue of Crowns, and the health of Crowns, the 

future of Crown corporations in Saskatchewan following the 

election of the Sask Party government. I think there would be 

very few surprises on the part of people who are watching the 

proceedings today, no matter what end of the political spectrum 

they’re on, that we would in fact be debating this issue. 

 

Historically we know that Crowns have done well in 

Saskatchewan because of a lack of interest by the private sector 

in investing in providing utility services in Saskatchewan. 

Although there may well have been private companies that were 

interested in providing services to Regina, Saskatoon, or the 

major centres, private companies were not interested in 

providing those services to rural areas of the province. Similarly 

with SaskTel, no interest on the part of major telephone 

companies to assume service anywhere but in Regina and 

Saskatoon or the major centres where they could make a return 

on their investment. 

 

No opportunity for any retention of the funds that people put 

into buying automobile insurance, or home insurance for that 

matter, for those funds to stay in Saskatchewan and to work for 

the interests of people of Saskatchewan. None of that. And 

that’s one of the reasons — because Saskatchewan was such a 

large agrarian area — that we’ve tended to rely on collective 

action through Crowns, probably more so than other 

jurisdictions, and continue to do so. In fact Saskatchewan 

farmers continue to show leadership in that area. Whether it’s 

collective action to promote the use of ethanol or biodiesel, 

whether it’s collective action through grain marketing, 

Saskatchewan farmers continue to work together to do the 

things that private industries will not do effectively on their 

behalf, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So none of this should come as any surprise, Mr. Speaker, that 

in Saskatchewan now we have Crowns delivering very good 

services at very low rates, in fact very good services at the 

lowest rate in Canada. Mr. Speaker, not only do we have good 

services at lower rates, we also in Saskatchewan have been able 

to extend the reach of those services to parts of Saskatchewan 

that private sector would never have done. 

 

We have a high-speed Internet reach in Saskatchewan that is 

greater than any comparable jurisdiction in the world, greater 

than any comparable jurisdiction in the world. If I might, just a 

brief anecdote. A few years ago, in New York City, explaining 

to people in New York City that Saskatchewan, you know, has 

a 85 per cent reach in terms of Internet, that we’re providing 

high-speed Internet to small towns, and they said, we’re not 

even getting that services in certain areas of New York City. 

 

So there you can see this is the influence of the Crowns: to 

enable us to extend the reach of services not enjoyed, not 

enjoyed by our neighbours to the South that also have agrarian 

areas, Mr. Speaker, but we’re able to do it in Saskatchewan 

because of the influence of the Crowns. 

 

Cellphone service similarly, Mr. Speaker, a very high reach for 

cellphone service in Saskatchewan, not something that’s been 

done in other jurisdictions. And of course we have some head 

office jobs in Saskatchewan that we otherwise would not have. 



1786 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

And most people in Saskatchewan agree with this assessment, 

but the right wing does not agree. The right wing has never 

agreed. They have a much different vision of Saskatchewan. 

 

They have seen, historically they have seen Crowns as a drag 

on the economy. They take the position that if we had 

competition in the electrical sector or the telephone sector or the 

natural gas sector or the insurance sector, that we would be 

creating more jobs in Saskatchewan. It would be adding to 

growth in Saskatchewan. That’s the position that they 

historically have taken. 

 

They don’t explain why it is that this competition might 

actually result in higher costs for people, that people might be 

paying more for electrical or for telephone. They do in other 

jurisdictions, but they do take the position that that extra money 

coming out of people’s pockets, out of their jeans, going to 

private companies would create more jobs in Saskatchewan. 

They also don’t explain why it is that that kind of 

competitiveness has meant that people in Alberta are now 

paying much higher rates than historically they did, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If people had any doubts about that that’s the direction and 

that’s the belief of the members opposite, I would refer them 

. . . If the Premier’s office hasn’t already provided them all with 

a copy of his speech from March 25, 2002. That was in fact the 

Premier’s seminal speech about future development and 

possibilities for future development in Saskatchewan. If any of 

the public want to see it, I would refer them to 

legassembly.sk.ca and to go to Hansard for March 25, 2002, 

pages 266 to 273. So that’s www.legassembly.sk.ca, Hansard, 

March 25, 2002. 

 

And there you’ll see an analysis by the Premier where he 

essentially takes the point of view that things have not gone 

right in Saskatchewan, that we’ve had 60 years of government 

that have continued to invest in Crowns, as opposed to a 

contrary vision that he had. And because we’ve had this 

approach of relying on Crowns, we’ve seen our population 

reduced. We don’t have the private sector investment. We don’t 

have the small, private entrepreneurs that we have in other 

provinces. Never mind the fact that, you know, within a few 

years, because somebody had a steady hand on the tiller, 

Saskatchewan’s economy improved tremendously, that there 

was population growth, that we did see increases in private 

sector investment. Never mind. 

 

At that point, his analysis was things are bad in Saskatchewan 

because we had 60 years of Crown investment. And again I 

encourage people to read the now Premier’s remarks. He was 

the member for Swift Current. That was his conclusion — 

things were so bad and the Crowns were to blame. 

 

If I just might quickly quote: 

 

And it’s little wonder, for what our private sector have 

had to endure, what our small-business men and women 

have had to endure in terms of high taxes on productivity 

and in terms of the ever-intrusive family of Crown 

corporations often competing with those small businesses 

with their own tax dollars. 

 

Those are the words of the Premier. 

 

He goes on: 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the barriers I spoke of earlier 

in terms of what the, what the governments of 

Saskatchewan have put in the way of venture capital and 

entrepreneurs, one of the barriers is Crown corporations. 

 

So we don’t have to go very far in our history to get a sense of 

what it is that the Sask Party and their leadership thinks and 

believes with respect to Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And 

then of course, he goes on in his remarks to qualify that and talk 

about what they wouldn’t do, you know, and all that kind of 

stuff — it’s the management of the Crowns and not the Crowns 

themselves. 

 

The members opposite might ask themselves like why is it they 

lost the 2003 election which revolved on the issue of Crowns. 

Was it because one of their members was so insistent on 

ramping up the issue of the Crowns in the years preceding that? 

And was he in fact deep-sixing the ambitions of Elwin 

Hermanson to become the premier of Saskatchewan by 

elevating that issue the way that he did? 

 

Of course by the next election you had shifted gears saying, we 

would never privatize the Crowns. Well no, you know, on paper 

he might never privatize the Crowns, but there is never any 

doubt — never any doubt — in the minds of the people of 

Saskatchewan, never any doubt in my mind that they would 

take actions to get at the Crowns. 

 

In this case, they’re getting at it through the back door. They’re 

doing it through a Trojan Horse called Saskatchewan first. 

They’re going through a Trojan Horse of great intentions — 

nothing that they hadn’t forecast or nothing that we couldn’t 

forecast, because again the Premier had taken that point of 

view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there was never any doubt in our minds, never any doubt in 

the minds of the people of Saskatchewan that the only real 

question was how. The only real question was not if you’re 

going to take a run at the Crowns, as they’re doing. The only 

question was how. And what we have here, again as I indicated, 

is a Trojan Horse, a Trojan Horse called Saskatchewan first, a 

Trojan Horse that masks the real intentions — in this case, an 

innocuous phrase called Saskatchewan first. 

 

Well I mean, who couldn’t agree with Saskatchewan first? But 

you have to drill down as to what this policy’s all about. And I 

have a simple question, Mr. Speaker. If you really put 

Saskatchewan first, why would you highball it? Why would you 

sell off profitable investments by Crowns in other jurisdictions? 

What is the sense of that when those investments continue to 

support Crowns and Saskatchewan jobs right here in 

Saskatchewan? Why would you do that? The wolf is back, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1787 

pleasure to take part in a 75-minute debate. Just for the record I 

have to read the motion: 

 

That this Assembly urge the government not to impose 

ideologically driven restrictions on Saskatchewan’s 

Crown corporations and allow them to operate in a 

manner that will best ensure their long-term strength, 

viability, and ability to deliver the best possible, lowest 

cost service to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we agree with that. Mr. Speaker, you know 

normally — normally, Mr. Deputy Speaker — when you think 

about what to put in a 75-minute debate, you try to look for a 

wedge issue that you know shows some differences. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I thought this actually was a 75-minute 

debate motion that came from our side. It just fits perfectly with 

the strengths of the Saskatchewan Party government. The 

Crown sector is a strength of the Saskatchewan Party 

government and of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when we look at the . . . my 

colleague spoke to this before. But you know not to impose 

ideologically driven restrictions certainly speaks to the failure 

of the NDP Party and the failure of their forerunners, the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] Party when you 

speak about Crown corporations and Crown investments. 

 

My colleague from Lloydminster and Weyburn-Big Muddy are 

both a little bit younger than I am, and I just noticed I was born 

just year or two earlier than they were. But when they talk about 

the Crown sector, they seem to refer to, you know, things that 

happened in the ’80s and ’90s. I can remember a little bit about 

what happened in the 1970s and the Blakeney government. 

 

Under the Blakeney government they nationalized, they — the 

NDP government — nationalized the potash sector in 

Saskatchewan. Now you want to talk about an ideological bent, 

I mean that’s an example that really set the province back for, 

quite frankly, generations. After that happened, the business 

sector was fearful to come into Saskatchewan and invest in the 

province. 

 

You can go even further back — and I don’t remember this; I 

wasn’t born in those days — but under the Douglas government 

when they actually kicked out the oil and gas industry out of 

Saskatchewan. That set us back 50 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it set . . . Certainly now, only now we are starting to recover 

and build a new Saskatchewan after the destructive policies of 

the CCF and the NDP government. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I think of when I look at the NDP 

government, they do not have confidence in Saskatchewan 

people. They don’t have confidence in the future of the 

Saskatchewan economy, they don’t have confidence in the 

future of Saskatchewan, and their policy with the Crown 

corporation I think laid that out very carefully. 

 

We in the Saskatchewan Party have decided that we have 

confidence in the future of the Saskatchewan economy and the 

future of the Saskatchewan people, and that speaks to the 

Saskatchewan-first policy that was laid out by my hon. friend 

and colleague, the Minister of Crowns. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP, they couldn’t understand how 

the province of Saskatchewan could grow. I think one of their 

members on the other side said it was statistically impossible to 

grow this province more than at 1 per cent a year. And we have 

seen that it is possible. And with the new thinking of the 

government, a government that has confidence in the future of 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people and confidence in the 

business sector in Saskatchewan, we see that that can happen, 

and we’ve proved that in the last year. 

 

Now our Saskatchewan-first policy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

certainly speaks to that thinking. When we look at 

Saskatchewan, you only have to go back to look at our 

individual constituents and constituencies. In my constituency, 

what were people saying to me all through the last eight years 

when we were in opposition? Well they wanted some basic 

services provided to their homes and their region — cellphone 

coverage, high-speed Internet. And this isn’t technology that 

was just being developed and just appearing in the world; this is 

technology that’s been around for many, many years. And 

under the NDP government, they refused to accept looking at 

Saskatchewan first. 

 

Myself and many other colleagues raised this in committee with 

the minister and his officials in the NDP, and they kept saying, 

well you have to have a business case to put a cell tower in 

Blaine Lake, Saskatchewan, or have proper cell coverage in 

Springwater or Cando or 10 miles from Rosetown, between 

Rosetown and Biggar. And our argument always was, and it is 

today, that there is a business case. There’s a business case for 

putting in cell towers. There is a business case for supplying 

high-speed Internet to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Number one, it’s just not people in the community that travels 

through those areas. There’s businesses. There’s the oil 

industry. There’s the farming, agriculture industry. There’s 

people that are travelling that rely on cell coverage and the 

Internet as they travel across Saskatchewan. But in our own 

communities, naturally in the farming industry and the oil 

industry, it’s very important to have that type of service 

provided. We as a government decided that we’re going to put 

Saskatchewan first. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what have we seen from the NDP’s 

policy in the past? Well the former government invested almost 

a half a billion dollars out of the province, with a target return 

of 22 per cent. But what actually happened? The actual overall 

rate of return on these investments to date was a negative 15 per 

cent — incredible losses to the taxpayers of this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I notice that the member from Regina Coronation Park 

said, you know, if there’s money made in the Crown sector, 

that’s a dollar in the pockets of the Saskatchewan people. Well 

I’d like to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that a half a billion 

dollars in losses is also money taken out of the taxpayers of this 

province, and it’s money that we can ill afford to throw away on 

ventures around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I’d like to refer to, not only to the out-of-province investments 



1788 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

that the NDP made that were really disastrous, but look at some 

of the investments that they made in the province. And they 

made these . . . And I’m referring to SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company]. We all know what 

happened with SPUDCO, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The NDP 

wanted to compete with business in this province. 

 

And I’d like to quote from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, October 

16, 2004, and I quote, on SPUDCO: 

 

To be sure, the scale of this affair — the mismanagement, 

lies, years of coverups, and failure of governing 

politicians to take full responsibility — cry out for 

answers and accountability. 

 

Well I think that says it all about the attitude of the former NDP 

government and what they think about the business sector in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And unfortunately my time is running out. I have so much more 

to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I look forward to the 

question-and-answer period and really, really find out what the 

NDP actually think. And it amazes me that they would bring in 

this motion, a motion that I think the Saskatchewan people 

would agree that is really a Sask Party government strongpoint 

of our platform, of the election campaign, and the result of the 

election campaign which makes Saskatchewan stronger. We 

believe in making the Crown sector stronger, have confidence 

in building the Crown sector in Saskatchewan with partnerships 

with the private sector or on our own. Infrastructure is where 

it’s at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we intend to have the Crown 

sector very active in Saskatchewan to help build this province. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for 10-minute question period. I 

recognize the member from Regina Qu’Appelle. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 

for the member opposite from Regina Coronation Park. Our 

priority is to have the Crowns invest in-province and enhance 

services for all people of Saskatchewan. Part of that 

commitment is to operate the Crowns with an eye to providing 

benefits for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question is: how ideologically driven 

was the NDP strategy of losing hundreds of millions of 

taxpayers’ dollars in out-of-province investments? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that members 

on that side would even have the audacity to speak of Crowns 

as though they’re somehow protecting them. Everyone in this 

province, everyone to a soul, knows that New Democrats are 

the ones that believed in Crown corporations to our hearts. 

 

We ran Crown corporations to provide the lowest cost utility 

bundle to all of Saskatchewan people, full stop, period. It was to 

the benefit of everyone — their constituents, my constituents. 

Every person in Saskatchewan benefited through our 

Saskatchewan Crown corporations. It’s interesting that we 

made . . . I mean we have the solid ground. No one believes 

Sask Party members that they’re going to somehow run the 

Crown corporations to the benefit of Saskatchewan people or to 

the benefit of our Crown corporations. 

 

In fact the people of Saskatchewan know that they’re about 

selling them off. They’re about emasculating the Crowns, 

gutting the Crowns. We’re about protecting, building, and 

providing the Crown corporations for the future of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I’m on my feet, if I could ask a 

question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question’s for the member from Big Muddy, Lloydminster. I 

apologize — it’s Weyburn-Big Muddy, not Lloydminster. So to 

the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we have a situation where SGI made $9 million in 

out-of-province earnings last year. MRM cogen plant was 

returning $1 million a month. Heritage Gas is profitable and 

more. In fact three out of four out-of-province investments are 

profitable; two of them are outperforming. How can selling off 

our revenue stream producing assets, how can that protect the 

people of Saskatchewan from rising utility rates? How is this 

sell-off at fire sale prices going to help Saskatchewan 

consumers? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 

the hon. member for his question. Mr. Speaker, I think my 

constituents would appreciate if that money was reinvested in 

this province, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — . . . in the services that my constituents and the 

constituents of all members of this House should be able to 

come to expect from their government-owned utilities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is baffling how that member can talk 

about protecting people of this province from rising utility rates 

when they were losing hundreds of millions of dollars over the 

last 16 years, Mr. Speaker. How did that protect the people of 

this province from rising utility rates? Losing millions of dollars 

is supposed to protect people of this province? Unbelievable, 

Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to ask a question while I’m on my 

feet if that’s all right, Mr. . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, the track record of the Crown 

corporations in this province of providing services to the good 

people of Saskatchewan is phenomenal. They have done so at a 

rate that has been very competitive and, in many cases, less than 

competitive. They provide those services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member from 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1789 

Lloydminster. Will he guarantee that our Crown corporations 

will continue to return to the people of Saskatchewan profits 

through dividends to the GRF [General Revenue Fund]? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 

question. I think somewhat misguided in his math if he thinks 

you can lose hundreds of millions of dollars and that somehow 

a dividend back into the GRF fund . . . He is sorely mistaken. 

However I can assure him if that is what he’s looking for that 

the people of Saskatchewan will most certainly see the benefits 

of strong Crowns under a Sask Party government, and moving 

forward our government will make that commitment to the 

people of Saskatchewan within Saskatchewan because it’s the 

best place in Canada to invest money today. So thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to ask the question to the hon. colleague from Regina 

Coronation Park. Mr. Speaker, in the last three weeks that 

member has called the Saskatchewan-first policy a five-year-old 

policy. And then earlier in this House, he called it the beginning 

of the end and his seatmate called it a Trojan Horse. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, if the Sask-first policy is the beginning of the end and 

a Trojan Horse, then why according to his own words did he 

support the policy five years ago? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank the member for the question. Sask first is 

a good idea, but under the Sask Party, Sask first is a Trojan 

Horse. They’re about emasculating the Crowns. They’re about 

selling off Heritage Gas, MRM. They’re about selling off the 

money-earning portions of our Crown corporations. They’re 

about taking away job opportunities from our Crown 

corporation employees. Employees that get to expand their 

knowledge and their experiences worldwide. They’re about 

taking that all away, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s a shame. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan know it, and certainly the people 

who worked day in and day out providing exemplary service in 

our Crown corporations, they know who’s their friend and 

who’s their enemy. And they know that the Sask Party cannot 

be trusted with respect to Crown corporations at all. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 

few moments ago the member for Biggar in his remarks used 

the word generations. And I would like to ask the member a 

question about another type of generation, that is electrical 

generation. 

 

We know that, people in Saskatchewan know, that the 

Government of Alberta under the leadership of Ralph Klein 

made a major transformation in terms of electrical generation 

and distribution in the province of Alberta providing for 

competition in the generation sector, providing for competition 

in the transmission sector. They believed that this would help 

reduce prices in Alberta. In fact the opposite has happened. 

Alberta people, Alberta industries pay more for their power and 

other unintended consequences. What guarantee can the 

member provide the people of Saskatchewan that you are not 

going to follow the same approach in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you 

for the question. I’d like to just respond to the member’s 

question about generation of electricity in this province. We 

believe in all sorts of areas where we can generate electricity, 

from hydro to wind and solar and also clean coal. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we have committed to the pilot project that 

was announced. The federal government will be investing $240 

million into the clean coal project into Saskatchewan. We are 

going to develop clean coal in this province because we have 

ample supply of clean coal in this province. And we are going 

to be a world leader in the production of energy through clean 

coal source of fuel, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but not at the expense 

of other types of options in generating electricity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow 

Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

heard some talk in the Chamber here today about SPUDCO, 

and I’m going to give the member for Regina Coronation Park, 

who was around at that time in this House, to maybe enlighten 

us about what happened in that case. The people of 

Saskatchewan deserve answers. And to quote The StarPhoenix, 

Mr. Speaker, from October 16 of this year, quote: 

 

To be sure, the scale of this affair — the mismanagement, 

lies, years of coverups and failure of governing politicians 

to take full responsibility — cry out for answers and 

accountability. 

 

We have quotes as well from the former CIC minister, Maynard 

Sonntag, who says he thinks that despite the $28 million loss, 

SPUDCO has quote “been largely successful.” Speaking to the 

losses on Crown investments, Sonntag said, “. . . I bet — and 

I’ll put my job on the line — . . . that we will lose money in the 

future . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if SPUDCO was a success to this government, 

what’s a failure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 



1790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re a cut-and-paste crew 

on the opposite side there. We want to check all of these quotes 

because they have not got a great record. 

 

Why is it the member for Biggar refused to answer the question 

on, are we following Alberta? Why is it . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 

elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Meadow 

Lake. 

 

Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

real pleasure to enter into debate on the issue of nuclear and 

uranium. I think I’ll first move the motion and then speak to it, 

Mr. Speaker. The motion reads: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan supports 

the consideration of further value-added development of 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry, including nuclear 

power generation, and recognizes the potential benefits to 

the growth and prosperity of the people of our province. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can talk for literally days about the benefits of 

the uranium cycle and even nuclear power. Saskatchewan’s 

home to some of the richest energy deposits in the world, and 

uranium makes up a large portion of that. However rather than 

fully utilizing this potential, we just dig it up and ship it off. 

 

We can do better than that, Mr. Speaker. Not under the NDP 

though; the NDP thought differently. We think the people of 

this province deserve an honest look at this issue. There’s an 

entire industry of potential out there, from refining to 

enrichment to power generation. At a time when Saskatchewan 

is prospering from a resource, well why not look at adding 

value to our uranium? Mr. Speaker, it’s a truism but the next 

pound of uranium we add value to in this province will be the 

very first. And I think that is a real tragedy. 

 

Just last week, Mr. Speaker, I was in China leading a delegation 

from this province to that country. We had a number of 

meetings with senior Chinese officials from both the generation 

side of the nuclear industry and also from at the more senior 

level of their government and talked about the plans that China 

has for nuclear, going forward. What we found out was that 

China is planning to increase the number of nuclear reactors in 

the country by approximately 50 by 2020 — a very significant 

building program that will increase the nuclear power 

generation as a percentage of the Chinese total nuclear 

generation from 1.5 to about 5 per cent. So a very significant 

increase in the generation of nuclear power in that country, 

which of course is going to necessitate the use of large amounts 

of uranium on a yearly basis. 

 

Of course our policy is that uranium from northern 

Saskatchewan would only ever be used in a civilian facility. We 

need to have safeguards. We need to be able to obviously trace 

how that uranium is used. Nobody wants to see uranium from 

northern Saskatchewan end up in nuclear weapons of any 

country, and that’s obviously a big part of what we’re talking 

about. 

 

So we toured the Chinese CANDU reactors actually. There’s 

CANDU reactors in China, very impressive facilities. At the 

particular facility we were at, there were four reactors under 

construction in addition to five that were in operation. 

 

Other countries have seen the potential of nuclear power 

generation. As an example as well, I think France has nearly the 

entire needs of the country generated by nuclear power. I think 

it’s well over 80 per cent of the power in France is generated by 

nuclear. In Germany it’s a very significant portion as well. 

America of course has nuclear plants that are a significant 

portion of the generation, of course a major facility at Pickering 

in Ontario, a reactor in New Brunswick as well. 

 

We think that this is something Saskatchewan should be 

looking at, considering the massive amount of uranium that we 

have in this province. Nearly a quarter of the world’s energy or 

uranium needs are supplied from northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker — nearly a quarter. And we have no value added to 

that other than taking it out of the ground. We think that that 

needs to . . . We have to look at changing that, Mr. Speaker, and 

having some of those value-added opportunities right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But you know, let’s talk about nuclear power generation. For 

generations, countries around the world have utilized this clean 

energy source including Canada. But renewable sources such as 

wind power have their place. One only needs to look at leaders 

such as Denmark to see that wind power did not lead to the 

closing of a single coal-fuelled power plant. And I mean 

baseload is an issue here, Mr. Speaker. You need to have that 

reliable generation of electricity. You need to be able to have 

that as a part of your grid. And obviously, nuclear would be a 

baseload production of power. 

 

If we’re to reduce our dependence on coal, we need to use a 

reliable and abundant energy source, Mr. Speaker. Only nuclear 

power generation offers that opportunity as we reach the end of 

the lifespans of these old coal-fired plants. And Ontario is 

looking at that option right now, Mr. Speaker, as well. But it 

doesn’t have to end there. 

 

Nuclear science and medicine benefits people around the world, 

and with our new innovation-minded government, 

Saskatchewan could become a world leader in 21st century 

nuclear technology. With our groundbreaking work in 

biotechnology, carbon capture, and other fields, it seems a 

natural fit for our province to consider nurturing another 

knowledge industry. 

 

What could this mean for the province? Bruce Power recently 

said that a nuclear power plant in Saskatchewan would cost 8 to 

$10 billion to build, and generate 20,000 direct jobs during its 

construction. Think about that. We could give a job to nearly 

every person who left Saskatchewan under the NDP. Not only 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1791 

that, a fully operational plant would create 1,000 full-time, 

highly trained, and well paid jobs. This would also bring with it 

900 indirect jobs, and they would be here for the next 60 years, 

contributing nearly $240 million annually to our provincial 

economy. 

 

The needs for specialized graduates would likely drive new 

programs at our universities and attract new students. This 

would pump billions of dollars into our economy through 

construction, taxes from new jobs, and possibly even power 

exports. 

 

Already our uranium industry is an important one to the 

economy of our province. In 2007 we produced nearly 9000 

tonnes of uranium, generating $54 million in royalties and taxes 

for the province. This provided over 4,400 jobs directly or 

through spinoffs. 

 

Not only that — those are mostly northern jobs that provide a 

great income and training to Aboriginal communities. And I 

think this is something that’s very important to note, Mr. 

Speaker, that these are areas that have traditionally had 

economic challenges in front of them, that have traditionally 

had unemployment rates that are quite high in comparison with 

the rest of the province, that have had opportunities pass them 

by time and again. 

 

These communities, the Aboriginal community, the Métis 

communities, First Nations communities, there are many of the 

individuals from those communities that are working in the 

uranium industry in northern Saskatchewan who have benefited 

from training, from experience, and bring that back to their own 

communities and pass along that knowledge. So there’s a great 

deal of benefit that has accrued to northern Saskatchewan 

because of the uranium industry there, and we would love to see 

further value-added bring even more opportunity to those 

communities in our North. 

 

This isn’t just a matter of the bottom line. This industry does 

help our communities by employing people in good, honest 

work for a fair wage. Life is tough in the North, and having a 

rich resource base allows us to make things better up there if we 

have the will to nurture that industry. 

 

Our uranium also isn’t just your average ore, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan’s ore can be up to 100 times richer than the 

world average. Traditionally, high-quality ore body has been 

seen in other countries to be at 1 per cent U3O8 [triuranium 

octoxide]. In the ore that comes out in Saskatchewan at 

McArthur River or Cigar Lake, you’re dealing with 20-plus per 

cent pure U3O8 deposits, which is astonishingly high, Mr. 

Speaker, and offers a great competitive advantage for 

operations in the North. 

 

The quality of Saskatchewan shines through to even our mineral 

exports. That means when our Premier goes to places like 

Washington to make the case for this province, it makes his job 

even easier. 

 

What are we doing now, Mr. Speaker, is a question. Well for 

starters we affirmed our government’s commitment to solid 

reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, and I expect that the 

Minister for the Environment will have more to say on that in 

the future. 

 

We’ve taken firm action on clean coal, including securing 

federal money for the project, a very significant amount of 

money that was unique to this province. We’ve also supported 

the carbon capture research being done right here in Regina. We 

unearthed all those NDP reports on nuclear power generation 

and made them public because our government believes in 

transparency and letting the public know how their money is 

being spent. 

 

We were also approached by Bruce Power, a leader in the 

Canadian nuclear industry, about conducting a study on the 

feasibility of nuclear power in Saskatchewan. That study is 

currently under way. SaskPower is looking at adding more wind 

turbines and other renewable energy sources to help reduce 

their need for coal. Not bad for just one year, and we’re only 

getting started. 

 

It seems that certain political parties can do nothing for the 

better part of two decades and still get a free ride when it comes 

to environmental issues, but our government wants to make 

sure that real action is taken now. Is nuclear power the total 

solution for carbon emissions? No, but it can sure be a big step 

in the right direction, and after years of inaction it’s a step that 

Saskatchewan may need to take in order to make serious 

reductions. 

 

Certain members of the NDP, including one who may be 

making a return to the province someday soon, have supported 

the idea of nuclear power and value-added uranium in the past. 

Then again they also supported oil sands development before 

and seem to have flip-flopped on that issue since the election. 

So support for a uranium industry may not be there now as well. 

Will the NDP stand up and support these developments in 

Saskatchewan’s economy or have they changed their minds? 

Will they change them again after their leadership coronation 

next year? 

 

Our party has always been committed to environmentally 

responsible development of our uranium industry, and that will 

not change under our government. But there is a real question, 

Mr. Speaker, as to where the NDP stands on this issue. We’ve 

heard from a Calgary big oil lobbyist who’s aspiring to lead that 

party of his support for the industry. I could read a quote here 

actually from the Canadian Press, January 27, 2008, and I 

quote: 

 

Some, like former NDP deputy premier Dwain 

Lingenfelter, say Saskatchewan’s wide open spaces make 

it ideal for every step of the cycle, including power 

generation and waste storage. While conventional reactors 

are widely seen as producing too much power for the 

province’s needs, Lingenfelter argues Saskatchewan could 

become a power hub and supply energy to the rest of 

Canada and the United States. 

 

So we have the individual, a Calgary big oil lobbyist who is 

aspiring to lead that party, in favour of storage as well as other 

parts of the nuclear cycle. We know that there’s members of 

that party sitting over there right now who are very 

uncomfortable with the idea of generation, who are publicly 

opposed to it. Who, I would imagine, if they’re opposed to 



1792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

generation, they would be opposed to storage as well. 

 

[12:45] 

 

So it’s going to be very interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see how 

those members vote on this particular motion. And they will be 

voting on this motion. I would suspect that there’s going to be a 

little dissension in the ranks over there. 

 

As I said, we know that their Calgary big oil lobbyist is a very 

strong proponent. And we know that there’s those in that party 

who probably even supported the NDP’s position in the ’80s, 

which was that they were in favour of phasing out uranium 

mining. They weren’t even in favour of mining, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think the Leader of the Opposition may have been a part 

of that particular movement. We, on the other hand, see mining 

and value-added as being potentially very advantageous for the 

economic future of this province, and think that the position that 

uranium mining should be shut down is extreme and 

unreasonable. We obviously have members opposite that would 

disagree. 

 

But speaking of support, here’s what the founder of 

Greenpeace, Patrick Moore, had to say about nuclear energy, 

and I quote: 

 

When I helped found Greenpeace in Vancouver in the 

1970s, my colleagues and I were firmly opposed to 

nuclear energy. But times have changed. 

 

Unfortunately, environmental activists had become so 

influenced by their own misinformation that they failed to 

consider the enormous and clear benefits of harnessing 

nuclear energy to meet Canada’s goals for clean air and 

reduced greenhouse-gas emissions. 

 

So the founder of Greenpeace can find his way clear to 

recognizing the mistakes and the misinformation that some in 

the environmental movement put forward to undermine the 

credibility of the uranium industry and potentially nuclear 

power generation. It’s unfortunate that the NDP can’t find their 

way to the same position, Mr. Speaker, because we believe that 

there really are tremendous potential benefits for Saskatchewan 

in this field. And it really is unfortunate that we have the NDP 

trying to hold us back, looking to the past — typical behaviour, 

Mr. Speaker, for the NDP, but I think still unfortunate. 

 

And we’ve actually seen this manifested, this attitude, in other 

files as well with respect to resource development. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Think we were always a wee province? 

 

Mr. Harrison: — That’s right. We heard the former leader of 

the opposition talk about Saskatchewan as the wee, w-e-e, 

province. We’ve had a situation where the NDP even to this day 

are doom and gloom. Things are terrible, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

awful. You listen to some of their speeches during the Throne 

Speech debate, and you would think that you were living in one 

of the worst places in the world. Negativity, constantly bashing 

the positive things that are happening in this province. It really I 

think speaks to the mindset of those members opposite — a 

bitter and resentful mindset. We have groups of members over 

there that when we have announced new initiatives that benefit 

the people of Saskatchewan, what’s their response, Mr. 

Speaker? We were going to get to that. We were going to get to 

it. We were working on it. We had . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Around to it. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — That’s right. They were going to get to it. We 

had the Leader of the Opposition today said that he intended to 

do something in the context of one of his questions. They were 

going to get to it, Mr. Speaker. That’s seems to be their 

response to pretty much everything. All of the good news that 

this government has been announcing and all of the positive 

initiatives that we have put forward, they were going to get to it. 

But other than that, Mr. Speaker, things are terrible. And that’s 

their general position, so I think it’s unfortunate. 

 

Today there are 440 commercial nuclear power reactors 

operating in 31 countries around the world. With over 364,000 

megawatts of total capacity, this supplies 16 per cent of the 

world’s electricity as baseload power, and their efficiency 

continues to improve. Even more countries operate research 

reactors. Two hundred and eighty-four reactors are operating in 

56 countries, including one at the University of Saskatchewan, 

which I think that is a fact that many individuals in the province 

aren’t aware of, but there actually is a nuclear reactor in 

Saskatchewan, a research reactor, at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What does the future look like for nuclear energy? Right now 

there are plans for over 100 new reactors around the world, and 

the developing world’s appetite for energy is just beginning. 

And as I had mentioned earlier in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 

China alone is considering or actively building 60 reactors in 

that country alone. There’s going to be a tremendous increase in 

the world’s need for uranium, for U308, in order to power these 

facilities. And we think that Saskatchewan, being the world 

leader in the production of uranium, should be a world leader in 

the value-added parts of uranium as well, including nuclear 

power generation. 

 

With all that growth, shouldn’t the world’s largest supplier of 

uranium be able to get a bigger piece of the value-added pie, 

and obviously we think that we should. Why is the world going 

nuclear? Well climate change is a growing concern. While 

nuclear power has no significant carbon emissions, nuclear is 

competitively priced with alternatives such as wind turbines, 

and uranium has a remarkably stable supply chain, including 

our sizeable reserves in this province’s North. 

 

In Saskatchewan’s case we don’t have the option of large-scale 

hydro projects which have their own environmental concerns. 

We have had to rely quite heavily on coal-powered thermal 

generation. We’re now faced with plants that need to be 

replaced at some point in the future, and that leaves us with a 

choice of whether to go nuclear or to continue to utilize our coal 

resources. 

 

What is Saskatchewan’s energy outlook? Nearly two-thirds of 

our power is from coal and gas currently, while our 

fast-growing economy means that demand for power will grow 

from 800 to 2,000 megawatts over the next decade, which is a 

very significant amount of power. And we think it’s a very 

positive thing that power requirements are growing in this 



November 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1793 

province. It’s a reflection of the fact that the province is 

growing, that things are happening, that industry is expanding, 

which results in great opportunities for the people of this 

province. 

 

And for the nearly 20,000 people who have returned back home 

in the last year, Mr. Speaker, who have saw fit to and have 

realized that there’s now a government in place that wants them 

back, that wants to see people succeed, that wants to see 

entrepreneurial activities increase. And people have realized 

that, and they have come home or have come here for the first 

time to take advantage of these new opportunities in our great 

province. 

 

So over that time we’ve always committed to reducing our 

greenhouse gases usage by one-third, and that’s over the next 

decade. 

 

We’ve recently taken the step of forming the uranium 

development partnership with funding from our Crowns. This 

12-person partnership will look at the further development of 

Saskatchewan’s uranium resources, which as mentioned already 

supplies one-third of the world’s need for the precious element. 

 

Around the world, nations are looking towards nuclear power as 

a source of clean and reliable power, several of which will 

hopefully be powered by uranium from Saskatchewan. The 

uranium development partnership will identify, evaluate, and 

recommend how we can best take advantage of this new wave 

of nuclear interest right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The final report due at the end of this fiscal year, next March, 

will help our government develop an energy plan for the future 

of our province, looking primarily at four sources — wind, 

hydro, coal, and nuclear. Also we will make this report public 

because our government is ultimately accountable to the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and we will not forget that fact. 

 

The establishment of the uranium development partnership will 

begin to effectively address the growing public call for 

government to articulate a clear plan for our nuclear industry, 

especially since the recent interest in building a power plant in 

Saskatchewan. That’s why it’s so important that our partnership 

has representation from all across the areas that could be 

affected. Representatives from the nuclear industry, our 

universities, labour, First Nations, Métis, and the environmental 

community will help shape the future of Saskatchewan’s 

nuclear industry. 

 

What will that future look like? I can’t say for sure, but it’s 

definitely looking brighter now that the people of Saskatchewan 

are finally seeing action to develop this industry. Uranium’s 

been a key element in the world for 60 years, and yet we have 

never seen a detailed plan or direction from the government of 

the day. And that’s about to change. 

 

It goes without saying that adding value to our vast uranium 

resources cannot come at the expense of the safety of the people 

of Saskatchewan nor the quality of our environment. As 

stewards of our environment, it’s paramount that we never lose 

sight of the long-term health of our environment and its 

residents for short-term gain. 

 

We will not lose sight of that, Mr. Speaker, and we will work 

towards strengthening our environment while pursuing 

sustainable and responsible growth. Our Premier’s taken the 

lead on this file, and here’s what he had to say on John 

Gormley’s radio show back in April. Quote: 

 

You know the federal government signalled in their 

budget — and this wasn’t widely reported because its 

budget documents are obviously large in scope and scale 

— but there was important language in there where the 

federal government signalled their desire to pursue the 

next generation of Canadian reactor technology. Our 

government believes Saskatchewan should be on the 

vanguard of that effort. We should be leading. 

 

We have the companies here, the uranium companies in 

Areva and Cameco who have, by the way, experience in 

hands-on involvement in the value chain in other 

jurisdictions where they operate. So we have all of this 

natural advantage for us to lead in this regard, to make 

sure we’re sustainably and responsibly pursuing the next 

reactor technology that Canada can pursue. 

 

So obviously our vision as a new government is we would look 

at that value chain, that refining, that enrichment, and 

potentially the power side of it, Mr. Speaker, and very positive. 

 

Polls show that Saskatchewan residents want us to pursue 

value-added uranium opportunities and even nuclear power. 

And why not? It doesn’t make much economic sense for 

Saskatchewan to only be involved in the mining of uranium and 

then ship it away to allow someone else to make the 

value-added dollars from our resource. The people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to receive the most from their resources. 

And that means that our government is open to hearing from the 

private sector. 

 

We’ve said that the taxpayers of this province will not be 

expected to put their tax dollars to build a nuclear power plant 

for SaskPower. Instead we extended an offer for private nuclear 

developers to make their case, and it didn’t take long for 

interest to be shown. If a private developer can provide 

Saskatchewan with clean, reliable, and affordable power 

without risking taxpayers’ dollars, then I think we owe it to the 

province to hear them out. 

 

That’s what our government does, Mr. Speaker, we listen to 

those who want to help build our province. Of course that 

doesn’t mean that crews are already clearing the land. If a 

developer wants to go forward with such a plan, we have a 

rigorous and stringent environmental analysis for it to go 

through before a licence can even be issued by the federal 

government. 

 

Residents can be assured that consultation will happen along the 

way during the process of considering any new form of power 

generation, and it will be open and transparent. Our government 

takes the duty to consult very seriously and understands that we 

do not run this province for ourselves, but rather on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve to earn as much money as 

possible for their uranium resources. They deserve a clean, 



1794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 20, 2008 

reliable source of power. They deserve high-paying jobs, 

whether in the mines of our North or the office towers of 

Saskatoon. They deserve to have the opportunity to pursue 

value-added ventures that our neighbours to the South have 

access to. They deserve for Saskatchewan to have the 

opportunity to be a centre of excellence for the uranium 

industry with the benefits that would last for generations. 

 

They deserve this and more, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue 

to work hard so that families can look back on today and see the 

continued diversification of Saskatchewan’s economy. A 

world-class people deserve a world-class economy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To conclude, we see there being tremendous opportunity in this 

field, in this sector. We believe that we owe it to the people of 

Saskatchewan to look at this, to examine this, to listen to those 

that are interested in making things happen on this file, Mr. 

Speaker. And with that I will conclude and table the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Motion by the member from Meadow 

Lake that be resolved: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan supports 

the consideration of further value-added development of 

Saskatchewan’s uranium industry including nuclear power 

generation and recognizes the potential benefits to the 

growth and prosperity of the people of our province. 

 

Ready for the question? I believe that the time has expired of 

adjournment for the day. So this House now stands adjourned 

until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Monday, Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 

 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1765 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1765 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1765 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1765 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1765 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1765 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1766 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1766 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1766 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1766 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1766 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1767 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Universal Children’s Day 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1767 

 Holodomor Memorial Day 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1767 

 Arts Councils Celebrate 40th Anniversary 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1767 

 National Child Day Observed in Prince Albert 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1768 

 Dress For Success 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1768 

 Historians Take Note 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1768 

 Forthcoming Apology 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1769 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Enterprise Saskatchewan 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1769 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1769 

 Seniors’ Drug Plan 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1770 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1770 

 Government’s Performance 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1771 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1771 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 67 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1774 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1774 

 Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1775 

 Bill No. 72 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1775 

 Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1775 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1775 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1776 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act............................................................................................. 1778 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 602 — The National Peacekeepers Recognition Day Act 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1778 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1778 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Viability of Saskatchewan Crown Corporations 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1779, 1788 

  Duncan ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1781, 1788 

  Harper ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1782, 1788 

  McMillan ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1783, 1788 

  Van Mulligen ................................................................................................................................................................. 1785, 1789 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1786, 1789 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1788 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1789 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1790 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


