




















































Hansard: November 17, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 13A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1667 

 November 17, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills, 

the minister of highways and public safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the House today, I’d like 

to introduce 25 very important people who help us do our job, 

who help us look good, I guess, in the eyes of the public 

because they are our first line of reference to many of the 

programs and activities that the government represents. 

 

We have 25 members from the public service as participants in 

the parliamentary program for public servants, and they 

represent a variety of government ministries, including Finance, 

Government Services, and including many who are in the 

building future leaders program. We have people from the 

Office of the Provincial Secretary. We have representatives 

from the Ministry of Social Services and from the Legislative 

Library. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they’re taking part in a day-long event full of 

activities. They are going to be watching the proceedings of the 

House for the next hour. We’re going to be meeting with them a 

little later. And they’re going to have a much better idea of what 

happens in this public venue once their tour is done today. But, 

Mr. Speaker, we’d like to welcome them here, and I ask all 

members to join with me in doing so. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming our guests from the public 

service here today. As the minister indicated, the individuals 

who work in the public service are very valuable to this 

province. They’re the ones who, in fact, make any government 

look good. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the 

minister in welcoming them here today, and hope that they can 

work hard enough to make this government look good. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of this Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce some guests in your gallery. Some of them are 

regulars from the Saskatchewan House of Prayer, Richard and 

Joanne Lepp, and Peggy Arnold. Also from the Saskatchewan 

House of Prayer with us today is Patricia Fraser. Along with 

them is Pastor Terri Murphy and from the National House of 

Prayer in Ottawa, Fran Parker. Her husband Rob was unable to 

attend today. He had to take off to catch a flight. 

They were some of the attendees at a breakfast this morning 

hosted by the Saskatchewan House of Prayer and Regina 

Evangelical Ministerial Association that the member from 

Moose Jaw North and I attended this morning. I’d like all 

members to welcome them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

welcome to their Assembly today, about 75 to 100 employees 

of the Department of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, 

Mr. Speaker. They’re here today to watch question period and 

to try to talk to their minister and their employer about some of 

the problems they’re experiencing in their workplace. So I’d 

like to welcome them all here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next member, I just 

want to inform our guests that you’re more than welcome to 

join with us in the Chamber today. We welcome you, but we 

also ask you not to participate in the debate in any form. Thank 

you. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 

join my colleague across the floor in also welcoming the 

members of the Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing, corrections workers. I want to take this time as well to 

acknowledge the fact that having worked in that field before, 

Mr. Speaker, for 14 years, it’s a very dangerous field to work 

in. I respect the work they do day in and day out. I also want to 

thank Mr. Bob Bymoen today, who is with us. 

 

Back in September he worked very well and worked well with 

my ministry officials and myself to get the provincial 

institutional lockdown and searches conducted. And Bob and I 

have a relationship, I guess; we know we can phone each other 

and talk. I look forward to that. As of Friday I left him a couple 

of voice mails on some issues, and I look forward to that 

continued relationship. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your east 

gallery I notice some people from across Saskatchewan who are 

involved in health care. With us today are Barb Cape, president 

of SEIU [Service Employees International Union] west, SEIU 

and the bargaining committee from SEIU across the province. 

Also with us in the east gallery, Gord Campbell, president of 

the CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] health care 

bargaining committee, and his bargaining committee from 

across the province. 

 

Also while I’m on my feet I notice Tom Graham, president of 



1668 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

CUPE Saskatchewan there. And these people are working hard 

to get a collective agreement to make the health workplaces in 

our province a better place for all of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask all members here to welcome these people to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 

seated in the west gallery there are 21 students, grade 5 and 6 

students that have made the trek in from Avonlea and were 

going to be taking in the proceedings for a while today. I had a 

chance to meet with them just prior to them coming into the 

Assembly here. And they’ve had an opportunity of seeing the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] museum as well as 

the history museum just on Albert and College. And now 

they’re here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, accompanying them — I’m thanking my 

colleagues for having so much to say around me here — 

accompanying them are their teacher, Denise Dombowsky, as 

well as Renata Briggs. And I know they’re going to have a very 

safe trip back to Avonlea, about a 45-minute trip back to 

Avonlea, because Darrell Epp is their bus driver, and I know 

he’s a very good driver because he had a very good teacher. 

Anyway I’d like all members to welcome them to their 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

south, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise in the House today to introduce Neil Buechler 

who is sitting in your gallery. Mr. Buechler is a long-time 

resident of Saskatoon, retired local director of the Marsh 

Canada office. He’s been a good friend and a good supporter. 

He’s been very active in many volunteer and community 

events. And in his case you usually get a package deal because 

you get his wife Verna and daughter Jill to come along. And I 

see they’re not with him today, but they are certainly the better 

part of that family. And I want to wish him well and welcome 

to this legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you I’d like to introduce to the legislature, colleagues 

Lorne and Rhonda Veitch, visiting from Swift Current. And 

we’re delighted to have them join us — and Lindell Veitch — 

here in their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 

with a petition in support of public safety and security in 

Saskatchewan. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders — including the 

policing community, the corrections community, and 

community agencies, organizations, and educators that 

interface with gangs — so he might understand the risks 

and challenges that gangs present to our communities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan families who are 

struggling and unable to find quality child care, which really 

restricts their futures here in the province. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of the constituents in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions to 

index the minimum wage. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed from people in Montmartre, 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1669 

Lumsden, Buena Vista, Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, Grenfell, 

Indian Head, and Moosomin. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the high costs of post-secondary 

education and accessibility issues. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this petition on behalf of students in 

Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Business and Professional Women’s Club 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to speak today 

about the Business and Professional Women’s Club of 

Saskatoon, BPW, a non-partisan, non-sectarian network of 

business and professional women, and a member of BPW 

International which represents over 100 groups on five 

continents. It is notable that the BPW has a permanent seat on 

the United Nations. 

 

BPW strives to improve social and economic status for working 

women to encourage women to pursue political office and to 

lobby at all levels of government. BPW provides women with 

many opportunities including networking, expanding their 

knowledge on women’s issues, developing leadership capacities 

and self-confidence as aids to career advancement. 

 

The BPW have offered informational meetings on issues like 

workplace harassment and bullying, on violence against 

women, and most recently an all-candidates forum for female 

federal candidates. They have organized a YWCA [Young 

Women’s Christian Association] crisis shelter wish list for 

donations. They are extremely active in International Women’s 

Day and carry out a yearly silent auction to raise funds for their 

educational bursary that they award to a mature woman 

returning to school. And the list goes on. 

 

The BPW advance issues affecting women in the workplace by 

responding to government briefs on request, participating in 

government forums and committees, and networking with local, 

provincial, and national women’s groups. They keep themselves 

informed on issues of national import and concerning women, 

existing and proposed legislation, and federal task forces. 

 

Internationally, BPW supports Nashi, a project to prevent 

children from becoming sex-trade victims by education and 

establishing trade schools and safe houses. They also support 

entrepreneurial women in developing countries. 

 

BPW has a strong presence in our province. I’m proud to be a 

member of this organization, and to call many of these women 

my friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Saskatchewan Party Convention 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party held its first convention since 

the November 2007 election, an election that saw the people of 

this province choose a new direction. And what did they 

choose, Mr. Speaker? As convention delegates heard, they 

chose a party that keeps its promises — 80 of them so far. A 

party that has given the people of this province the largest ever, 

single-year tax cut. They elected a government that has made a 

$1 billion investment in infrastructure, soon to climb to $1.5 

billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They chose a government that is taking steps to ensure a secure 

future for our children and our grandchildren through debt 

reduction — almost 40 per cent, at a rate of $5,000 per minute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, former Canadian ambassador, renowned 

broadcaster, and the pride of Wadena, Saskatchewan, Pamela 

Wallin spoke at that convention. She had this to say about her 

home province under its new government. This is a quote, Mr. 

Speaker, from Pamela Wallin, “Saskatchewan’s new premier is 

very much a part of the new generation of leaders, post-partisan 

in a way, focused on getting stuff done, and making things 

happen,” said Wallin. 

 

As the Premier would say, turning Saskatchewan into a place 

where hope trumps fear. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

New Business Opens in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 

this opportunity to congratulate a young entrepreneur who has 

recently established a business in the constituency of Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Ms. Sarah Gerow has opened Kreme Boutique, a store 

providing upscale, new and gently used women’s clothing, 

shoes, handbags, and accessories. Sarah’s a young entrepreneur 

who, after extensive experience of working in retail, decided to 

take the plunge and start her own business. 

 



1670 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, Kreme Boutique is situated on the 600 block of 

33rd Street, right in the heart of Saskatoon Massey Place. This 

location is just across from my constituency office. When I 

spoke to Sarah and asked why she chose to open her store in its 

location, she told me that she saw the commercial strip along 

33rd Street as an area experiencing a rebirth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as someone who lives in this neighbourhood, I 

couldn’t agree more. Each week there seems to be more and 

more strollers going down the sidewalks. Young families are 

choosing to move to this area of the city because they 

appreciate its character, charm, and good access to services and 

amenities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome Sarah to the neighbourhood 

and wish her all the best with this new business venture. I’m 

sure that in no time she’ll have a regular clientele from the 

neighbourhood and from across the city. I would ask all 

members to join me in congratulating Ms. Sarah Gerow on the 

opening of Kreme Boutique. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Carrot River Wildcats Football Team Wins Championship 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the Carrot River Valley 

constituency has again risen to the occasion. November 8 was a 

great one for the Carrot River Wildcats football team as they 

beat the Plenty Wildcats 48 to 14, winning the provincial 

six-man football team.  

 

Mr. Speaker, it should also be noted that Plenty is located in the 

Rosetown-Elrose constituency — my right-hand seatmate’s 

riding. And though I give Plenty a ton of credit for making it to 

the finals, you just can’t underestimate the people of Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Carrot River Wildcats football team has only 

been in existence for 10 years and in that time has won the 

provincial title three times and came second once. I give credit 

not only to the boys but to the coaches for their work ethic and 

fortitude. 

 

Mr. Speaker, coaches Greg McJannet, Cory Schmaltz, and 

Dwight Wrubleski start practice every morning at 7 a.m. To top 

it all off, the boys have to meet academic standards to play. 

Now that is dedication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Eric Tillman and Coach Miller, if they would take 

my advice, need not look all over North America for talent. All 

they have to do is look to Carrot River for a winning team and 

players. Go Carrot River Wildcats. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert’s Award of Merit 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, on October 17, local Prince 

Albert musician Donny Parenteau was presented with the 

Prince Albert Award of Merit, which is the city’s highest 

honour. Donny is the 143rd recipient in the entire history of the 

Award of Merit in Prince Albert. 

 

The award was presented to him at a special benefit concert for 

the Parkland Community Club. Donny was instrumental in 

organizing the benefit which raised an astonishing $78,000. The 

generosity of the people of Prince Albert never ceases to amaze, 

Mr. Speaker. Seventy-eight thousand dollars will go toward 

much-needed upgrades and repairs to the Parkland Community 

Hall so that it might be better utilized by the entire community. 

 

Parkland Community Hall is in the West Flat in my 

constituency and is a place where I once worked for a summer. 

Donny grew up in the West Flat, and he has strived to give back 

as much as he can to his community. His actions have showed 

that greatly in the last number of years. 

 

Additionally, I’d like to wish Donny the best of luck on his 

upcoming album, as I’m sure it will meet with the same success 

that seems to accompany everything he does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating Donny Parenteau on being awarded Prince 

Albert’s Award of Merit. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Dedication to Business and Volunteerism 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 23, 

Mr. Ralph Boychuk was honoured by the Prince Albert & 

District Chamber of Commerce with a Lifetime Member 

Recipient Award. 

 

Mr. Boychuk has been very dedicated to the success of the 

business community and has a long history of volunteerism 

with the chamber of commerce. Besides having been the 

president of the Prince Albert & District Chamber of 

Commerce, he also served in various executive capacities on the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce Board and was a 

2006-2007 president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce. 

 

He now sits on the executive council of the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce in an advisory position. He was the 

Chairman of the Saskatchewan Chamber’s 25th anniversary of 

ABEX [Achievement in Business Excellence] awards that was 

held here in Regina in October. Ralph also sat on the board of 

the Canadian Chamber of Commerce from 2006 to June 2008. 

He has also shown his dedication to community through 

volunteerism with the Prince Albert High Noon Optimist Youth 

Soccer Association, the development and alumni committee for 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology], the Prince Albert Kinsmen Club, Prince Albert 

Golf and Curling Club, Prince Albert Raider Hockey Club, and 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1671 

the Prince Albert Forestry Expo. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, as MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for Prince Albert Carlton, I ask all members to join 

me in personally recognizing and congratulating Mr. Ralph 

Boychuk on receiving the well-deserved honour of lifetime 

member recipient by the Prince Albert and District Chamber of 

Commerce. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Saskatchewan Potash Council 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Potash Council 

was officially formed September 10, 2008. The council 

members believe the formation of the council is truly a 

historical event for Saskatchewan labour and the Saskatchewan 

potash industry. 

 

The participating Saskatchewan potash organizations are: the 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union Local 922; 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union Local 892; 

United Steelworkers Area Council; United Steelworkers Local 

189; United Steelworkers Local 7458; United Steelworkers 

Local 7552; United Steelworkers Local 7656; United 

Steelworkers Local 7689; and the Rocanville Potash Employees 

Association. 

 

At this time the council has a broad mandate which includes 

some of the following: the exchange of information on a regular 

basis; to advise potash workers through their respective 

organizations on issues of concern, member education, 

collective bargaining, political action, strategic campaigns, 

health and safety regulations, WCB [Workers’ Compensation 

Board] compensation and appeals; to help promote workers’ 

issues with the potash industry; lobby both levels of 

government to support workers’ rights; lobby the Saskatchewan 

Mining Association to promote common agendas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is in the spirit of solidarity that the 

Saskatchewan Potash Council pledges to increase their 

members’ joint efforts to achieve justice and equality for all 

workers in the potash industry. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 

members to join me in recognizing the Saskatchewan Potash 

Council for its historic event and wish them all the best. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Severance for Former Public Servants 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. About a year ago 

the Deputy Premier and his transition team started their mass 

firings without cause in our province’s professional public 

service. 

To the Deputy Premier: what’s the total cost of severance for 

these fired public servants, including deputy ministers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in a question that was asked by the opposition that was tabled in 

this Assembly, we’ve provided information to that opposition. I 

can tell the member opposite, if she hasn’t read that 

information, that in fact there were 44 people that we have 

provided a severance package to as a result of negotiations that 

have been ongoing with a number of legal firms. And it’s my 

understanding as of the weekend that there are 10 individuals 

that are still in that process of negotiating through what is 

entitled through the regulations that we have within this 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, not a lot of support for 

that answer. But the numbers are starting to come in, and 

they’re big. I’m going to table a list of civil servants that have 

reached settlements with the government to date. The cost is 

over $4.1 million, and this doesn’t include many of the deputy 

ministers that their government chose to fire. It doesn’t include 

people from the Labour Relations Board or Crop Insurance or 

the protocol office or our Crown corporations. All of those folks 

were fired in the last year. 

 

So will the deputy minister stop dodging the question and tell 

the taxpayers of the province how much, how much is this mass 

firing going to cost us all? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as the Deputy Premier, I 

will inform the member opposite, as I’ve already indicated, that 

the process is ongoing. There is over a $4 million settlement, as 

was indicated when the former premier released the staff that 

was currently within this building. There was about a $4.5 

million settlement in terms of ensuring that those individuals 

had the ability to move forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for me to provide a final number is impossible, as I indicated 

in my first answer, Mr. Speaker; that there are still negotiations 

under way with about 10 individuals that will be determined as 

the process unfolds. Mr. Speaker, the public accounts 

documents that will be produced next for March 31, 2009 will 

indicate all of those settlements. So we will arrive at full 

disclosure, we will arrive at accountability, and we will ensure 

that the people of the province understand exactly what has 

happened. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



1672 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, 44 people received $4.163 

million. These are public servants, Mr. Speaker. And it’s clear 

the government doesn’t mind spending money when it wants to. 

They can spend millions of dollars on severance for fired 

professional public servants, and they’re going to spend 

millions more because we haven’t yet heard what some of these 

long-term deputy ministers are going to receive, but they have 

no money when it comes to the hog and cattle industry. 

 

So to the Deputy Premier: why is he taking millions of dollars 

and wasting it on firing professional public servants when his 

fellow Minister of Agriculture could be spending it on an 

industry that is going down the tubes, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, that member, since she’s 

been here since 1986, should understand that when 

governments change, there is a change in terms of numbers of 

people that are working for government. Mr. Speaker, we have 

been forthright with the opposition and we’ve been forthright 

with the people of Saskatchewan in talking about settlements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to indicate that of the list that the 

member has, which we provided to her, is that no one, Mr. 

Speaker, no one received a settlement beyond $250,000 except 

for one individual, Mr. Speaker, that’s not on that list. That’s a 

person whose name is Murdoch Carriere. They settled with him, 

telling people that he was fired when in fact he was not. That 

member should be held accountable for the money that she 

spent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

you know, we haven’t yet heard of the settlement for John 

Wright, which we believe will be close to $1 million. And why 

is that? Because he is a professional public servant that has 

given over 30 years of his life to this province and they fired 

him without cause, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They fired Gillian McCreary who was a public servant long 

before the NDP [New Democratic Party] was elected in 1991. 

They fired Jack Zepp, a public servant long before the NDP was 

elected in 1991, and they fired Hal Cushon, a public servant 

long before the NDP was elected in 1991. So we have millions 

of dollars being spent on professional public servants who did 

nothing — nothing, Mr. Speaker — other than to serve the 

people of this province. 

 

Now tell us again: why do they see fit to spend $4.16 million on 

firing professional public servants, and they can’t provide 

money for senior citizens so all seniors can benefit from the 

drug plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t really believe the 

questioning from that member. Mr. Speaker, every time a 

government has changed, Mr. Speaker, every time a 

government has changed, there has been a change of 

individuals. There has been a change of individuals within 

political responsibilities. There have been a change in terms of 

individuals responsible for providing leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

That is understood. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we 

intend to follow that, Mr. Speaker. We intend to ensure . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We intend to 

ensure that the people who are entitled to severance packages 

have the ability to negotiate them. It will involve change, Mr. 

Speaker. It will involve financial commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

But that is what occurs when governments change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And for that member to stand there sanctimoniously talking 

about the fact that, oh back in 1991 nothing changed — we 

didn’t release anybody; it didn’t cost anyone, any of the 

taxpayers’ money — it’s not true, Mr. Speaker. She knows it. 

Everybody in the province of Saskatchewan knows that as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Public Safety 

admitted last week to the media that his policy of informing the 

public when offenders are unlawfully at large does not exist, 

describing it as quote “an interim protocol.” We don’t know if 

this protocol was communicated to front-line staff, but two 

front-line corrections workers along with the deputy minister 

have been suspended. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why has he suspended people for 

failing to follow a policy that the minister admits doesn’t exist? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s go 

back, Mr. Speaker. An interim policy, interim statement was 

made to the deputy minister. Protocol and procedures now are 

in place, Mr. Speaker, where from the director level up . . . 

[inaudible] . . . central staff, information to myself and 

notification to the public will take place. 

 

The hard-working staff members at the front line in corrections, 

Mr. Speaker, have done a great job. They’ll maintain their great 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1673 

performance by being very diligent and vigilant to make sure 

escapes do not happen, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re doing, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, on August 30 media reported 

suggesting that the staff at the Regina Correctional Centre were 

in fact not told that management had received advanced 

information about a possible escape. When I asked the minister 

about this a couple of weeks ago, he didn’t seem to know the 

answer so I will try again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why were front-line workers at the 

Regina Correctional Centre kept in the dark about a possible 

threat to their safety and that of the general public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

member opposite, thank you for that question again. We have 

investigations going on and reviews, Mr. Speaker. At the 

conclusion of those particular processes, we will find out a 

number of things, I am sure, Mr. Speaker, one of which will be 

what happened surrounding the escape back in August, Mr. 

Speaker. I look forward to those results coming forward. The 

public will get those, as will the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

but for now I will not talk about ongoing investigations. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to hide behind 

the four different reviews currently under way in his 

department, except of course when he’s hiding behind the 

Minister of Justice or the Minister of the Environment. Workers 

in the department must wish they were so lucky, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re being suspended for breaking rules that no one has seen 

and which the minister now admits don’t exist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when will these reviews be 

complete, and are these reviews examining the minister’s role 

in these various fiascos? Or is it a plan to blame it all on 

front-line workers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the reviews and the investigations will be done when 

they’re done, Mr. Speaker. Three of us on this side of the House 

understand the process, Mr. Speaker — not to meddle in 

investigations, not to obstruct investigations, and to wait for the 

conclusion of the investigations, Mr. Speaker. And when it 

comes to the member opposite, who was pretty free with 

information in the media, Mr. Speaker, I will not comment on 

the investigations, Mr. Speaker, until they are done in their 

conclusion. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, front-line workers want and 

deserve to be consulted before the government implements any 

changes that affect them or their families. To the minister: will 

he commit here today that he and his officials will consult 

front-line workers and their representatives prior to any changes 

being implemented by this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the member opposite for that question. The answer is yes. I will 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that a year ago when I was briefed by my 

officials, this particular issue came up about the ongoing 

committee work being done between officials and SGEU 

[Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union] 

officials, Mr. Speaker. So I will tell you right now that if there’s 

operational concerns across this province, there’s local 

union-management committees that talk to SGEU, to my 

officials, Mr. Speaker. I will say this, Mr. Speaker, that the 

process will be followed as always has been. But just to let 

everyone know, Mr. Speaker, that this has been ongoing for a 

number of years. 

 

The member opposite doesn’t want to mention, but back when 

he was given the minister’s position of this particular portfolio, 

the officials were working with SGEU, Mr. Speaker. He 

stopped it. He stopped it, Mr. Speaker. Public safety’s 

paramount here, Mr. Speaker, as is the staff safety, and he did 

not do anything about it, Mr. Speaker. He stopped it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this government, without 

consultation, broke their word and rammed through essential 

services legislation in the spring. At the time, we raised dozens 

of valid concerns, and the answer was always the same — wait 

for the regulations. Yet here we are nine months later and still 

no regulations in sight. 

 

To the Minister of Labour: when will he table the regulations? 

 



1674 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to update the people of this province regarding essential 

services. The great news is the people of this province are now 

covered by essential services, Mr. Speaker. It was a yawning 

and obvious gap, Mr. Speaker, that was there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question preamble highlighted the consultative 

process. That was very important, Mr. Speaker. That 

consultative process allowed us to reach out right across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. We met with nearly 100 individuals 

personally; we received feedback, Mr. Speaker, and it allowed 

us to strengthen the essential service piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. On that, Mr. Speaker, what we can say is the people of 

this province can be reassured work is under way to ensure that 

their safety remains the primary component of this government. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, back when this government 

was busy doing one thing before the election and then the exact 

opposite after, we asked another simple question. We asked 

which civil servants are covered under essential services 

legislation. So now, nine months later, maybe the minister 

finally, finally has an answer to this. 

 

To the minister, again: who’s in and who’s out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the good news is the people 

of Saskatchewan are in and the members opposite are out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a good start. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in January 2007, Mr. Speaker, Vince Ready 

provided a report that recommended to parties that he address 

the continuation of essential services during a labour dispute, 

Mr. Speaker. What he said is, the difficulty is that, unlike most 

provinces in Canada, there is no legislative regime in 

Saskatchewan for the provision of essential services during a 

labour dispute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re delighted with is that we have passed 

essential services, and 70 per cent of the people of this province 

supported that, Mr. Speaker, because they wanted to ensure that 

their highways are plowed in the winter and that people have 

access to medical care during strikes that we saw last year, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re covered, Mr. Speaker. Once again the people 

of this province are in when it comes to essential services. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I’ll tell you who’s not in on the know, and 

that’s the Minister of Labour when it comes to essential 

services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in committees in the spring 

session, the Minister of Tourism, Parks and Culture knew 

exactly how many civil servants were affected by this 

legislation. In that same spring session, the Minister of Energy 

told us that all government departments were undertaking a 

review to determine which government employees were 

affected. We asked this question as well and it caught — 

surprise — the Minister of Labour by surprise. He had no idea 

what was going on, which is quite common for this minister. 

 

To the minister: we know this is going to affect the people; we 

just don’t know who and at what cost. Simple question: what is 

the cost of entering into essential services legislation 

negotiation with public sector workers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to provide a bit of an update. The cost is 

considerably lower than if the people of this province were not 

covered by the legislation, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first point. 

There are four very simple and important criteria, Mr. Speaker. 

It relates to a danger to life, health, and safety; it relates to the 

destruction of premises and property; it relates to environmental 

damage; and the operation of the courts, Mr. Speaker. Those are 

the four key criteria, Mr. Speaker, that will inform our work in 

this area. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the big problem with essential 

services legislation always was that they did it without 

consultation. Well here we are nine months later with no more 

consultation, no regulations, no more answers than we had nine 

months ago. And it’s obvious the minister is not exactly in a 

rush to get these regulations out. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, yes or no: will he hold 

consultations before releasing the regulations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it a little bit strange 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1675 

that back in January 2007, Mr. Speaker, when Vince Ready 

came forward and said that there needs to be an essential 

service framework in place, Mr. Speaker, he said the difficulty 

is that, unlike most provinces in Canada, there’s no legislative 

regime in Saskatchewan for the provision of essential services 

during a labour dispute, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we were able to do upon being elected by the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker, is ensure that we wouldn’t go back 

to a time when 400 people per day were being turned around 

from the Royal University Hospital, Mr. Speaker — to ensure 

that health services were provided for the people of this 

province; to ensure that highways would be plowed, Mr. 

Speaker; essentially to ensure that the right to strike remains, 

but it’s balanced with public safety, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

we’ve moved forward, Mr. Speaker, and in due course, those 

regulations will be released. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Response to Health Disparities Report 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon Health 

Region’s health disparities report outlines numerous solutions 

to alleviating poverty and closing the health gap between the 

province’s rich and poor. The Minister of Health is entering his 

second year in government, and nothing he has done to close 

the health gap between the province’s rich and poor has made a 

difference. The solutions to the problems are being given to the 

minister. Mr. Speaker, what is he going to do with these 

recommendations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I am very proud actually to answer on 

behalf of our government to this particular question on this 

report. We have not only — without having the report — 

addressed a number of the recommendations but gone well 

beyond the recommendations. So I hope the member opposite 

has more questions because it’s going to take more than a 

minute to give her the answer. 

 

We announced a historical tax cut which will take 80,000 

people, low-income workers, off of the tax roll. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the report recommends 

that no one under the income, combined income, of 33,390 

should pay income tax. We did better than that, Mr. Speaker. 

No one under the income of 41,300 will be paying income tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m waiting for the next 

question to continue the answer. But we increased shelter rates. 

We indexed it, which is unprecedented in our country, to the 

market within the different regions. That is for all of the 

low-income clients. And there is far more that we did than that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many of those things 

don’t affect people who don’t work. And no one can deny the 

health gap between the rich and the poor. People in low-income 

neighbourhoods are three times more likely to be hospitalized 

for diabetes. They are 34 times more likely to have hep 

[hepatitis] C, three times more likely to have heart disease, 15 

times more likely to attempt suicide, and five times more likely 

to have a child die in infancy than those people living in a 

high-income neighbourhood. 

 

Will the minister listen to the pleas of the men, women, and 

children living in poverty in the inner cities and commit the 

required millions needed to implement the report’s 

recommendations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps the 

member opposite doesn’t understand the system that is 

administrated within my ministry, because those on SAP 

[Saskatchewan assistance plan] and TEA [transitional 

employment allowance] are not working. They’re not working. 

They receive shelter allowance and they’re not working. And 

that has been increased and indexed under this government. 

They receive rental supplement, and they don’t necessarily have 

to be working. Some of the low-income working people also 

qualify for the rental supplement. That too was increased and 

indexed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We announced an increase to the low-income tax credit, Mr. 

Speaker, that will apply to those that are working and not 

working. Mr. Speaker, we more than doubled the seniors’ 

income plan. That is for the low-income seniors, and chances 

are, Mr. Speaker, they’re not working. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s been quite clear who 

doesn’t know their file. 

 

A November 14, 2008 Leader-Post article stated the Canadian 

Institute for Health Information, and I quote, “. . . estimates the 

additional cost to the health system from people living in 

poverty to be $640 million a year across the country.” 

 

In the same article, Mark Lemstra, one of the authors of the 

health disparity report, says, and I quote, “. . . an investment of 

$300 million . . . into the province’s poorest citizens could . . . 



1676 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

save $1 billion down the line.” 

 

To the minister: if he won’t commit to helping the province’s 

most vulnerable, will he commit to saving Saskatchewan 

taxpayers $1 billion by investing in the report’s 

recommendations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me 

continue. Let me continue to what we’ve done, and I’m sure if 

she adds it all up it’s a considerable amount of money that is 

spent for those most vulnerable within our society. 

 

We have met the cost of any increase to the utility rates to those 

that are most vulnerable with the SAP and TEA clients within 

my ministry. We increased the mileage that we pay for them for 

their medical appointments so that they get more per kilometre 

than they were receiving under the previous government. For 

the low-income working, most of whom are single-parent 

families, we significantly increased the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement as well as increasing the income 

threshold for those that will qualify. 

 

We have increased the rental supplements of those with 

disabilities to 40 per cent, so along with the shelter allowance 

they qualify for 110 per cent of the average market in any given 

district. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That government has 

done nothing but turn their back on the province’s most 

vulnerable people. This spring, with a mountain of money in the 

bank, what did they do? They cold-heartedly ripped the funding 

from Station 20 West, which would have addressed many of the 

problems outlined in this report. Their only solution to the 

problem was a health bus. If the minister will not commit the 

required funding necessary to implement the report’s 

recommendations, will he at least return funding to Station 20 

West? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add 

one more point, and that is that this government has also 

committed 77 million for people with disabilities who have to 

be, beyond a doubt, the most vulnerable people within our 

society. 

 

[14:15] 

 

But let’s never forget, Mr. Speaker, that the Lemstra report is 

based on history and data from when the NDP were 

government. This is when the NDP were government. This did 

not happen within the last eleven and a half months. But guess 

what? In eleven and a half months this government has taken 

significant action. We have fewer people than ever before on 

social assistance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 59, 

The Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 59, The Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Order. I call members to order. 

The Speaker is quite prepared to listen to the debate. The House 

will stand at a pause till we have members’ attention. 

 

Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 60, 

The Senate Nominee Election Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 60, The Senate Nominee Election Act. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1677 

Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 61, The Local Government 

Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved first reading of Bill No. 61, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar, the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answer to 

questions 93 through 106. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 93 to 106 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader, 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

am pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill 58, to 

amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during our government’s first year in office we 

have consistently adhered to three key priorities. These 

priorities have been investment and infrastructure, reduction of 

debt, and broad-based tax relief. Over the course of this past 

summer, we asked Saskatchewan people to write to us with 

their views on their priorities for our province. As it turns out, 

the people of Saskatchewan and the Government of 

Saskatchewan are in agreement on the priorities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 21 our government responded to these 

consultations by announcing the largest investment in 

infrastructure in Saskatchewan history, the largest amount of 

debt reduction in Saskatchewan history, and the largest, 

single-year income tax cut in Saskatchewan history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will enable the implementation of our 

income tax reduction initiative. This Bill increases a 

Saskatchewan basic personal exemption, the amount you can 

earn tax free before you start paying income tax, by $4,000 

from the 2008 taxation year. This amount will be now $12,945, 

the second highest personal exemption amount in Canada. In 

addition, Mr. Speaker, the spousal exemption amount and the 

equivalent to spouse amount are also being increased by a 

matching $4,000 for the 2008 taxation year, bringing these 

amounts to $12,945 as well. Mr. Speaker, this Bill also 

increases the dependent child tax credit amount by $2,000 per 

child to $4,795 for the 2008 taxation year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these measures will save an individual taxpayer 

$440 a year and will save a family of four $1,320 a year. In 

combination, Mr. Speaker, these enhancements to 

Saskatchewan’s exemption amounts will mean that a working 

family now can earn up to $41,300 before paying any provincial 

income tax. That’s because we now have the highest family 

exemption in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Not only that, Mr. Speaker, these 

exemption enhancements mean that 80,000 lower income 

Saskatchewan people will no longer have to pay any provincial 

income tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — But, Mr. Speaker, we know that many 

lower income Saskatchewan residents already pay no provincial 

income tax. Our income tax reduction initiatives did not forget 

these residents, Mr. Speaker. This Bill replaces the existing 

Saskatchewan sales tax credit with the new and enhanced 

Saskatchewan low-income tax credit. Mr. Speaker, benefit 

levels are significantly enhanced and ramp-up for adults is 

eliminated and eligibility has been extended to more people. 

 

This new initiative is a fully refundable tax credit that will 

continue to be delivered by the Canada Revenue Agency in 

conjunction with the quarterly federal goods and services tax 

credit. And these changes are effective July 2008, Mr. Speaker, 

the start of the current benefit year. Retroactive benefits for the 

July and October 2008 quarters will be paid out with the 

January 2009 quarterly payment. Annual benefits for a family 

of four can be as high as $600, and this family will receive 

partial benefits until their income exceeds $58,000. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we anticipate that the new Saskatchewan low-income 

tax credit will now be available to 300,000 Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated, these tax changes are 

all retroactive to the start of the 2008 taxation or benefit year. 

And although we have just announced these tax changes, we 



1678 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

also remain committed to full inflation indexation of the 

provincial income tax system. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

also includes technical amendments to ensure that all of the new 

personal exemption amounts and the new low-income tax credit 

amounts are fully indexed to inflation for the 2009 taxation or 

benefit year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I very pridefully move second reading of The Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 58, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a pleasure for me today to stand and speak today 

to Bill No. 58, An Act to amend the Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister who just rose gave a pretty good 

explanation about the Bill which, for the interests of those who 

may read my remarks in the next few days, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

simply like to acknowledge what the minister has said. 

 

The Income Tax Amendment Act today does deal with the 

retroactive increasing of the basic exemption amounts effective 

for the 2008 tax year. It deals with the retroactive increasing of 

the exemption amount with respect to a dependent spouse 

effective for the 2008 tax year. It retroactively increases the 

exemption amount in respect to and equivalent to spouse — i.e., 

a dependent other than the spouse — effective for the 2008 

taxation year, and retroactively increases the exemption amount 

in respect to a dependent child also effective for the 2008 tax 

year. And, Mr. Speaker, finally it enhances the refundable 

Saskatchewan sales tax credit, including changing the name to 

the low-income tax credit effective for the ’08-09 benefit year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can’t take a piece of legislation in 

isolation from comments that have been made by the 

government or in isolation from the overall specifics of the 

economy that we’re in or in the context of other legislation or 

other matters in front of the Chamber. Mr. Speaker, in that 

regard, not wanting to take this Bill too much in isolation, I 

know we are a good week since we dealt with the Speech from 

the Throne, Mr. Speaker, but I just want to make reference to a 

couple of comments in the Speech from the Throne before I 

carry on with some of my remarks on the Bill in front of us 

today. 

 

And I quote from the Speech from the Throne, and I suspect 

that members opposite who are just delighted with the speech 

will probably applaud me on a couple of occasions here in the 

next moment or two, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speech from the Throne actually, as it’s printed on page 2, 

starts: 

 

For as long as I can remember, people have called our 

province “Next Year Country.” 

 

Today, I am pleased to report that in our Saskatchewan, 

next year has arrived. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — You see, Mr. Speaker, I knew that they would 

applaud my comments. I just knew it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting that earlier this year . . . 

And people who were listening to my comments with regards to 

the Throne Speech earlier this month, Mr. Speaker, will 

remember that I talked about the surplus that the government 

has inherited and that they are now working towards building 

upon, Mr. Speaker. And as we know, that the government 

earlier reported a surplus of roughly $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we have the context of $3 billion in the bank, an 

economy that is booming, an economy that because it’s 

booming is creating some obstacles for individuals, vulnerable 

people in our communities, municipalities and, Mr. Speaker, 

certain sectors of our economy. And I can name just one for 

example, right now, Mr. Speaker — the trucking sector who is 

having trouble with labour shortages and the cost of moving 

goods. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are challenges in this booming economy. So 

as people who are watching this, Mr. Speaker, already know, 

the Premier this summer sent his members out into the province 

to identify what it is that people were talking about needing in 

terms of this $3 billion deficit. And one of the things, one of 

many things that was told to government members, one of the 

things that they came back with, Mr. Speaker, was income tax 

cuts. So, Mr. Speaker, this government proceeded to make some 

income tax cuts and that’s what brings the Bill forward today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Back to the context: $3 billion in the bank; a crisis, Mr. 

Speaker, for some people in our booming economy; and an 

income tax Act, Mr. Speaker, that by its very nature produces a 

circumstance in which for people to benefit, to benefit from the 

benefits included in this Act, Mr. Speaker, they are going to 

have to wait till next year to receive the benefits. 

 

So the Throne Speech that the members opposite applauded just 

a few moments ago, Mr. Speaker, said this isn’t next year 

country; it’s this year. And yet the solution to . . . The problems 

that individuals and businesses and communities are 

experiencing, Mr. Speaker, are this year. So this Act proceeds 

to address this issue of next year. We’re going to provide 

funding, and yes, Mr. Speaker, we acknowledge it’s retroactive 

so it covers this tax year, but in doing the coverage, Mr. 

Speaker, no one actually receives any of that benefit till next 

year. 

 

So the senior on a fixed income in North Battleford or Weyburn 

or Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, a senior who’s received a rent 

increase for their apartment or their house where they’re living, 

Mr. Speaker, now are going to have to wait till next year in 

order to see the benefit that they’re earning this year on money, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government inherited from this 

government, this party, last year. Mr. Speaker, this context that 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1679 

I’m talking about seems to have eluded the members opposite, 

who are continuing to talk through my remarks on this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So is it next year country or is it this year country, Mr. Speaker 

— $3 billion? We happen to have an understanding that of 

course the tax cuts and the debt reduction that the members 

opposite are so proud of, Mr. Speaker, represent roughly — get 

this, Mr. Speaker — represent roughly $300 million. Or let’s 

put it in a percentage context, Mr. Speaker: 10 per cent, 10 per 

cent of the total surplus that’s sitting in the bank, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what do they leave in the bank, Mr. Speaker, at the end of 

the day, but about $1.9 billion or 60 per cent of the overall 

surplus. So this legislation today which is meant to bring next 

year country to this year country and doesn’t quite do that, 

actually only applies 10 per cent of the surplus that in fact they 

inherited from last year’s, last year’s economy, Mr. Speaker. So 

very, very interesting — very interesting, very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So the bottom line for me today in speaking about this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, is to ensure that the public fully understands that 

indeed there is more, there’s more to this process of helping 

people during difficult times, Mr. Speaker, and a booming 

economy does provide difficult times. I can quote some. Maybe 

I will, Mr. Speaker. They’re animated across the way and are 

interested in additional information from me, so maybe I will 

indeed put some additional information on the paper, Mr. 

Speaker. But you know, we’ve got to fully understand, the 

public’s got to fully understand that while this is welcome 

news, there is a broad context, Mr. Speaker, that we have to put 

this in. 

 

The comments that I made a few moments ago about seniors in 

their homes . . . Mr. Speaker, I read a lot of newspapers from 

across Canada. Mr. Speaker, I also read the local newspapers. 

And back in August of this year I was reading the Regina 

Leader-Post. And there was quite an interesting story there by a 

writer here in Regina who, Mr. Speaker, had travelled to one of 

the booming areas of the province. And I think everybody 

knows that Weyburn community is booming; it really is, Mr. 

Speaker. The activity that’s taking place in that area is 

welcomed, I know, not only by Weyburn residents but by all 

residents in the province of Saskatchewan. But there are 

challenges, Mr. Speaker, that this booming economy presents. 

 

And I know the member from Weyburn over there has been 

barking at me a little bit during my comments, Mr. Speaker. 

Maybe he didn’t read this. Maybe he didn’t read this article in 

the Regina Leader-Post from August 2, 2008. And here, I’m 

just going to quote: 

 

Weyburn renters — like their counterparts in Regina and 

Saskatoon — aren’t immune to the rising costs of progress 

during Saskatchewan’s economic boom [says Charlie 

Hoskins]. 

 

Here’s what Charlie Hoskins says: 

 

“I moved here in June 1995. I’m coming up on 81 shortly 

[age 81, Mr. Speaker, and I continue the quote] and I 

would like to be able to relax and take it easy instead of 

having somebody hounding me all the time to pay more 

rent. My pension doesn’t go up that much. They have got 

you over a barrel because there is nowhere else to go down 

here.” 

 

Well Charlie Hoskins, Mr. Speaker, is the people that we are 

trying to speak for on this side of the House. They’re seniors, 

they’re students, they’re immigrants, they’re First Nations 

people moving into our towns and villages, Mr. Speaker, to take 

advantage of job opportunities there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are people who are still earning minimum 

wage, living on pensions, living on fixed incomes of one kind 

or another. They may have a disability, Mr. Speaker, or indeed 

they may just not have the skills yet to participate in our 

economy. Mr. Speaker, their income is not sufficient to allow 

them to deal with the rising rents, the rising cost of 

transportation, the rising food costs. And, Mr. Speaker, I quoted 

this story in Weyburn. It’s the same in North Battleford. It’s the 

same in Swift Current. It’s the same in Meadow Lake. Mr. 

Speaker, these are the people that we speak for today. 

 

Now I’m sure they’re happy to know that when they file their 

income tax in February or March — if they file their income 

tax, Mr. Speaker — but when they file their income tax, that 

maybe in March, April, or May they might see some benefit, 

benefit that actually has been out of their pocket for maybe as 

much as a year to 18 months, because we know that rents 

started to rise some time ago. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, very important — broad context of this 

legislation. Can’t argue with a number of the points that are 

directly in this. But what else matters, Mr. Speaker, when we’re 

dealing with basic personal credits and the sorts of things that I 

outlined when I started my remarks today? 

 

And I think the last point that we have to take into account, Mr. 

Speaker, that I just started on here a second ago, is not all 

people in Saskatchewan file their income tax returns, although, 

Mr. Speaker, I argue whenever I see somebody in this situation 

that everybody in Saskatchewan should file income tax return, 

regardless of what their income is, regardless of whether they 

have income or not. Mr. Speaker, there are benefits to filing an 

income tax return, but all of us are aware there are people out 

there who simply do not. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we address this piece of legislation, we 

should be addressing how do we make sure, how do we make it 

easier for people whose education, Mr. Speaker, may not have 

taught them the need to file an income tax return every year, 

whose circumstances may be such that they’ve never had to file 

or that they have difficulty in understanding how to file? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are benefits here for people that will take 

place next year and therefore, Mr. Speaker, it will be incumbent 

upon all of us to help those who don’t know about it to take 

advantage of it next year. 

 

So the second part of my comments in regards to this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Remember my first ones were about, what about 

this year country that they talked about so proudly in the Throne 

Speech? But when we do look at next year country, Mr. 

Speaker, how do we make sure that those who should benefit 



1680 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

from this legislation will in fact be able to benefit from it? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not saying for everybody, especially on 

the other side, to just tell everyone to go off to see, whether it’s 

in December or January or February, to see a private tax filer, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s no reason whatsoever for private tax filers 

to take advantage of these opportunities in charging people a 

percentage of what money they might be eligible to receive. Mr. 

Speaker, people should have the ability and the opportunity to 

benefit fully from this credit without having to involve 

somebody else in that process. But, Mr. Speaker, they need to 

be talked to. They need to be told about, and maybe we need to 

do something to make it easier for low-income people or those 

with little or perhaps no education to understand what needs to 

be done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s still a considerable amount of 

work that needs to be done, but, Mr. Speaker, I do say on behalf 

of the opposition that by and large the provisions as they appear 

in this piece of legislation, the provisions as they appear in this 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, are quite supportable. But we 

need to ensure that the public and the government fully 

understands the context and the implications of what’s involved 

here. So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I would like to move 

therefore that debate on Bill No. 58 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader, the member 

from The Battlefords, has moved adjournment of the debate. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Members, before I recognize 

the second reading speech, I would ask that members . . . I 

realize there’s a number of conversations taking place, and if 

you could just tone it down a little bit, it would make it a lot 

easier to hear the person recognized and speaking on the floor. 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is with great pleasure that I offer the second reading 

speech on The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, 

I rise today to move second reading of The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Saskatchewan’s land registry system is known nationwide for 

innovation, reliability, and customer service. The amendments 

contained in the Bill will enhance the reliability and security of 

Saskatchewan’s land registry. The major category of 

amendments contained in the Bill relate to the assurance and 

compensation provisions of the Act. 

 

These amendments are intended to settle the concerns people 

may have in losing their homes to fraud. Though fraud is an 

extremely rare occurrence in Saskatchewan, with only two 

reported cases occurring in the past 30 years, the importance of 

having a home and feeling secure that that home will not be lost 

because of fraud is something that we recognize is very 

important to the people of Saskatchewan. We are doing 

everything we can to ensure that the land registry is secure so 

that people can feel confident that their homes are secure, Mr. 

Speaker. These amendments will expand the assurance 

provisions of the Act to provide additional protection to title 

owners as well as to mortgagees suffering losses as the result of 

fraud. 

 

This Bill also contains a number of other amendments that 

improve the functionality of the system in many different ways. 

The first of these amendments recognizes the registrar of titles’ 

responsibility over the grant directory. The second places a 

limit on fractional ownership in mines and minerals. The third 

category, Mr. Speaker, allows Information Services 

Corporation, ISC, to establish fees and pricing strategies for 

special land information products and services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed Bill will ensure that rightful owners 

of a home who have been removed from title by fraudulent 

actions and have been in continuous possession and occupation 

of that said home are able to get the title back in their name, if 

they wish, in situations where innocent purchasers have not 

occupied the residence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, land titles legislation has always set out who gets 

the title and who gets compensation regarding a fraud. This 

amendment ensures that there is a presumption that the person 

who has the strongest connection to the home — the person in 

actual occupation of the home — gets to keep the home while 

ensuring that the other party has access to compensation. The 

Bill will allow a quicker and less costly resolution of issues 

related to fraud by giving the registrar the ability to restore title 

to the former registered owner or, if that is not possible, allow 

the registrar to refer the matter to court, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The amendments expand the assurance provisions to provide 

compensation to financial institutions and other lenders who 

entered into a mortgage with a fraudster, and register that 

mortgage in the land registry as long as the lender meets the 

required standard of due diligence when entering into the 

mortgage and is not covered by any other insurance for their 

loss. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Bill facilitates compensation in excess of the actual value 

of the title where a home lost through fraud cannot be restored 

to the original owner. So the owner, Mr. Speaker, no longer has 

to bear the cost of legal fees, realtors’ fees, and other expenses 

that were necessary in acquiring a comparable residence. 

 

The registrar of titles will be responsible for establishment and 

maintenance of the land grant directory, thus providing an 

easily accessible and searchable record of all Crown land grants 

that were submitted to the land registry with a request for issue 

of title. 

 

The amendments facilitate the creation of the limitation of 

fractional ownership of mineral titles to facilitate development 

in the oil and gas sector. And I know the hon. member from 

Kindersley, the Minister of Energy, is certainly somebody who 

has lobbied very hard for this and has spoken passionately 

about this provision in the Act. 

 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1681 

ISC will now have the authority, similar to other Crown 

corporations, to enter into agreements with individual 

customers for services where the fees agreed to be paid may 

differ from those generally applied to the land registry 

customers, to determine the appropriate method of payment to 

meet its business and customer needs, Mr. Speaker, and to 

waive the . . . in addition to the power, the registrar that already 

exists, the power to waive fees. Regulation-making powers are 

expanded with respect to the circumstances where 

authorizations or consents are not required to issue titles or 

abstracts and defining rules relating to the operation of the 

abstract directory. The registrar of the corporation will now 

have the authority to determine the hours of operation of the 

land title registry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The law reform commissions of Saskatchewan and Manitoba 

jointly issued a report on private title insurance which included 

recommendations to cover assurance coverage in this province. 

These recommendations were considered in drafting the new 

amendments. 

 

ISC, Mr. Speaker, also sought the advice of the Law Society of 

Saskatchewan and the Canadian Bar Association. Certainly 

with whatever piece of legislation we’re talking about, 

consultation is so important. And in this particular instance, the 

Law Society of Saskatchewan was consulted along with the 

Canadian Bar Association, and I know all members are 

appreciative of the efforts that have taken place to ensure that 

this has happened. 

 

We recommended that ISC expand the insurance provisions to 

ensure that title owners would not lose their land as a result of 

fraud, Mr. Speaker. Today The Land Titles Act, 2000, the Act 

that exists today, does not assign responsibility for the grant 

directory to the registrar. Easy access to and consistent 

maintenance of the grant directory is important to the province 

because our history is integrally connected to the land through 

farming, forestry, resource development, and First Nations, Mr. 

Speaker. It is appropriate that the registrar be given the 

responsibility for this key historical information. 

 

The mineral sector, as I indicated earlier, is important to the 

province’s economy. There’s nobody that can certainly 

challenge that. Unlimited fractional ownership in minerals 

impedes an economic development in the oil and gas sector 

because consent is required from all mineral owners before the 

minerals can be developed in our province. Mineral 

development becomes difficult when there are a large number 

of owners that must be located and provide their consent prior 

to development. This provision reflects the broad consultations 

with the oil and gas sector and the legal community, Mr. 

Speaker. This amendment balances the interests of mineral 

developers and mineral owners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ISC delivers specialized services in addition to land registry, 

and it tends to deliver new land information, products, and 

services. These amendments will allow ISC to facilitate these 

services by providing ISC with the authority to establish fees 

and pricing strategies for these services. 

 

ISC has been very successful at running the land registry. 

Efficiency and customer satisfaction have vastly improved over 

the last couple of years, increased since ISC’s inception. And 

these amendments seek to continue to provide the people of 

Saskatchewan the level of service that they expect from their 

public sector, from their Crown corporations, from a Crown 

corporation like ISC, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I am pleased to move second reading of 

The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations has moved that Bill No. 57, The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to respond to this second reading speech by the 

Minister of ISC. 

 

I think that it’s quite noteworthy that that member said on quite 

a few occasions during the speech this afternoon that this 

corporation is doing a good job for the people of Saskatchewan, 

and I agree. This corporation was an attempt, and I think it’s 

been a very successful attempt, to modernize the land registry in 

Saskatchewan because what everybody knows is that the ability 

to have a chance to borrow money against land or to know for 

sure that you have the use of land in developing business, in 

providing security for your home, making sure that you’ve 

provided for your family — whether it’s a farming operation, 

ranching, mining, or an industry — is absolutely crucial. 

 

And we had a long history, and I guess we have a long history 

of very secure title in this province. And I think anybody 

looking at the numbers of problems in the land title systems 

over a century recognize that there was much good work that 

was done by the people who ran a paper-based system. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it became quite clear just over 10, 12 years ago that a 

paper-based system would not be the appropriate system to 

work in the 21st century. 

 

And I think what we’re seeing now is the result of hard work 

and much struggle by many people to transform a system that 

was based on oodles and oodles of paper to a system that is 

digitally controlled, that’s based on a digital map of the whole 

province, and that it clearly gives everybody an assurance that 

their properties are secure. It gives lenders the ability to lend 

money against many, many properties all at once because they 

can work very quickly. 

 

I just have to say, when I first started practising law in 

Saskatchewan 30 years ago, I was assigned to work with a 

senior land lawyer who worked in the areas of oil and gas and 

pipeline work, and I spent much time going over legal opinions 

which we would provide to oil companies or gas companies or 

pipeline companies as to the security of title related to the work 

that they were doing. Give you an example, when pipelines are 

built right across the province — and we know now that we 

have quite a few of these pipelines — that particular pipeline, 

that particular business goes underneath many, many pieces of 

property. And anybody can look at a map of Saskatchewan and 

see the patchwork and realize that you’re going to be through, 



1682 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

underneath many fences, many roads, many other parcels. 

 

Well the old system was a system whereby one would go and 

look at each title. And what that meant is that you’d go back to 

the original grant and then you’d check every title all the way 

through the century to make sure that the person who you were 

going to sign the lease with that would allow for the building of 

the pipeline was the right person. And I’d have to say that in 

that process, which was something we did very carefully as a 

team, we often discovered discrepancies. 

 

And very rarely were the discrepancies discrepancies of the 

land titles office themselves, but they may have been 

discrepancies within families or within perceived ownership, or 

I think the reference was to fractional titles. There may have 

been certain kinds of things that happened. Other times it 

related to problems with railway title that had been put through 

land or other places, but there was always a question that 

needed to be answered and then provided assurance. 

 

And as lawyers, our job was to provide assurance to the bankers 

that when they lent money to build a half a billion dollar 

pipeline, that when they were done there wouldn’t be somebody 

who owned a chunk of that pipe that would stop the flow 

through it. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I tell that little story because what the 

minister has brought forward today is in one sense another step 

along the road in making sure that businesses can rely on the 

land titles system we have in Saskatchewan, now run by ISC, so 

that the further development of business in Saskatchewan can 

continue without any restrictions. And this particular legislation 

is I think quite interesting, and I know my colleague, the 

Minister of Justice, is going to do some more thinking about 

this to identify all of the different aspects of it. But today I just 

wanted to outline a few things that I think are particularly 

interesting about this and what’s being done. 

 

Now I think it’s appropriate that the minister started off with the 

question of fraud because that’s always been one of the 

difficulties in a paper base system or in a now modern digital 

system is, are you actually getting all of the true documents, and 

does the record actually reflect what’s actually happened in a 

transaction. And I think it’s appropriate in this particular 

legislation we’ll be authorizing the registrar in a greater fashion 

than we have in the history of Saskatchewan to be a participant 

in solving those particular problems if they arise. 

 

And I note that the minister said there are only a couple in the 

last 30 years and so that practically it seems like not a big 

problem. But when it does arise, it causes incredible difficulties, 

whether it’s for a business but particularly when it’s a 

homeowner because often a homeowner may not know that 

their title has been transferred even two or three times, money 

borrowed against it, and you have banks and others coming 

forward trying to get money from a house that you always 

thought was yours. 

 

Now what this particular legislation does is it appears to give 

the registrar the power to correct titles which used to be 

reserved pretty well for the courts to correct the titles. And it 

does it in a way that also allows for the insurance fund which 

backs up our land titles system to compensate not just for the 

particular piece of property but also for the related expenses. I 

think that that’s an entirely appropriate way to do this, but I 

think we’ll have to spend some time looking at this to make 

sure we understand what the mechanism is, and I know that my 

colleague will start looking at that. 

 

Now one of the areas in this particular vein relates to how you 

correct the situation, and I know that there’s much debate in the 

courts but also within the policy-makers trying to develop land 

titles policy as to whether you go back to where the original 

mistake was made or if you deal with the situation related to 

who would be most disrupted by a correction of the title. And it 

appears — although we’ll have to ask some more questions — 

that the officials advising the minister in this particular case 

have opted for a solution which attempts to keep whole the 

person who is in a particular house or a business that might be 

in a particular building or piece of land. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s an appropriate way to look at 

it, and I know that it gives the registrar some power to fix these 

things, but also appropriately it gives the registrar the ability to 

refer the matter to the court if there isn’t complete agreement or 

satisfaction. And as with anything related to land titles, any 

matter can go to court. But this also gives a chance for the 

registrar to refer matters there, and I think that’s appropriate. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Now another area in this legislation today, moving on from the 

fraud question, is related to the registry of grants. And this I 

think is also a helpful addition because it will provide all of that 

information that sets out what the original grant was from the 

Crown. And I think the explanation here that the public may 

need is that the Crown in the right of the province has basically 

had control of the whole of the land of this province, and all of 

the grants have come either from the federal Crown or the 

provincial Crown. More recently, and I guess since 1930, the 

province has had more control of the land and of the grants. 

 

And so quite often a question becomes, well what was actually 

granted in that original grant? Did it include just the surface, or 

surface and coal, surface and gravel, surface and oil and gas, or 

surface and everything below the surface? As some of our 

industries move forward in finding new uses for resources that 

are under the soil, some of the questions about the original 

grants become even more crucial. What this particular 

legislation appears to do is provide access to all of those 

original grants and the new grants that come as they come 

forward. This will be of assistance to everybody. 

 

One of the interesting questions that it does raise, and I think it 

goes to the heart of the system that we now have in 

Saskatchewan, is we have a digital map that includes the whole 

of the province. The land titles system will include all those 

lands where grants have been made from the Crown but will 

still retain a registry in the Department of Environment which 

includes land in northern Saskatchewan and will still have, in 

southern Saskatchewan, titles that will be registered in this 

system but that will be primarily in the hands of the Department 

of Agriculture. 

 

It raises a continued question about how we move forward in 

the province as we deal with unpatented or ungranted land in all 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1683 

parts, but especially in northern Saskatchewan. And I know that 

the minister and ministry and the officials in the ministry will 

be looking at this kind of a question over the longer term 

because ultimately the system that we now have pretty well 

requires that every square centimetre of the province have some 

description or some way that it can be described within the 

system that we have. I think that this step related to the grants is 

another step down that road, but we have some more work to 

do. 

 

Now the issue around compensation, which was mentioned in 

this particular legislation, has some interesting history. And I 

was pleased to hear that the minister has consulted with the 

Canadian Bar Association and the Law Society. And I know 

many of the lawyers in Saskatchewan and across the country 

have received requests to work with title insurance companies 

as opposed to relying on our communal or provincial insurance 

that we have through our land titles system. And one of the 

questions that always arose and provided possibly a little bit of 

interest from the title insurance companies were some of the 

extra costs if there was a problem with the title. What this 

particular legislation we have here does is allows for 

compensation for appropriate extra costs if they do relate to a 

problem with the title, including the fraud. And I think that’s 

important. 

 

What they also make clear is that there is no possibility of an 

insurance company selling insurance to cover a risk knowing 

full well that they will be totally compensated by the province 

for that risk. In other words, the claim cannot be subrogated and 

paid out to the insurance company such as you might in some 

other situations. I think this is a new area for this particular kind 

of legislation. And I know we’ll have to look at this and ask 

some questions about this as we move forward to make sure 

that we have the right plan and the right intent as we move 

forward because there are very large interests worldwide in 

having another layer of title insurance on top of what we know 

in Saskatchewan has been very good title protection for over a 

century. So I’m pleased with how it’s presented in the 

legislation. Obviously some of these things will be covered by 

further regulation. 

 

I think another positive point of the legislation as you go 

through it is that there are quite a number of places where 

present rules that are located in regulations — in other words 

that are easy to change — have been recognized by the officials 

to have the quality that they should actually be in the Act so that 

they can’t be changed without coming back to the legislature. 

The importance of this is that this adds another layer of 

protection to landowners and lenders and other people involved 

in business in the province. And I think that we will see that 

those suggestions do make sense, although I think we’ll have to 

take further look it and ask some questions. But I think that’s 

the right way to go. 

 

Also the legislation continues to expand the areas where the 

registrar could make regulations. Now normally the role of the 

opposition is to be quite suspect of chances to increase the 

amount of regulatory power. But I think in this particular case 

so far — although we’ll have to examine it some more — there 

seems to be a right balance around the regulatory power in the 

sense that some regulations have been moved into the Act 

because that’ll provide security. It although does add some 

regulatory power which allows for the registrar to have more 

flexibility dealing with fraud and a couple of other matters. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is quite complicated. It’s 

based on a lot of very good work over quite a long period of 

time. It does have some aspects that we’re going to continue to 

want to look at. Even though we know there’s been some 

consultation here, we also know that we will have to ask some 

more questions. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move 

adjournment of this debate to allow us to do further work. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved that Bill No. 57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 48 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 48 — The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just on a point of 

order, I believe I’m going to have to clarify with the 

Government House Leader the order in which Bills were being 

called today. I have a list that’s somewhat different than that 

which the Clerk was just referring to. So I just want to clarify 

that. But we are prepared, we are prepared at the moment to 

proceed with the Bill as called, but I just want to serve notice I 

need to spend a little bit of time with the Government House 

Leader here before the next Bill is called. 

 

The Speaker: — Just a point of clarification. That isn’t really a 

point of order, but I would certainly give the Opposition House 

Leader the opportunity to work with the Government House 

Leader to address the order of debate that will take place this 

afternoon. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted 

to put on the record that the same information is circulated 

before the House sits for the Clerks at the Table and for the 

opposition as well as our members. So I certainly believe that 

this information was transmitted appropriately. 

 

The Speaker: — Debate on Bill No. 48, The Financial 

Administration Amendment Act, 2008. I recognize the member 

from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to have an opportunity to make a few comments with 

respect to this Bill. And although the subject matter may sound 



1684 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

rather straightforward, it is in fact a Bill and a principle that 

goes to the heart of why it is that the Legislative Assembly 

convenes. 

 

There is an impression in our society that governments are able 

to do lots of things and act in many different ways, and 

governments surely can. But there’s some things that 

governments cannot do in our system of parliamentary 

democracy, and that is that governments cannot pass legislation. 

Governments can certainly, as we see, put forward Bills and 

legislation, but governments cannot pass legislation, cannot 

enact legislation. That is something that has to be done by the 

representatives of the people of Saskatchewan through their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Similarly, although governments can spend money, and 

certainly do, governments cannot have access to those funds 

unless that has been approved by the Legislative Assembly. 

And it’s an important parliamentary principle in our system of 

government that no government can spend money unless that 

money has been and that spending has been authorized by the 

Legislative Assembly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 

through their elected representative. 

 

So this particular Bill deals with the question of giving 

government approval to spend money without there being a 

budget in place. The public may know that sometime before the 

end of the fiscal year, in the month of March usually, the 

government will come forward with a budget that anticipates 

the government’s spending needs for the next fiscal year 

starting April 1. And ultimately those budgets are passed and 

then provides the government with the authority to in fact 

expend the funds that are stipulated and laid out in that 

particular budget. 

 

The problem comes when the government needs to spend 

money before the budget is finalized. Although the budget may 

be put before the Legislative Assembly in March, the debate on 

that budget can go for a number of weeks. And then there’s a 

detailed examination of all of the aspects of the budget in 

review, in various committees — sometimes in Committee of 

the Whole of the Legislative Assembly but mostly in various 

policy field committees of the Legislative Assembly — where 

each of the committees will look in detail at the proposals in the 

budget for the particular areas they’re interested. And at some 

point, that all then comes together. Usually close to the end of 

the legislative sitting, say sometime in May, approval is given 

to the government finally to proceed to spend funds as these 

funds are outlined in the budget for the year, the estimates for 

the year. 

 

The question that arises for governments and for the Legislative 

Assembly is, how can the government spend money if it hasn’t 

received the authority from the Legislative Assembly? What 

should the government do in the interim? 

 

In the past, the position has been taken that the government 

should come to the Legislative Assembly on a monthly basis, 

pending the adoption of the budget, should come to the 

Legislative Assembly on a monthly basis and request approval 

from the Legislative Assembly for one-twelfth of all the funds 

that it needs to meet its commitment so that the government can 

send the monies that are required by the school boards, so that 

the government can expend one-twelfth of its budget, roughly 

speaking, for the various health districts, that the government 

does have funds available to meet its obligations, say for social 

assistance and other transfer programs. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And so the practice has been for the government to come to the 

Legislative Assembly and say, here’s our proposed expenditure 

for the next month and we’re asking for your permission to then 

expend those funds for the coming months pending the approval 

of the budget. 

 

Now the government is asking with this particular piece of 

legislation for an amendment that would then mean that the 

government no longer would have to come to the Legislative 

Assembly for that kind of approval; would no longer require 

interim supply for one month at a time. What this legislation 

would do is make it automatic that when the budget is tabled, 

the government can be provided with two-twelfths of the funds 

that it needs to carry on pending the adoption of the budget. In 

most years the budget will have been adopted at the end of that 

period and therefore there would be no issue created. 

 

There may be the odd year, for whatever reason, if the budget is 

delayed that at some point the government may have to come 

back for an interim supply. But the government is asking in this 

particular case to be provided with the authority to provide the 

funding that it requires for two-twelfths of the budget year, 

recognizing that even while it’s asking for that, lots of debate is 

going on as I indicated, whether it’s in committees of the whole 

House or whether it’s through other policy field committees of 

the Legislative Assembly, where lots of questions are being 

raised about specific expenditures —whether it’s efficient, 

whether it’s the right kind of expenditure, and so on. But that 

debate is ongoing and therefore the government is indicating 

that really no further purpose is really solved by delaying or 

having to put the government through the hoop, shall we say, to 

ask for approval for one-twelfth of the funding that it needs for 

the coming year because we are involved in discussing the 

larger picture. 

 

Well on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important 

principle of no supply unless it’s authorized by the Legislative 

Assembly. On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, there’s no record 

that I’m aware of where there’s ever been any denial of interim 

supply requests by the provincial government. I’m not sure 

whether that denial would in fact trigger a provincial election or 

what it might do. But realistically there’s no opposition, I 

gather, that’s ever been wanting to put itself in a position of 

denying a request say, for example, to allocate funds for school 

boards for a month or allocating funds for the government to 

meet its social assistance payments, being put in a position of 

denying that request and then being held responsible for making 

that decision. So on the one hand it’s an important principle. On 

the other hand there is no record of any denial in the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly that I’m aware of. 

 

Secondly, any thoughts that people might have that this then 

provides the members of the Legislative Assembly with an 

opportunity to question the nature of the expenditure that the 

government has, I certainly am aware of rulings in the 

Legislative Assembly by Committee of Finance Chairs over the 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1685 

years that would suggest that the interim supply is really not a 

mini-budget debate in providing the members of the Legislative 

Assembly with an opportunity to question the nature of the 

expenditure that the government is providing. 

 

And the rulings have been that narrowly this is a question of 

interim supply, that the questions should relate to whether the 

funds that the government is asking for to meet its 

commitments for a one-month period is in fact sufficient; if 

there is some other request inherent in that, for example, you 

know, the government paying out funds to school boards not on 

a one-twelfth but on a two-twelfths model, whether or not the 

funds that are in that Bill are sufficient. And so therefore any 

questions have to be narrowly put as to the sufficiency of the 

fund for the government to meet its commitments for that 

one-month period and not in terms of the nature of the request. 

 

For example, is there enough money in the budget for 

highways? Is there enough money in the budget for health care? 

Is there sufficient funds to enable schools to proceed in a certain 

manner, Mr. Speaker? And so consistently the rulings have 

been that, no, it’s strictly a question of whether the government 

has sufficient funds for the one-month period. 

 

Recognizing that should this legislation pass, if there are 

questions in the future from say a group that is funded by the 

government, that group taking exception to the amount of funds 

that was provided to the government even though the funds 

might be in the budget, the members of the Legislative 

Assembly still have the opportunity through question period to 

put questions to the provincial government about the funding 

that has been provided under interim supply, now an automatic 

interim supply should the Bill pass. So that opportunity is still 

there through question period for those questions to be asked 

and also for written questions if these are great detail issues to 

be put to the government and to ask them to reply. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would say on balance that, yes, it’s an 

important parliamentary principle that no funds should be 

advanced to the government unless these have been approved 

by the Legislative Assembly. On the other hand, practice would 

show that there’s never been an instance of funds being refused. 

And realistically we don’t think that efficiency of this particular 

House is well served by continuing on with what is a rather 

arcane practice in many ways, and that the people of 

Saskatchewan will be better served by proceeding through with 

this legislation and making the change that is outlined in the 

legislation to make the interim supply an automatic two months 

supply once the budget is tabled with the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Having said that, there’s still lots of opportunity for members of 

the Legislative Assembly and specifically, I guess, the 

opposition members to raise questions — obviously in the 

budget process we have — about the priorities of the 

government and what the government is providing as a program 

for the year through that budget. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, we are satisfied that on 

balance that this is a change that can be accepted by the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. We would certainly ask 

at this time that this Bill proceed through to committee, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion that Bill No. 48, The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To Crown and Central Agencies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill now stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Crowns, CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s 

a pleasure to rise today and enter debate on the trespass Bill, 

The Trespass to Property Act that has been introduced in the 

House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there has been a number of 

questions that have been put forward on The Trespass to 

Property Act, and I think the main one is, what’s the need for 

this Bill, what issues does it fix, and where are we going with 

this Bill in general? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know in all the time that I have been 

elected, I know I have heard of a number of incidents here and 

there . . . It’s pretty scattered. Maybe a little more often at this 

time of year when we’re dealing with hunting season and things 

that may go on there. But it’s pretty rare to hear complaints of 

this nature throughout the rest of the year. And I know 

personally I cannot recall one time where I had a constituent or 

a citizen of the province of Saskatchewan that has approached 

me about the need for a trespass to property Act. 

 

So when we look at it, you always take an open mind or have an 

open mind when you look at any of the pieces of legislation that 

are coming forward, ask yourself a number of questions. What 

do they do? What’s the intent? What groups may have been 

lobbying for this? Who does it help? But you also have to have 

the ability to look at the big picture. Who may it hinder? What 

are the unintended consequences? And I believe my colleague 



1686 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

the other day, when he made comments about this Bill, he also 

referred to it and he called it the law of unintended 

consequences. And solely because it is a new Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

we really need to give the Bill some scrutiny, do some 

comparisons, and see what it actually means and what the 

unintended consequences may be from this piece of legislation. 

 

I think when we look at the Bill, when you go through it 

initially, it’s fairly straightforward. I think in many cases it 

seems to be fairly upfront in what its intentions are. But one of 

the things that we have always done — and I know that I like to 

do — is to be able to look at other jurisdictions, see what 

legislation is there, see what the differences are and what the 

similarities are, and then really have a discussion with people 

that may be impacted by the legislation and get a feel from 

them as to what their take on the legislation is, if they have 

concerns or if they are supportive. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while all of us here are elected to 

represent our constituents, none of us knows everything. There 

isn’t one of us in the Assembly here that will have real life 

experiences in all aspects of life in the province of 

Saskatchewan, so we really rely on our constituents to give us 

feedback, to give us input and guidance in the decisions that we 

will make. I know in the area south of Moose Jaw, because I 

have a rural component to my constituency, and there are many 

people out there that I’ve spoken to over the summer and 

there’s a couple of those that I will phone to get their take on 

the legislation and have a bit of a discussion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the other issues I think we need to do is 

to look at, like I said previously, look at other provinces. Where 

are the similarities in Bills that are currently in other provinces, 

and why has it always been felt that Saskatchewan did not have 

a need for a trespass to property Act? Those are a couple of 

things that I believe we need to look into. We need to have a bit 

more time to discuss this with the citizens of Saskatchewan and 

really put a little more definition on the areas of concern. So, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point in time until we have more 

research done on the Bill, I move that we adjourn debate on The 

Trespass to Property Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the 

pleasure of the House to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 — be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my honour 

today to speak to Bill No. 9 which is an Act to amend the 

superannuation and supplementary pensions Act. This Bill in 

principle affects many. All of us are concerned about pensions 

one way or another. But this Bill specifically speaks to just 

over, well just about 1,900 people who are currently involved in 

the pension plan that is a defined benefit plan. And I’ll get to a 

little bit more about that later, but my opening was that I’m 

honoured to be speaking to this Bill. 

 

[15:30] 

 

My second point is, I’m following two of my colleagues. The 

member for Regina Dewdney has spoken to this in March 17 of 

this year when the Bill was before the House, and then again 

November 12, just five days ago. The member for The 

Battlefords has also spoken to this Bill on November 12. And 

the thing that struck me as I read their wise counsel and their 

speeches was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my colleagues were 

quite clear that there are parts of this Bill that of course we 

accept and of course are progressive and will be helpful, but the 

double-dipping provisions clearly require much more 

consultation. Clearly we have a great deal of nervousness on 

this side of the legislature respecting the benefit, respecting 

whether that’s a good thing to do or not. 

 

And want to say along those lines that members on this side of 

the legislature have a long tradition of respect for our civil 

service. We genuinely appreciate the job that civil servants do 

in every walk of Saskatchewan’s life. And for over 100 years 

now, we’ve had civil servants that have served us — our 

province — have served us just in an exemplary fashion. 

 

Of course there’s always someone you can point to that isn’t 

necessarily doing the job we’d like them to do. Sometimes it’s 

because they’re not actually doing the job, but more often it’s 

because we’re tasking them to do a job that’s not so popular. 

But civil servants are a necessary part of our society, and they 

just work very diligently overall — day in and day out. Many of 

them I’m proud to call acquaintances, but many I’m proud to 

call friends as well. And I want to be on the record of thanking 

our civil servants for doing the great work that they do, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But as legislators . . . and I know that the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow was referring to the trespass Act, and said as 

MLAs we don’t have a lock on all of life’s experiences in 

Saskatchewan. And it’s just so with this Act as well; I’ve not 

received superannuation yet. And in fact, I want to point out I 

won’t be receiving one under this at any time because this is a 

defined benefit Act. 

 

But MLAs, even when we don’t have a direct personal 

relationship with this particular Act — even though we don’t 

have that — we do have an overall responsibility to our 

constituents, the very people that we applied to go to this place 

and represent. Every election we go and we apply to our 

constituents, and the result is here on both sides of the 

legislature. The people that are elected, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are the ones that had the most, enjoyed the most support in their 

constituency. And ergo we have a responsibility to try and be 

protectors of their tax dollars and protectors of our constituents 

in everything that they would want. 

 

And that takes me to, by way of explanation, this Bill. As I 

understand it, the minister said in his second reading speech that 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1687 

this Bill, An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act does not involve members of a defined 

contribution pension plan. Instead it affects — and I’ll get to the 

more definitive list — but instead it affects some people who 

are in a defined benefit plan. 

 

And by that I’m referring to a plan that is often referred to as a 

formulary plan where there’s a provision for so much pension 

per year of service times. Typically it will be the best five years 

of your pensionable earnings, and that’s a formula. So that 

particularly, when you get near to the time that you want to start 

drawing from your pension plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can 

figure it out literally to the dollar what it is that you would be 

receiving on a monthly basis or on an annual basis if that’s the 

way you wanted to calculate it. But it’s a defined benefit plan, 

and it has more relationship to a promise that’s made by, in this 

instance this Bill, a promise made by respective governments. 

And the promise is made and supported by taxpayers, and that 

then speaks to how it is that we come, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

fund a defined benefit plan like this. 

 

We make promises, so much per year of service based on, you 

know, a formula that includes how long you’ve worked, what 

your earnings are. And usually they include some formula that 

is the best three or five years of your earnings so that your 

pension would be the greatest value to the pensioner. But that’s 

not funded. It’s only partially funded and that’s something that 

happened historically, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not something 

that any individual on either side of this House set up. 

 

This plan in fact that we’re dealing, the plans we’re dealing 

with had no new members coming on to after 1977. 1977, so 

that’s a full nine years before the longest serving MLA that’s 

currently in this House was first elected. So nine years before 

anyone that’s here in the House today was elected, this Bill 

would affect those people from before. 

 

Like I pointed out earlier in my speech, there’s close to 1,900 of 

those people that work in various departments and various areas 

of Government of Saskatchewan responsibility. Close to 1,900 

of them have started work prior to 1977 and are still qualifying 

under the terms of this supplementary provisions Act, this Act 

to amend the superannuation Act. So we’re not talking about a 

small number of people. You know, 2,000 or 1,900 people is 

not an insignificant number of people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 

us to be dealing with. And we want to make sure that the 

government’s got it right. 

 

The other type of plan, just to sort of make it very clear, is a 

defined contribution plan as opposed to a defined benefit. And a 

defined contribution plan is one that all civil servants who 

participate in a pension plan in Saskatchewan subsequent to . . . 

after 1977 and all MLAs elected after 1977 participate in. And 

that’s where a percentage of our earnings is deducted from our 

paycheque and it is matched by the taxpayers, the employer, 

and that’s then invested. 

 

And whatever that will . . . That lump of money that usually 

grows, although I’m reticent to point out it hasn’t grown in the 

last months. In fact it’s taken a dive as the stock markets have 

taken a dive, and so our pension plans have diminished greatly. 

But that’s the other type of most common pension is the defined 

contribution plan. 

This Act deals, as I pointed out, with the defined benefit. And 

as an aside on this, I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a 

number of superannuates, there’s 7,856 pensioners as of 

December 31, 2007, so 7,856 pensioners that have been looking 

for indexing. And I want to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

members of the now government promised that that would 

happen almost overnight — almost overnight. And here we are, 

over a year since the election. 

 

And we’re not talking about indexing the pension for these 

7,856 pensioners, people who were pensioned off, who were 

retired as of December 31, 2007. Instead we’re talking about an 

Act that will affect about 1,900 people directly, potentially, and 

of course it affects all of taxpayers beyond that. 

 

I just want to be a little bit more clear about who all is in this 

Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Bill 9, which is what 

we’re discussing here today, deals with the following defined 

benefit plan because there’s a number of them. It’s not a long 

list but I just want to read into the record which specific plans 

they are. It applies to the public service superannuation plan. It 

applies to the Liquor Board superannuation plan. It applies to 

the Power Corporation superannuation plan. It applies to the 

Anti-Tuberculosis League superannuation plan and, Mr. 

Speaker, it also applies to the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company employees’ superannuation plan. 

 

So it’s a very specific group that this affects. I’ve said the 

number of people that are currently retired under these plans, 

and I’ve also said, pointed out that there’s close to 1,900 people 

that will be affected by the double-dipping provisions that this 

Bill has in it — the double-dipping provisions that frankly 

causes us the most concern on this side of the House. 

 

Before I get a little further into the double-dipping portion, I 

want to stake some high ground so that in principle we can all 

understand what it is that I certainly have a level of comfort 

with. Mr. Deputy Speaker, every day there are individuals who 

change employment — every day. Sometimes the employees 

want to change; they want to move and seek work somewhere 

else. Sometimes the job has simply run out and they have to 

move on. 

 

I think of people who are hired sessionally here — and not to 

put too much of a damper on our Pages who do terrific work — 

but when the session’s over, shortly thereafter their job grinds 

to a halt here, and it’s simply time to move on to a different part 

of their lives. And we hope they’ve carried good memories of 

their times here, and certainly they will carry good wishes of 

members on both sides of the House when that time does come. 

 

So people change employment. That’s the point that I’m trying 

to make here. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, people will have served 

for a considerable length of time — many years — and they’ve 

reached retirement age and they superannuate. They then retire. 

And I want to stake the high ground which is, I have no 

problem at all with someone retiring, collecting a pension, and 

going to work building houses or going to work for a different 

employer — for a different employer. That’s unequivocally no 

problem for me at all. 

 

[15:45] 

 



1688 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

The problem that we have in this Bill is that it allows . . . Well 

let me just use an example. It would allow a civil servant — 

well MLAs — it will allow deputy ministers, for example, to 

retire. They’re working and earning, well let’s say $200,000. 

They could retire today and be hired back tomorrow to do the 

same job. They could then collect their pension. Their pension 

in this case which could be as high as $140,000 in the example 

I’ve used. It could be as high as that. It’s again based on years 

of service and it would vary in every instance, but it could be as 

high as 140,000, plus they could get paid their salary again, and 

clearly that’s double-dipping. Now I’m not wishing good or bad 

on deputy ministers. That’s not the point of citing that example. 

It’s just a very senior level of civil service that I use in this 

example. 

 

Again I want to say I have no problem with a deputy minister 

retiring from being a deputy minister and then going on and 

doing some employment for a different employer or clearly a 

different job, but never, never should a deputy minister come 

back other than perhaps a very, very definite, short time frame 

for training. You know, I’m thinking six weeks, maybe even as 

long as three months, so you could train somebody else — 

although I’m hesitant to even say that that’s a good idea, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because my question is, well isn’t that part of 

our jobs is to make sure that there’s somebody looking over our 

shoulders that can step up to the plate when we’re done? And 

certainly every ministry should have someone that could step up 

to the plate and become a deputy minister with little or no 

notice. I know it’s always been the way it’s happened in years 

gone by. 

 

So the double-dipping provisions are the part that causes us the 

most discomfort. And we think what’s happened, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that there was loopholes respecting double-dipping 

and that some people found ways to retire, collect a pension, 

and then get hired back to do the same job, and not just for a 

very, very short period of time but for an extended period of 

time. And that’s clearly double-dipping. 

 

That’s the sort of thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has been 

pointed out earlier, but I fully subscribe to this notion. If any of 

us went to coffee row or went knocking door to door and asking 

our constituents or in some form were able to ask the people we 

represent in a meaningful way, do you subscribe, do you favour 

that someone could retire today, draw their pension, and get 

hired back to the same job and then draw both pension and 

salary for an indefinite period into the future, the simple 

majority of people would say no, that’s double-dipping. And 

that’s not appropriate. 

 

What instinctually we know is appropriate, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that when it comes time to retire, hopefully we have 

the luxury of spending some months at least mentoring and 

helping our replacement understand the issues at very least so 

that when we retire, they’re on the job and running, they 

actually have the background knowledge. 

 

And of course the replacement, you know, the person that 

replaces us, won’t do the job in exactly the way that we are. 

And you know, that’s a good thing. Everything should change, 

or people who are doing the work should be able to make 

informed decisions and make the best choices that they can. 

And that’s the appropriate way for this to work. 

So constituents and the people of the province would by and 

large say double-dipping shouldn’t happen. We had tried to stop 

double-dipping. This Bill, one of the things it does is simply 

acknowledges that some people were able to find ways to 

double-dip, and this Bill then says, well they were finding ways 

to double-dip so let’s just make it legal; let’s make it okay. 

 

And I don’t think that’s where our constituents’ heads are 

necessarily at. I think our constituents would say, if there’s a 

loophole that allows some individuals to find ways to 

double-dip, let’s fix those loopholes. Let’s wish our 

superannuates the very, very best. Let’s look after them, and a 

way we could look after them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is, as I said, 

look after the indexing that was promised by the Sask Party 

government, look after the indexing that was supposed to 

happen overnight. Here we are a year later and I don’t think 

there’s a Bill on the order paper dealing with indexing. I don’t 

think there’s been any significant movement on that front. And 

I say shame, because it was a clear promise that was made 

through the last election. 

 

I won’t go further down that other than to say, I know that from 

personal experience, from talking to some of the superannuates, 

of these plans that wanted indexing. And we were on a certain 

path of getting there, but clearly not fast enough for these 

superannuates But the incoming government had said, we’ll fix 

it real quick. And yet here we are a year later and the quick fix 

is simply not happening. So I say there’s a broken promise. And 

that’s something that the government could bring forward more 

appropriately than this Bill that simply is dealing with issues 

like double-dipping. 

 

We clearly have not had the wide consultation that the former 

two speakers had asked for on this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We had called for a wide consultation so that we got the Bill 

right. There is no way that we’ve had wide public consultation, 

no way that that’s happened because we wouldn’t have the 

double-dipping provisions in it if there had been that 

consultation that went far and wide. 

 

So my plea would be that we in fact, the government take up 

the responsibility of doing this consultation, and listening. 

Consultation isn’t always out there just saying, this is the way 

it’s going to be. Consultation should involve a two-way process 

where it’s not just talk —I’ll talk and you’ll listen. It should be 

a situation where we’ll have a dialogue back and forth and find 

out what just might be the most reasonable way to proceed on 

this. 

 

And I don’t think that this Bill is going to be . . . It shouldn’t be 

that difficult to reach agreement on what is the appropriate 

thing to do. But the appropriate thing is not to continue to 

simply just make the double-dipping the proper or the allowable 

thing to do. 

 

So I think I’ve outlined, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ve 

outlined the major concerns that I have on this speech. And I 

want to again commend anyone that has interest in this to go to 

a couple of very good speeches. My colleagues, the member for 

Regina Dewdney and The Battlefords, spoke March 17, 2008, 

and both of them spoke November 12, 2008 on this very issue. 

And both of them made some very cogent arguments. 

 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1689 

I hope that in some tiny way I’ve at least added a little bit more 

to this debate today . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I hear the 

government saying, at least a government member saying, no I 

haven’t. I accept responsibility for that, but I think that the 

responsibility is also on the government to listen, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to do a broad consultation. And all three of us on this 

side of the House have been very explicit. We’ve said, no, you 

have not done the broad consultation. Because there is no way 

that our constituents would say, simply make double-dipping 

legal. Our constituents would be saying, for heaven’s sakes, 

close the loopholes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what they 

would say. 

 

I hear government members yip, yip, yip about this. I wish they 

would get up and speak to the Bill, Mr. Speaker. Better yet, I 

wish they would speak up in their caucus. I wish they would 

speak up in their caucus. I wish they would speak up in their 

cabinet, and I wish they would say, do this Bill right. And part 

of how you do it right is to do the broad consultation and 

actually listen, hear what some people are saying. Or as a sign 

of good faith, deal with the indexing of the superannuation plan 

as you promised in the last election . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . The member for Kindersley chirping from his seat, he 

should deal with his promises that he made during the last 

election. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. All members will have their 

chance to participate in the debate. I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have said 

pretty much what I wanted to on this Bill. But on the offside 

chance that I may have missed some important point, I move 

that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 9 at this time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Regina Coronation 

Park has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased once again to stand up and talk about Bill No. 46, 

An Act to amend the Labour Market Commission Act. Mr. 

Speaker, this is an important Bill. The labour market 

partnership between business, labour, education and training 

institutes, governments, and other stakeholders is essential to 

connect the dots and, Mr. Speaker, make things work within our 

Saskatchewan labour market. 

 

We need to have our educational institutions, our businesses, 

labour organizations, and stakeholders all working together to 

try to make sure that we’re training people and educating people 

for the workforce of tomorrow. So on the fact that the actions 

that we take meet a need that the people of the province have, a 

need to supply and deliver a qualified workforce to prepare 

young people for that workforce of the future, Mr. Speaker, the 

Labour Market Commission is one of the instrumental tools in 

helping to achieve that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any government has the responsibility to meet the 

many challenges that come with economic growth, and one of 

those challenges of course is to have adequate labour to meet 

the future market needs of that economy. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

Labour Market Commission works with government and labour 

and educational institutions and other stakeholders to make sure 

that we’re educating people in the right disciplines in order to 

meet that need moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise that Saskatchewan is currently — 

as are many other jurisdictions — experiencing a serious labour 

shortage, and there is a large gap between what the government 

is doing and what actually needs to be done to address it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what this Bill does is make the Labour Market 

Commission, which was currently 19 members, it cuts it back to 

11, Mr. Speaker. In an area where we already need more work, 

we need greater co-operation, the ability to work together to 

accomplish the connecting of the dots between our educational 

institutions, our businesses, and our labour organizations, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t need fewer people to do that. There is 

adequate work to go around, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this government has decided that the size of the 

commission was unwieldy, and they couldn’t achieve what they 

wanted to achieve with 19 members so decided to make 11, Mr. 

Speaker. Well in our environment, that doesn’t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker. There is enough work to go around for 19 people, Mr. 

Speaker. And these people are not full-time sitting on the 

Labour Market Commission, Mr. Speaker. They’re all people 

who have other jobs. They have other responsibilities, Mr. 

Speaker, so many of them couldn’t attend every meeting, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So 19 members on a piece of paper might seem unwieldy, Mr. 

Speaker, but they’re not always all going to be there because 

they have other responsibilities in their communities. They have 

other responsibilities in their jobs, Mr. Speaker, so that many of 

them may miss a large number of meetings so that we really 

need to cut back from 19 to 11 to achieve the end goal, which is 

actually to connect the dots between the various players in our 

labour market to ensure that our goals to achieve our 

educational institutions meeting the needs of our future labour 

market are in fact being achieved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

We on the opposition side have a great deal of respect for the 

work the Labour Commission has done in the province. It’s 

gone a long way to help connect the dots to this point, Mr. 

Speaker, and we expect great things from them in the future. 

 

This legislation is based on a government’s belief that the 



1690 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

current Labour Market Commission is an impediment to 

economic growth. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s just not the case . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — To request leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Go ahead, member from Sutherland. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to this 

afternoon introduce to you and through you my son, Jarrod 

Schriemer, sitting in our gallery. And he’s in Regina to take his 

advanced care paramedic course, and he’s doing very well. He 

just told me he got a 92 on his last exam. Anyway, thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment 

Act, 2008 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I 

started to indicate, that the changes in this legislation are based 

on the government’s belief that the current Labour Market 

Commission and its size of 19 members is an impediment to 

economic growth. That simply is not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

There is more than enough work to go around for all 19 

members, Mr. Speaker. There’s the opportunity to have a 

greater knowledge base around that table when decisions are 

made with 19 members, Mr. Speaker, and there is no clear 

indication that its size of 19 members is in any way an 

impediment to economic growth. Through the current boom, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is clear evidence to the contrary. 

 

The Sask Party has made it very clear that it believes labour to 

be an impediment to growth. Rolling the labour management 

committee into Enterprise Saskatchewan is just one more way 

the Sask Party is attempting to weaken labour here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and cutting back the representatives 

from the labour organizations on the committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we look at this in some detail, we see removal 

of a single representative from what was previously termed the 

social economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those are individuals 

from the non-for-profit sector, Mr. Speaker — 

non-governmental organizations who are in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the areas where we have difficulty recruiting people into 

the labour force today, qualified people. Mr. Speaker, people 

that have the education that they need to have to deliver some 

of the most sensitive social service programs that we have, Mr. 

Speaker, to deliver programs to some of the most vulnerable 

people in our society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s just one small change made in this 

legislation that leaves that entire sector of the economy, that 

entire sector of our population, without any direct involvement 

in the Labour Market Commission, without the voice being 

around the table, Mr. Speaker. So those employers in the 

non-profit sector, Mr. Speaker, don’t have any voice in the 

future of the Labour Market Commission in our province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who did the Sask Party consult with before 

proceeding with this legislation? We’re told by members of the 

commission that they weren’t consulted, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this is another ideological change without any input 

from those who are involved in the commission or the 

stakeholders in which to see whether or not it’s beneficial to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they 

simply made a change because they believe they have a right to, 

as government, to change whatever they want. 

 

Well yes, they do have the right to make changes. But changes 

should have a meaningful, productive impact on the people of 

Saskatchewan in a way that the people of Saskatchewan would 

appreciate those changes, Mr. Speaker. To go from 19 to 11, 

Mr. Speaker, leaves voices out from around the table, Mr. 

Speaker, and leaves sectors without proper involvement in the 

process, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s about excluding 

people, not including people. And Mr. Speaker, the best way to 

work with the people of Saskatchewan is through inclusion, Mr. 

Speaker, not exclusion. 

 

Inclusion is where people want to be, Mr. Speaker. And by the 

way, that is the NDP way. It’s what we believe in. We believe 

in including people in decision making. We believe in including 

people in decision making for the benefit of their organizations 

and for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We don’t 

believe in exclusion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Enterprise Saskatchewan portfolio or ministry is relatively 

unknown today, Mr. Speaker. Why are the people of the 

province or the members of the opposition to have any 

confidence that this body is going to be able to oversee the 

Labour Market Commission and put the decisions that are in the 

best interest of the province — as an example, educational 

institutions and labour organizations — into consideration with 

their decisions, Mr. Speaker? Because the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan’s mandate, Mr. Speaker, is all about ensuring and 

removing impediments to the business community, 

impediments to economic growth, Mr. Speaker. It isn’t about 

balancing the issues of education and training with the future 

needs of employers in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, without 

a lot of thought, they just simply folded it in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act also does one significant thing. It removes 

the requirement to consult with organized labour and business 

organizations that are most representative of labour and 

business. They don’t have to consult with them before they 

decide who’s on the commission, and they don’t have to consult 

with them before they make decisions. We have no doubt that 

the business will continue to be widely consulted by the 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1691 

government opposite while labour organizations will be largely 

left out or ignored by the government opposite. 

 

We have today a Premier who, when he was the leader of the 

opposition, said he was going to go to war with labour 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, go to war with unions, Mr. Speaker. 

So why would those organizations have confidence that they are 

going to be consulted by this Premier or his government? Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t have that confidence, Mr. Speaker, nor 

should they based on the unilateral changes to pieces of 

legislation, including The Trade Union Act, Mr. Speaker, 

including putting in place essential service legislation that the 

members opposite talked about wasn’t required before they 

were government. And the minute they become government 

they implement, you know, essential service legislation. So, Mr. 

Speaker, why would labour organizations have any confidence 

that this government would consult with them prior to making 

changes, prior to taking steps that would have impact upon the 

working men and women of this province, Mr. Speaker? That’s 

a lack of respect for those individuals as they’re moving 

forward. 

 

The legislation reduces the overall number and eliminates 

representation, as I mentioned earlier, from the social economy 

completely. Mr. Speaker, that leaves an entire sector of our 

economy unrepresented in this debate, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the concept of inclusion and meaningful consultation 

and meaningfully working with the various sectors of the 

economy and the various sectors of our society is very 

important. And when you exclude individuals, that means 

you’re not getting their perspective or their point of view as 

you’re making decisions that may well affect them, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, we think that the removal of the 

references to social economy or those in the non-profit 

organizations, from the Labour Market Commission, can 

significantly hamper those agencies in the future from being 

able to meet their labour needs as we move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a few minutes about why 

originally we put in place a Labour Market Commission, Mr. 

Speaker, and it was to deal with a number of challenges that we 

had in the province of Saskatchewan. And there were several 

converging factors a few years ago that made it very, very 

important that we first put in place the current commission and 

the structure, but also its current complement of 19 members, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite can chirp from their seats, Mr. Speaker, 

but it would be nice if they actually were listening, Mr. 

Speaker, and cared about what we, representative of the people 

of Saskatchewan as well, are saying, Mr. Speaker. Because we 

are all elected by our constituents here to represent the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan and to ensure that the 

decisions made by government are the appropriate decisions, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a few minutes about the 

converging factors that led to the current structure, 19-member 

Labour Market Commission. One of the things was, was we had 

very strong economic growth in the last few years, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m very proud that when we were in government, we became a 

have province. We became a have province, and as we built the 

foundation for today’s economy, Mr. Speaker, we had surplus 

budgets of billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, over the last three or 

four years, Mr. Speaker. And this government today doesn’t 

like to acknowledge that the previous government put in place 

the foundation — in fact made this province a have province, 

Mr. Speaker — made the tough decisions on oil royalties, made 

the tough decisions on corporate capital taxes, made the tough 

decisions on corporate taxes, Mr. Speaker, made those tough 

decisions. 

 

But what do we hear, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, we heard 

today the government tell us that they made the largest single 

tax cut in the province’s history, Mr. Speaker — in a member’s 

statement — but, Mr. Speaker, that is false, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to point out to the members opposite that when the 

provincial sales tax, when the provincial sales tax was cut by 

two points, Mr. Speaker, that’s about $400 million, Mr. Speaker 

— about $100 million more than the members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I 

was indicating a minute ago, the previous NDP government, 

when it cut the sales tax by 2 per cent, it was a $400 million tax 

cut, Mr. Speaker. Their $300 million tax cut is not the largest in 

the province’s history, Mr. Speaker. I would argue it isn’t even 

the second largest, Mr. Speaker, but the members can always go 

out and they can always tell that they’ve done everything first 

and have done everything better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The truth is though, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan are smarter than that, Mr. Speaker. They’ll 

understand. They’ll know what’s really happening in the 

province. They know very well that this government hasn’t 

changed royalty rates, hasn’t changed any of the corporate tax 

structures, so our economic boom is based on what the previous 

government did, Mr. Speaker. And they should be rewarded, the 

previous government, for having achieved that. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I have to say the chamber of commerce, 

the chamber of commerce last week did. The chamber of 

commerce acknowledged the fact that the previous government 

had made this province a have province. The previous 

government had made the changes that were necessary, Mr. 

Speaker, and those things, those things, Mr. Speaker, those 

things have made a difference in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. They’ve made a huge difference. It’s allowed our 

economy to grow. It’s created the boom that we’re in today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The second factor that contributed to the tightening of the 

labour market conditions were, we have an aging population 

due to a declining birth rate, Mr. Speaker. Those are issues that 

do present challenges, Mr. Speaker. The average number of 

children per family is declining, not just here but around the 

world, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, we need to understand 

that that’s a reality in our province and a reality within our 

economic boundaries, and we need to work to address that, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we need to address those issues that are 

affecting our labour market climate, and one of them is the fact 

that we have an aging population, Mr. Speaker, and a declining 

birth rate. That we can’t change rapidly, Mr. Speaker, and those 

are issues that we must then find new strategies to work around, 



1692 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the onset of the retirement of the baby boom 

generation . . . Our history in this country saw a huge surge of 

population in what’s known as the baby boom generation, Mr. 

Speaker, after the Second World War, and that generation has 

largely carried us in the workforce till today, Mr. Speaker. But 

as that group of people, men and women, begin to retire, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to have that huge bulge of influx of 

people that was there 25, 30, 35 years ago, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

going to lose that in the same proportion in which they entered 

the workforce, Mr. Speaker. They’re leaving the workforce 

through retirement. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s another challenge 

that we have to work with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a growing Aboriginal population, which 

is not a surprise to anybody here. Now that is a challenge but a 

great opportunity as well, Mr. Speaker, because that growing 

youth population of Aboriginal youth, Mr. Speaker, give us an 

opportunity to bring that new generation of Aboriginal youth 

into full employment in our marketplace, Mr. Speaker. To 

create educational opportunities to see more and more 

Aboriginal young people get post-secondary training, more and 

more Aboriginal young people into trades and skill training, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s an opportunity for this province, an 

opportunity that many other provinces don’t have today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of our challenges, we have limited immigration. Now 

that’s an issue that we all have concerns about and we’re all 

working to try to improve, Mr. Speaker. We need more 

immigrant workers in our province, Mr. Speaker. We need to 

open our doors to allow more immigration into our province. 

Mr. Speaker, we as a province all want to see that. We need to 

be open and very . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m at a loss for words for a 

second. We need to be open and willing to make changes in 

order to make those immigrant families more comfortable in 

our communities. We need to find a place where they feel 

comfortable, Mr. Speaker, that we can help them to feel 

comfortable living and working in our environment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

We had a historical out-migration, the population, particularly 

the youth, but that changed around about 2006, Mr. Speaker, 

and we started to see an increase in population in a . . . And by, 

Mr. Speaker, by the end of 2006, Mr. Speaker, we had a — for 

the first time in over a decade, Mr. Speaker — we saw net 

in-migration. That started to occur again under the previous 

government as the economy grew, as the economy grew, Mr. 

Speaker, and as that foundation that had been built through 

tough choices, Mr. Speaker, in difficult times many times, Mr. 

Speaker. But tough choices were made to build the economy to 

become a have province, Mr. Speaker, and with that came the 

shift in population in the end of last quarter, last two quarters of 

2006, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And people are now coming to this province, Mr. Speaker — 

from 2006 on — in numbers that we haven’t seen in a long 

time. And again the fundamental foundation and work that 

made that happen was done by the previous government, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not done by this government. But, Mr. Speaker, 

the new government tends to think everything started, the world 

was created on November 7, 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a situation with increased 

competition from other jurisdictions, the in provinces of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, and as a result of that increased 

competition, we’ve had some difficulty in recruiting individuals 

from other jurisdictions. But, Mr. Speaker, we worked very 

hard as has the government. And I’m going to say this, you 

know, the new government also has worked very, very hard to 

create an environment in which people want to come to our 

province. 

 

When we advertised, and we did — we advertised in Alberta; 

we advertised in Ontario — about the need to have people in 

Saskatchewan, inviting people to Saskatchewan. The current 

government when in opposition criticized us for spending that 

money on advertising, Mr. Speaker. But we’re not going to 

criticize them for spending that money on advertising that 

they’re doing today because it’s what we needed to do in 2005 

and ’06 in order to get people to come to our province, and it’s 

what you need to do today. It is what you need to do today to 

encourage more people to come. So we do encourage you to 

continue to work to get people to come the province, as we did 

from 2004, 2005, 2006. 

 

Mr. Speaker, things don’t change overnight. People need to 

understand that there’s a change, that things are moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. And it took some time in order to get 

people to understand that Saskatchewan was the place to be in 

the future. And by the end of 2006, Mr. Speaker, people 

understood that, and people were . . . The net migration was 

into the province of Saskatchewan, not out, Mr. Speaker. And 

that pattern has continued with the new government. 

 

And I do want to thank them for continuing our programs. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to thank them for continuing our programs. I 

want to thank them for continuing our tax schemes, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that the new government, the new government 

knew that the previous government had put a good foundation 

in place, that this province would continue to grow on that 

foundation, Mr. Speaker. And I do want to thank them for 

continuing that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now having said that, Mr. Speaker, when we’re 

dealing with the Labour Market Commission, we put a Labour 

Market Commission with 19 members in place for a reason, Mr. 

Speaker. And we put that in place to ensure that we had 

adequate bodies and the right knowledge around the table, Mr. 

Speaker, to continue to connect the dots between labour, 

business, educational institutions, government, and other 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. We had an inclusive plan to want to 

connect the dots in a way that help provide a continued, 

enhanced labour market environment in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s what the previous commission with 19 

members was designed to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the new government’s decided unilaterally to cut it back to 

11 without very little or no consultation of the people of the 

province, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be a few 

conversations going on, and they seem to be from members that 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1693 

are sitting at the opposite ends of the Chamber. If you want to 

have conversations, move behind the bar. That way you 

wouldn’t have to shout to one another. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying before, the current Labour Market Commission structure 

of 19 members looked very closely at what the needs were of 

the various stakeholders including business, labour, and 

educational institutions and other stakeholders, including the 

representative from what was deemed the social economy — 

the non-for-profit sector, Mr. Speaker. And they’ve eliminated 

that representative, the non-profit sector, Mr. Speaker. And 

they’ve cut back representatives from the labour organizations 

and business, shortening the number of people and denying 

some of that knowledge and depth that those individuals 

brought around the table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now why did they do that, Mr. Speaker? We don’t really know, 

Mr. Speaker, because they didn’t consult with the current board. 

We don’t know who they consulted with. We don’t know if 

they worked with other stakeholders in the community, Mr. 

Speaker. Or did they simply just ideologically make a decision 

— which I would say they did, Mr. Speaker. They made an 

ideological decision. They wanted a board of 11 people. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that board of 11 people, Mr. Speaker, is not 

adequate, not adequate to fully examine what the labour market 

in our province in the future needs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need a group of 19 individuals, Mr. Speaker. We need 

representation from the social economy, Mr. Speaker. And we 

need representation, Mr. Speaker, from the business community 

— of broad stakeholders of the business community, Mr. 

Speaker — the labour community, the educational institutions, 

Mr. Speaker, and other stakeholders that are important to 

meeting the needs of . . . our labour needs moving forward, Mr. 

Speaker. We need to have people who understand the issues of 

immigration on the board, Mr. Speaker. But as we’ve limited 

the board now to 11 members, we’re losing some of those 

skills, Mr. Speaker. We’re losing some of that representation. 

That knowledge that’s gone from the table is going to make it 

very difficult, Mr. Speaker, for the Labour Market Commission 

to function to the same quality level that it had in the past, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The new government for ideological reasons have removed 

seven members from the board, which is a removal of 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker — significant stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker — that have something to offer to this province. They 

have something to offer for the benefit and the well-being of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

when they have been removed, when individuals have been 

removed, when seats have been taken away from that 

commission, Mr. Speaker, it limits the information we have 

around the table to make decisions. It limits the number of 

people who have input into making the decisions about the 

future of our labour market needs in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need representation from big business, from small business, 

Mr. Speaker, from medium-sized business, from the 

manufacturing sector to the service sector, Mr. Speaker. And if 

we don’t have representation from all those groups, Mr. 

Speaker, then somebody’s voice is not heard around the table. 

And when we remove those voices, Mr. Speaker, in whose 

interest is it in removing those voices, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this change could have long, long, long-lasting 

impact, Mr. Speaker, on our province. It could in fact change 

the ability of the commission to make the types of quality 

recommendations they have been able to make in the past to 

move forward our needs, to match our labour needs to our 

business’s requirements, Mr. Speaker, to our social needs of our 

communities, Mr. Speaker. All those things needed to be 

examined, Mr. Speaker, and when those parts of the equation 

aren’t there as we make decisions, Mr. Speaker, I argue we do 

not make as good a decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you in fact take away some of that knowledge from the 

table, you make different decisions, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

important as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, that we have an 

inclusive system that allows the very best decisions possible to 

be made by the Labour Market Commission, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, once again I’d like to say that there is never 

too many people, there is never too much inclusion as you’re 

making decisions. There’s never too much knowledge around 

the table. As you’re making decisions about the fundamental 

future of our province — the future of our young people, our 

children, in some cases our grandchildren, Mr. Speaker — we 

need the knowledge around the table to ensure that the right 

decisions are made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it is absolutely wrong, Mr. Speaker, to reduce the size of 

the Labour Market Commission from 19 to 11 and remove 

some of that fundamental knowledge, Mr. Speaker, from around 

the table as decisions are made, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I have made my points over the last 25 minutes or so, 

Mr. Speaker, and so at this time I would move adjournment for 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 46, The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 49 — The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and speak to Bill 49, The Ambulance Amendment 

Act. My comments might not be quite as inciting as perhaps the 

member from Dewdney in his last speech for some of the 

members opposite, but I will see what . . . I would like to share 

some thoughts on this important Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As our province changes, as the institutions develop, as the 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

realities in the various communities throughout our province 

change, inevitably legislation at different points in time needs to 

be looked at to ensure that it indeed reflects the reality in 

communities and to ensure that the legislation is serving its 

initial purpose and the need for that legislation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill 49, The Ambulance Amendment Act is one such 

piece. A good amount of this Act, Mr. Speaker, could be termed 

as housekeeping matters, and cleaning up the Act to ensure that 

it is modernized and it reflects the current reality in our 

province. 

 

To start off, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say from this side of 

the House, and I’m sure this sentiment is shared by members on 

the opposite side, that we truly do appreciate and value the good 

work done by the ambulance operators in our province. We 

have a very large province and people are spread out in many 

corners. And it’s important to have ambulance services to 

ensure that all members in our province receive the urgent 

medical care that they receive. So whether that’s a result of 

something like a heart attack, whether that’s a result of a serious 

accident, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that individuals have the 

proper access to ambulances in order to get to a place where 

they can receive urgent medical care. 

 

I know for myself, Mr. Speaker, as a teen I broke my femur in 

rural Saskatchewan near the town of Shell Lake. And it was 

because of the quick response I was able to have from 

paramedics that I was able to be stabilized and taken to 

Spiritwood Hospital where I could later be taken to the city. So 

it’s very important for people throughout the province, in urban 

centres, and of course especially in rural areas as well. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is also tied into recent changes 

we’ve seen with the expanded role of paramedics, not only in 

the ambulance system but in the health system as a whole, with 

paramedics now being a self-regulated profession. It’s a 

positive step, and it’s part of larger discussions within the health 

care sector, Mr. Speaker, examining who is the best medical 

professional to deliver a specific type of care in a specific 

situation in a era, not a new era, but an era where we need to 

use our resources wisely to ensure that people receive the best 

possible care for the most number of people. That’s an 

important thing to do. So certainly the step of moving 

paramedics into the direction of being a self-regulated 

profession, that’s a positive change. 

 

I’m also encouraged by the minister’s remarks on this Bill 49, 

Mr. Speaker, that it was done in ongoing discussions with the 

Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association. 

Certainly engaging with stakeholders, with the professional 

association, is only natural and is most fitting when introducing 

legislation that has a direct impact on the people working in the 

field. And so that is a positive thing as well. 

 

However whenever we look at legislation, and especially with 

housekeeping types of Bills, it’s important to see what are 

perhaps some of the larger implications that might not be seen 

at first glance, or what are some of the larger changes that 

perhaps need to occur with a piece of legislation. And indeed 

The Ambulance Amendment Act, it might not be something that 

this House returns to in the immediate future. So it’s important 

that when we make changes such as the changes outlined in Bill 

49, it’s important that these changes are reflective of what is 

needed in the community and what is needed in the profession. 

 

So I know on this side, Mr. Speaker, of the House there are a 

number of questions that we want to ask — questions that we 

want to address to the public, questions that we want to ask to 

members in the broader community, in the various professions 

that are outlined and that would be impacted in some way with 

The Ambulance Amendment Act. And that’s something that we 

want to continue to do on this side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So given that I know a number of my colleagues also want to 

look at Bill 49 and make comment and since we are talking to 

other people and wanting more information on this, at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill 49. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of Bill No. 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 53 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 53 — The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and continue discussion on Bill 53, The Medical 

Profession Amendment Act, a pleasure to follow up on the 

initial comments that were made from, well, the minister 

introducing the Bill and then comments from the member from 

Battlefords. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is indeed a very 

important one and one that requires looking at by many people 

because it involves the health care system, and it involves the 

quality of care that’s delivered to patients and to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Certainly when we’re looking at the type of health care that is 

provided, the type of service that is provided to individuals, it’s 

necessary to ensure that the systems that we have in place 

within the broader health care system, that they can respond to 

any problems that might come up. I would like to start off, Mr. 

Speaker, by saying thank you to the many people that work 

within the health care sector. Whatever the profession, whatever 

the discipline, it’s through these people that people receive 

great quality care here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I know through an election process and then of course through 

doing constituency work, you do come across situations where 

perhaps someone hasn’t had a completely positive experience 

with the health care system, or they have some worries about a 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

particular element of the health care system. But in my 

experience at least, Mr. Speaker, that’s been far out-shadowed 

by the many people who really speak with pride about the 

health care system in Saskatchewan and the quality of care 

they’ve received — whether that was for themselves or whether 

that was for their family members. 

 

It’s no secret in almost any public opinion poll, health care 

continues to rank near the top or if not at the top of people’s 

concerns when it comes to government, when it comes around 

to election time. So it’s only natural, Mr. Speaker, when 

looking at The Medical Profession Act, we want to ensure that 

the Act is set up in such way that quality care can be provided 

to people. 

 

So I provided kudos and a thank you to the many people that 

work within the health care system. It is true, from time to time 

though, there is an investigation. And tying into my comments 

on the previous Bill, Mr. Speaker, there are many 

self-regulating professions within the health care field, and 

these health care professions, through the legislation that is put 

in place, have the ability to do investigations when necessary. 

That is the case looking at the changes here with The Medical 

Profession Act. 

 

We believe of course that public safety is very important, and 

it’s important to ensure that the system allows for the public to 

be safe, the system allows for situations where perhaps 

someone’s safety is put in jeopardy or in question, allows the 

system to look at that case and learn lessons from it. And that is 

why for The Medical Profession Act these changes here, as I 

understand them, would allow the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons the ability . . . when coming across information in an 

investigation, Mr. Speaker, it would provide them with the 

ability to share that information with other required 

organizations within the health care sector — whether that was 

the association of registered nurses or whether that was 

information to the minister. That’s important feedback. Or 

whether that was with the Saskatchewan College of 

Pharmacists. That’s necessary. 

 

It’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation is in 

many ways coming out of the request from the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan and that also the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, the Saskatchewan College 

of Pharmacists, and the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 

Association have also had input in this process and see it as a 

good development. 

 

When dealing with any type of investigation where there is 

information, obviously privacy, Mr. Speaker, and obviously the 

protection of individuals — whether that’s the practitioner or 

whether that is the patient — that protection needs to be there. 

So it’s necessary that the legislation allows for the correct 

balance, the correct balance of on one hand ensuring that patient 

care is of the utmost concern, is being taken into consideration, 

and then also the anonymity of patients or the medical 

professionals in the various fields. 

 

In reading the legislation, Mr. Speaker, I see the way that it is 

designed that it would be a council decision, a council of the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons. I think that’s a positive 

thing as it allows a larger group of professionals who are 

experienced and have knowledge about medical care to make 

the determination as to whether or not information should 

indeed be passed on to another body and to another 

organization. As with any group, Mr. Speaker, it’s always better 

when there are more thinking heads around the table as opposed 

to fewer for most things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I’ve gone through the legislation and listened to other 

comments and had the opportunity to speak with some of the 

stakeholders in the field, Mr. Speaker, it appears that Bill 53, 

The Medical Profession Amendment Act does make decent 

sense from my first impressions and from looking at it and 

doing some thinking. But I know there are other members on 

this side who would like to have a say on this piece and might 

have some other questions and some different points of view, 

perhaps from their own life experience or their experience from 

the work that they’ve done in this building or their experience 

with dealing with constituents. So seeing that I’ve expressed 

some of my ideas on this, Mr. Speaker, I would move now that 

we would adjourn debate on Bill 53. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of Bill No. 53, The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 45 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate and speak about something 

that is very near and dear to the heart of many Saskatchewan 

people — the credit union system and the proper functioning 

thereof. It’s not the most, you know, groundbreaking legislation 

being brought forward, but it’s an important piece of legislation 

notwithstanding. 

 

Again the main sort of import of the changes are to making the 

board a bit more independent of the industry itself, bringing 

people from the outsides in. It gets them, I guess, a bit more 

space between them and the industry to provide fresher eyes. 

 

But I would venture to say, Mr. Speaker, that to date certainly 

the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation — having 

been founded in 1953, the first of its kind in the country, Mr. 

Speaker — I guess the hope that we would have is that those 

that are coming after in this new configuration of the board, that 

they continue the diligence and the good service for the credit 

union system and the healthy functioning in Saskatchewan of 

the credit union system that we have certainly been 

beneficiaries of in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s interesting. Casting a bit of a glance around the country in 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

terms of the deposits guarantee limit that certain other 

jurisdictions have on their deposits with the credit union, I, you 

know, note with pride that in Saskatchewan there is no limit on 

the insurance for guarantees. It’s interesting times, Mr. Speaker, 

with the turmoil and the crisis in the international financial 

sector. Canada’s banking system generally is in a stronger 

position than certainly most other countries and is held up as a 

bit of a model. And I’d argue within that, where credit unions 

are provincially regulated entities, that the credit union system 

also is in a fairly strong position to safeguard the financial 

interests of its members and the financial services sector that 

they represent. 

 

It’s interesting in other jurisdictions, British Columbia coming 

to mind, Mr. Speaker. October 22, Premier Campbell brought 

forward a promise that they were going to bring the House back 

in November 20, coming right up, Mr. Speaker. And they were 

going to change the credit union Act in British Columbia to take 

the limit off guarantees for credit union members and for 

deposits held with the credit union in British Columbia. And 

again this was heralded as something that was groundbreaking, 

that was being responsive to uncertain financial times. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, I note with interest that that’s already the 

case here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I think that’s something that again we’ve certainly taken 

pride in the credit union system over the years and in many 

ways. You know again, 1953, the Credit Union Deposit 

Guarantee Corporation being the first such entity in Canada, 

again I think the credit union system here is ahead of the pack 

when it comes to the rest of the country. And here they are 

leading. 

 

I note that Nova Scotia, they have a $250,000 limit on insurance 

to the guarantees they provide. Prince Edward Island, it’s 

$125,000 or 100 per cent of RRSPs [Registered Retirement 

Savings Plan] or RRIFS [Registered Retirement Income Fund]. 

And again here in Saskatchewan, there is no limit on the 

insurance provided. 

 

So it’s just one instance, Mr. Speaker, where I think we’ve been 

served well in past by the Credit Union Deposit Guarantee 

Corporation. And it will be interesting to see how the work of 

this very critical board continues in terms of not just providing 

good service for the people of Saskatchewan, the members of 

the credit union sector, but in ensuring that the sector continues 

to lead in Canada and that others are catching up to us. All the 

more important in these uncertain financial times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I guess the main points I wanted to bring up were those, Mr. 

Speaker. The credit union system . . . I guess in the interest of 

some disclosure, I’m a credit union member and have been 

since I was old enough to take the money from underneath the 

mattress and trot it down to 5th Avenue. I had an account with 

the Sherwood Credit Union and now of course Conexus. I know 

that they do a tremendous amount of good work across the 

province. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A Fat Cat account. 

 

Mr. McCall: — And in terms of Fat . . . Well the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy is asking me if I’d had a Fat Cat account. 

I have to say I’m so old that I came after the Fat Cat accounts 

came on. But I think he may have had a Fat Cat account; I’m 

not sure. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. Royal Bank didn’t . . . 

 

Mr. McCall: — Maybe more of a . . . Royal Bank wouldn’t 

have one? Well I guess I’ll be interested to see what he has to 

say in this debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway, the legislation in terms of the composition of the 

board, bringing them in line with the best practices in terms of 

governance, we think this is laudable. We of course want to 

examine these measures further, Mr. Speaker, to be sure that 

what we think what is a good step forward is in fact that. So in 

that respect, Mr. Speaker, I will at this time move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 45, The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 44 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 44 – The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today 

to speak to Bill No. 44, The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Act. 

As the minister indicated in his second reading speech a couple of 

weeks ago, this is a change to legislation that was passed in this 

House in 1917, and it relates to some fundamental problems that 

have arisen in Saskatchewan as it relates to agreements for sale. 

 

Now the whole area relating to the sale of land has many 

appropriate rules, and the common law has developed over many 

centuries, in fact, to deal with problems that do arise. But in this 

particular situation, I think that some problems have arisen 

recently whereby people have used the concept of an agreement 

for sale to tie up land in ways that are considered inappropriate. 

And it’s my understanding that this particular legislation is set 

up as a way to respond to some specific problems that have 

arisen. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now I know that we’ll be having a chance later in these 

proceedings to ask some specific questions of the officials who 

have been working on this particular problem, but I’d like to set 

out a few of my thoughts today as it relates to this particular 

legislation. 

 

It appears that problems arise in situations where people make a 

deposit to buy land and then subsequently are caught up in other 

transactions around that particular land which then become 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

quite difficult to disentangle. And this involves financial 

institutions. It can involve other purchasers. It can involve joint 

ventures or other things that may happen. And subsequently if 

something goes wrong or there’s a downturn in the economy or 

one of the people involved in the whole development are not 

able to come up with the funds that they’d originally promised, 

you end up with a situation where you need to go through a 

procedure to cancel this original agreement for sale. 

 

The procedure that is presently the remedy here in 

Saskatchewan involves application to the court, and many times 

that may be the most appropriate place for this to be resolved. 

But sometimes the procedure to do that ends up taking quite a 

bit longer than what any of the parties had understood, or it may 

actually give some kind of strange bargaining power to a 

particular person involved in the transaction that doesn’t 

actually have very much money in the whole transaction. 

 

And so I think that the suggestions that have come forward 

around this particular legislation have related to trying to figure 

out how to provide a remedy. And so what has happened is 

there’s a definition of the contract or agreement for the sale of 

land that’s in this particular legislation. And basically it’s quite 

simple, which is appropriate. Purchase price has to be paid over 

a period of time and upon the payment of the purchase price the 

vendor transfers the title — that’s the key, that you don’t 

actually get the title until you’ve made all your payments — 

and that this particular payment period is more than six months 

from the date of the possession. 

 

There are situations where, to assist a purchaser, a vendor may 

agree to payments over quite a number of years to get the asset 

or the property that’s being purchased. 

 

And I note that one of the books that was just published this 

fall, which is kind of an interesting book about the Depression, 

written by Bill Waiser of Saskatoon, called Who Killed Jackie 

Bates? And basically one of the factors in that book actually is 

an agreement for sale of a butcher shop in a small town in 

western Saskatchewan where all of the money wasn’t able to be 

paid in the ’30s, and so they accepted that they would get some 

of the money and then eventually, when all of the money was 

paid, they would transfer pursuant to this agreement for sale. 

 

One of the factors in the book is the fact that this money doesn’t 

come forward and these people end up becoming quite 

desperate. And they actually use the excuse that they didn’t get 

the full price for their business that they sold as one of the 

factors in the court case involving the charge of murder of this 

young child. It’s a fascinating book for lots of other reasons but 

I thought it was quite curious, that particular issue, around then, 

how do you get property back? And some of these other things 

was a factor in this book as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when one is involved in a transaction to 

purchase land and you end up making a promise to pay over 

quite a number of years, we clearly want a protection for the 

people who are in that situation. And the legislation was passed 

in 1917 and the amendment that we’re going to do now will 

provide that protection but with an even greater or better 

remedy for those people who are involved now. 

 

So how does that remedy work? Well basically it allows for a 

cancellation of these agreements for sale in a way that is much 

more expeditious And the importance of this is that it will 

eliminate some of the situations where a person who has very 

little money paid into an agreement — in fact they may have a 

five-year agreement for sale to purchase a property, for 

example, where they’ve only paid 5 per cent or 10 per cent of 

the purchase price — it’ll eliminate the situation where that 

person can actually control land of a much greater value with 

very little money deposited in the whole situation or paid in the 

situation. 

 

And this is important legislation both in times when values of 

land are going up dramatically but also when they’re going 

down dramatically, because clearly when land prices are 

increasing quite dramatically year to year as we’ve seen over 

the last number of years, somebody can enter into an agreement 

for sale and pay 10 or 20 per cent down on that particular 

property and actually see the value of the property that they 

purchased double in value and therefore end up . . . I guess if 

you do this on a broader basis, you could purchase a lot more 

land than you might otherwise. But the other side of that though 

is when things start to get into a problem and the original owner 

maybe wants to get the property back or use some of the other 

clauses in the agreement, some of the remedies haven’t been as 

clear as to how to do that. 

 

Now the types of things that are going to be included in this 

particular amendment will also be passed through to other 

legislation in Saskatchewan so that the concept will be available 

for quite a number of other remedies that we have. And so for 

example in the farm security Act dealing specifically with farm 

land, there are a number of remedies, and basically we’ll add 

into that particular legislation the definition of agreement for 

sale, so that there will be a statutory definition rather than a 

common law definition. 

 

This is always an interesting task, to put in statutory definitions 

into land law, because what can happen is that you may then 

allow for new interpretations that are based on the common law, 

but that then are based on the wording of the statutes. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, it’ll be especially crucial for us as we move 

forward in examining this particular Bill to make sure that the 

definitions that we do put in our legislation will match what 

have traditionally thought to have been the definition for an 

agreement for sale. 

 

Now I don’t think there are any particular situations where 

regulatory powers have been created in this area, which I think 

is appropriate, but once again we will have to ask the officials 

to make sure that we’re not in a situation where some of the 

certainty of the law is being changed because of this particular 

legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I will continue to look at this 

one and work with my colleagues as we move forward to make 

sure that the appropriate legislation is passed and with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 44, The Agreements 

of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the Standing Committees on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice as well as Human Services to meet this evening, I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the work of committees, this House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. The Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 

 



November 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 1399 of Hansard, No. 4A of Tuesday, October 28, 

2008, in the fifth paragraph of Hon. Ms. Heppner’s introduction 

of guests: 

 

“Mr. Zhu Li” should read “Liu Shuguang”; 

“Yao Xin” should read “Li Hailin”; and 

“Zhao Yue” should read “Jiang Hengwei.” 

 

We apologize for these errors. 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1667 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1667 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1667 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1667 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1667 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1668 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1668 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1668 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1690 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1668 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1668 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1668 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Business and Professional Women’s Club 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1669 

 Saskatchewan Party Convention 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 

 New Business Opens in Saskatoon 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1669 

 Carrot River Wildcats Football Team Wins Championship 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1670 

 Prince Albert’s Award of Merit 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 

 Dedication to Business and Volunteerism 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1670 

 Saskatchewan Potash Council 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1671 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Severance for Former Public Servants 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1671 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1671 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1672 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1672 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1673 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1674 

 Response to Health Disparities Report 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1675 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1675 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1676 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1676 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1677 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1677 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1677 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1678 

 Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1680 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1681 

 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 

  Taylor (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 1683 

  Gantefoer (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................... 1683 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1683 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 1685 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1685 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1686 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1689 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1693 

 Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1694 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1695 

 Bill No. 44 – The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Nilson ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1696 

CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1699 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


