




















































Hansard: October 29, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 29, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1433 

 October 29, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

[Prayers] 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

a group of women and men seated in your gallery that represent 

the Association of Saskatchewan Realtors. They’re here today 

and yesterday to discuss government affairs and put proposals 

both to us and to the official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that the group of women and 

men that I met with this morning and informally last night were 

very, very pleased to hear of our great tax cut in the Throne 

Speech. And also this group was very, very supportive of the 

Throne Speech. So Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 

join me in welcoming the Association of Saskatchewan 

Realtors to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 

through you and to you I would also like to join with the 

member opposite in extending a warm welcome on behalf of 

my colleagues to the realtors that have joined us here today. In 

particular I see Karen Krawczyk, Al Didur, Cliff Iverson, Bill 

Madder, many others. I don’t see my old broker, Mr. White. I 

think he’s off making a living somewhere. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, we appreciate that groups 

like the realtors can come to the Legislative Building, put their 

case for improvements in public policy. This helps us as 

members to learn more about the issues that affect groups in our 

province, and therefore we appreciate the presence of the 

realtors here today. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour for me today to stand and introduce two individuals that 

are seated within a group of citizens that helped build our 

province. We have a number of representatives from senior 

citizens groups. Among them are Lois Borden who’s the former 

chairperson, Provincial Advisory Committee of Older Persons, 

and we have Bev MacLeod, executive director of Saskatchewan 

Seniors Mechanism. I don’t know all of the individuals that 

accompanied them today, but I want to welcome them all to 

their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join in with the minister welcoming these guests 

to our House on behalf of the opposition. They have made a 

huge contribution to making our province what it is today, and 

we welcome them to the House. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Hon. Assembly, a group of people assembled in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 44 grade 7 students 

from Greystone Heights School in Saskatoon Greystone. These 

bright and invigorated students are accompanied by their 

teachers, Steve Vincent, Lindsay Olson, and Deanna Fast. I 

look forward to meeting with them immediately following 

question period, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, please join me 

in welcoming these students and their teachers to your 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome the students from Greystone, but in particular I would 

like to welcome their teacher, Mr. Steven Vincent, who is my 

first cousin. So it’s a pleasure to have him in the Assembly 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to introduce to you and through you to the other members 

of the legislature my good friend, Andrew Scheer who’s the 

Member of Parliament for Regina-Qu’Appelle, who defeated 

NDP [New Democratic Party] stalwart Lorne Nystrom not once 

but twice, Mr. Speaker — 2004, 2006 — and was recently 

re-elected with over 50 per cent of the vote in his riding and has 

done a fantastic job representing his constituents and will 

continue to for a very long time. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a great privilege for me to be able to introduce 

some special guests that are seated in your gallery this 

afternoon. Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is the president of the 

Canada West Equipment Dealers Association, Duane Smith 

who is a constituent of mine from Swift Current. In addition to 

his current duties, he’s also a very a successful entrepreneur 

with Jay Dee Farm Equipment Sales in southwest 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

Saskatchewan. And before all of that he was president of the 

comp high school SRC [student representative council] and was 

ably assisted by a vice-president. And he managed to succeed 

despite that vice-president’s assistance, Mr. Speaker. And so I 

want to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

Joining him is the executive vice-president and basically the 

executive director of that association, someone who’s no 

stranger to this building or this province — John Schmeiser has 

joined us as well. We welcome both of them to this Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today the petition that I present speaks to the struggles 

of Saskatchewan families who are unable to find child care for 

their children. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this petition on behalf of citizens in 

Moose Jaw; Regina; Maple Creek; Abbey, Saskatchewan; 

Langenburg; Esterhazy; Melville; Duval; Carnduff; and also 

more from Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I’d like to present a petition in support of 

public safety and security in Saskatchewan: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders, including the policing 

community, the corrections community, and community 

agencies, organizations, and educators that interface with 

gangs and understand the risks and challenges that gangs 

offer to our communities. 

 

As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present petitions 

today to the Legislative Assembly from the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. The petition deals with the cuts to 

the Station 20 project in Saskatoon which affected some of the 

most vulnerable citizens of that city. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by the residents of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property taxes. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks in Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Education Week: Howard Coad School 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is of 

course Education Week, a very special week to mark great 

things our schools are doing throughout this province. One very 

special school in my constituency is Howard Coad School. 

Howard Coad celebrated its 50th birthday this past spring and 

Mrs. Douglas, the principal, proudly remarked that last year on 

registration, they had about 116 students. This year they have 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

164 and today, October 29, they have 190 students and they 

continue to grow, welcoming new students and families. 

 

They have just established a brand new ESL [English as a 

second language] program this year, currently supporting about 

27 students. The arts are very important in this school as they 

have an outstanding music program led by the very talented 

Richard Dubé. He engages the students with songs, drums, and 

flutes. The student leader core has just recruited its membership 

for the school year, and in the spring the voyageur club will be 

well under way. All staff members including educational 

associates are all about the kids. They work very hard, on the 

clock and off, to provide caring support and direction for our 

young people, believing very much they are a true community 

school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Howard Coad School staff and students on Avenue T — and 

that’s “T” for terrific — and wish them the very best. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Funding for Community-Based Organizations 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

honour today to speak to the recent announcement by the 

government to increase funding to community-based 

organizations or CBOs. The 7 per cent increase has been 

celebrated by groups across the province. Combined with the 

2.3 per cent from the spring budget, the total increase represents 

9.3 percentage over the year. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it’s better to let the words of the CBOs 

speak for themselves. Quote: 

 

What terrific news! These improvements mean we will be 

competitive in recruiting staff, and much more able to 

retain our current and future staff. 

 

Or quote, “In this one initiative, you have rectified the travesty 

that a succession of NDP governments perpetrated on NGO 

service agencies throughout Saskatchewan.” Or quote, “In the 

28 years our Executive Director has been here this is the largest 

increase ever given to the staff of our agency.” And finally 

quote, “Now we will be in a position to support the staff who do 

this very demanding and important work for children and 

families in their critical time of need.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Premier stated when making this 

unprecedented announcement, community-based organizations 

do the heavy lifting in supporting so very many people across 

our province. The government is proud to be able to partner 

with all these important groups and their over 6,000 staff in 

creating a better life here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

Academic Education and Physical Fitness 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A teacher at City 

Park Collegiate in Saskatoon, Ally Cameron, has conducted a 

nationally recognized study in combining academic education 

with physical fitness training. 

 

Minds in Motion puts six treadmills and six stationary bicycles 

not in a gymnasium, but in the classroom. Three days of the 

week a language arts class began with a 20-minute cardio 

workout at the beginning of a 90-minute double class, and on 

the other two days math students arrived at the classroom with a 

math problem on the board to think about as they did strength 

training. 

 

The questions being studied are whether physical fitness 

increases academic achievement, and whether improved 

physical fitness levels will decrease symptoms of attention 

deficit disorder. Increasing the oxygen consumption of the 

students as the class commences is an important and innovative 

part of this study. 

 

Similar research outside of Canada has seen a decrease in 

absenteeism, improved academic performance, and increased 

social skills in the participating students. Ally Cameron who 

undertook this innovative programming, and Grant Roberts of 

Mecca Fitness in Saskatoon who donated the required exercise 

equipment, are both to be commended for the contribution to 

our community and to its students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

25e anniversaire de la Fédération des aînés fransaskois 

25th Anniversary of the Fransaskois Seniors Federation 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Merci, M. le Président. Je suis heureuse de 

souligner le jalon important d’un organisme francophone 

provincial cette année. L’année 2008 marque le 25e 

anniversaire de la Fédération des aînés fransaskois de la 

Saskatchewan, la FAF. 

 

Samedi dernier à Saskatoon j’ai eu l’occasion et le privilège 

d’être invitée et de participer aux célébrations de 25e 

anniversaire de ce regroupement, en compagnie du secrétaire 

provinciale, député de la circonscription de Cypress Hills, and 

du ministre de l’enseignement supérieur de l’emploi and du 

travail, député de la circonscription de Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Pendant la soirée nous avons eu la plaisir de faire la 

connaissance de certains des pionniers qui, grâce à leurs temps 

et à leurs coeurs, ont réussi à créer et à développer leur 

fédération dans l’ensemble de la province. Je tiens à remercier 

plus particulièrement la fondatrice Mme. Jeanne Leblanc de 

Zenon Park, qui a fait preuve d’une grande détermination dans 

la poursuite de son rêve même si de nombreuses personnes, à 

l’époque, pensaient qu’il était impossible. 

 

Aujourd’hui je tiens à souligner leurs efforts auprès de cette 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

Chambre. Merci. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

acknowledge an important milestone for a Francophone 

provincial organization. The year 2008 marks the 25th 

anniversary of the Fédération des aînés fransaskois de la 

Saskatchewan, the FAF. Last Saturday in Saskatoon I had the 

opportunity and the privilege to be invited and to attend the 

celebration of the 25th anniversary of this group in the company 

of the Provincial Secretary, the member for Cypress Hills, and 

the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

During the evening, we had the pleasure to be introduced to 

some of these pioneers who gave their time and their heart to 

create and to expand their federation throughout the province. I 

want to particularly acknowledge the founder, Madame Jeanne 

Leblanc of Zenon Park, who had the determination to follow 

her dream that many saw as unrealistic at the time. 

 

I would like to acknowledge their efforts today in this Chamber. 

Thank you.] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Remembering Founder of the Saskatchewan Baseball 

Hall of Fame and Museum 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A week ago 

Saskatchewan lost, if not one of its most significant citizens, 

then certainly its most enthusiastic baseball fan in the province. 

Dave Shury, whose lifelong passion for baseball led to the 

creation of the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame in 1983, 

passed away on Wednesday, October 22. He was 78 years of 

age and had lived with multiple sclerosis since 1955. 

 

Dave Shury’s love of Saskatchewan’s proud baseball history, 

the communities which supported it, and the many talented and 

dedicated players, coaches, builders, and fans resulted in a 

commitment to document and celebrate that history, a 

commitment that has now spanned decades. 

 

The Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in the 

town of Battleford continues to draw hundreds people every 

year to relive the past and bask in the glory of this sport that 

once dominated small town Saskatchewan. The stories that have 

been preserved and that are still being unearthed tell a tale of 

settlement, of love and love lost, of courage, of glory, of 

comedy, of tragedy, and of community. 

 

Dave Shury’s commitment and passion has been shared with all 

of us. It has and will continue to make us better people and 

remind us of the simple fact that indeed baseball is life. Dave 

Shury’s life and his passion will be celebrated by his family and 

friends on Thursday, November 6 in Battleford. Donations in 

lieu of flowers can be sent to the Baseball Hall of Fame and 

Museum. His legacy to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan past, present, and future must continue to live on. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

A Stronger Saskatchewan and a Better Life 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to 

report to this House the reviews of what our government 

announced last week for the people of Saskatchewan continue 

to pour in, and they are extremely positive, Mr. Speaker. The 

latest to sing the praises, the Winnipeg Sun. In a recent column 

entitled “Saskatchewan shows the way,” the author suggests 

that Manitoba’s NDP government would do well to learn from 

the example set by the Saskatchewan Party government. To 

quote: 

 

For years we had a stronger economy than Saskatchewan 

. . . But oh, how times have changed . . . last week 

Saskatchewan Premier Brad Wall’s government delivered a 

speech from the throne that included massive tax reduction 

commitments that leave Manitoba in the dust. 

 

How things have changed indeed, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

leads a country with the highest year-over-year increases in 

average earnings, the biggest drop in the number of people 

collecting employment insurance. Under our government, 

Saskatchewan is leading the entire country in economic growth. 

To quote further from the Winnipeg Sun column: 

 

The Saskatchewan government has clearly demonstrated 

that when the economy is strong paying down debt, 

investing in key priorities and returning money to the 

individuals in the form of huge tax breaks is the right 

recipe to ensure that strong economic growth continues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this means a stronger Saskatchewan and a better 

life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next speaker, I know 

there are some members’ statements that tend to draw a lot 

more attention and intervention. However this Chamber isn’t 

always the easiest place to hear and especially for our guests. 

So if our members could keep that in mind so the guests can 

hear what’s being stated, it would be greatly appreciated. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Nashi Fundraiser 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, along with my colleague from 

Saskatoon Fairview, I too was privileged to attend the Nashi 

harvest brunch at St. Philip School in Saskatoon Nutana on 

Sunday. 

 

In Saskatoon Nutana there are several constituents who work 

tirelessly to end the vile global practice of trafficking women 

and children for the sex trade, most frequently from Ukraine. 

My friends and constituents, Savelia Curniski, Nashi president 

and co-founder, and Marianne Hladun and Carol Cisecki are 

among the many volunteers who are devoted organizers of 

fundraising events in support of Nashi’s initiative to build a safe 

house and training centre in Ukraine. 

 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

These women and others speak at local meetings to raise 

awareness of this terrible human rights crisis. They educate us 

about the naïveté of the young people who believe they are 

crossing borders to find positive economic opportunities, only 

to be degraded and traded abroad to those willing to harm 

others for their own insatiable appetites. 

 

I invite my colleagues to inform themselves of this social crisis 

for women and children living in poverty, especially in Third 

World countries and in Ukraine. To learn more about Nashi’s 

mission and purpose — along with information about other 

fundraising events we can attend — to support this important 

organization, I urge people to go to the Nashi website, 

www.nashi.ca. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Dewdney. 

 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in late August the Minister of 

Public Safety announced a policy he assured us would keep the 

public informed when dangerous criminals were unlawfully at 

large. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we learned that the minister’s 

new policy was in fact not a policy, but an email from the 

deputy minister to some senior officials. The minister has no 

idea whether the information was ever passed on to front-line 

workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: will he table that 

email in this legislature today so that Saskatchewan people can 

judge for themselves whether the minister’s new policy should 

be taken seriously? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

opposite for that question. Public safety is one of the most 

important concepts this party has, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 

important issue that deserves the attention of this Legislative 

Assembly. As I’ve stated publicly and in the House, the public 

has a right to know if the offenders are unlawfully at large. A 

new policy was established to make certain this notification 

took place. It is clear that things didn’t work as planned, Mr. 

Speaker. However we are taking the necessary steps to make 

certain the policy is fully and effectively implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, there is a difference between 

drafting up new policy for distribution to employees and getting 

an official to dash off a quick email so that you have something 

to say in a media scrum. Mr. Speaker, the minister admitted in 

his media scrum yesterday that he assumed that his officials had 

passed along the email, but he took no personal responsibility to 

ensure that the information was properly communicated to 

ministry staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Public Safety: given his failure 

to ensure that his so-called new policy was properly 

communicated, will the minister now admit that he bears some 

responsibility for the incidents this past week? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, public safety is important to 

this government. To be clear, as minister, I identified the policy 

that I felt needed to be followed — namely, inform the public 

immediately when an offender is unlawfully at large. The 

ministry has responsibility for implementing the policy. This 

includes communicating the policy and developing the 

appropriate procedures for use throughout the system. 

 

We are now reviewing the incidents of last week. The review is 

being conducted by the deputy minister of Justice. Our goal in 

this review is to find out why things didn’t work, so that we can 

make the necessary changes. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we learned back in August that 

senior officials at the Regina Correctional Centre were told in 

advance of a potential jailbreak, but the minister and his 

department took no action to prevent it. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

management lifted security restrictions that had been placed on 

the unit a couple of weeks earlier for security reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: given the advance notice, why did 

he fail to do anything to prevent these escapes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 

member opposite for that question. I can answer it today, Mr. 

Speaker, that when information like that is communicated up 

the chain of command, it stops with the officials in the head 

central office. Actions are taken by the director of the institution 

to make sure that security is implemented. Procedures are 

followed. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I want to also clarify a point, again 

recalling from the last two days. When that government was in 

power for the last 16 years, their policy was to not tell the 

public at all when someone escaped, Mr. Speaker — not at all. 

 

That particular member from Regina Dewdney was the minister 

in fact of this ministry at one point. He could have developed 

the policy. He could have asked his officials to put in the right 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

procedures, Mr. Speaker. He did nothing, as his caucus 

colleagues did nothing back then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a policy now. Public safety is the most important thing 

in this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the staff in our correctional centres 

do an outstanding job of protecting the public. They deserve a 

minister who will stand by them and give them the tools and the 

information they need to do their jobs. Mr. Speaker, in fact 

front-line staff were not informed about a possible escape. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why was the staff at the Regina 

Correctional Centre kept in the dark about a possible threat to 

their safety and that of the general public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

opposite again for those questions, and this last one. We have 

now initiated an internal review and an external review, Mr. 

Speaker, investigation. Those two processes will come out with 

recommendations that we’re going to implement and follow, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s critical here is if the members opposite think that the 

staff at the correctional centre weren’t informed of any possible 

jailbreak, that will be part of the actual investigation, Mr. 

Speaker. I am looking forward to that result and the 

recommendations that come forward. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — There’s a pattern forming here, Mr. Speaker. The 

government fails to share information with front-line 

corrections workers that they need to do their jobs, and the 

public servants are getting all the blame for the failure of the 

minister’s new policy to come. But nobody holds the minister 

himself responsible to the same standard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why does this government have 

one standard of accountability for deputy ministers and other 

public servants, and others for members of its cabinet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let’s be clear on 

this. Public safety is very important to this party and this 

government. Everything that’s happened for the last 16 years 

was under their watch, Mr. Speaker — policies they 

implemented, Mr. Speaker, procedures they took part in 

devising, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. However, 

clearly we know there was no policy to inform the public on 

escapes. So I have to wonder, did they have any policy direction 

whatsoever from that side, Mr. Speaker, over 16 years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Clean Coal Project 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government’s 

clean coal plan was announced on February 27, 2008. At that 

time we had many questions about the costs of the clean coal 

project and we asked them. That was eight months ago and 

we’re still waiting for the answers. 

 

In the government’s new spirit of open, accountable, honest 

answers, to the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]: what will the total cost of the 

clean coal project be, and what will this cost Saskatchewan’s 

electricity users? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s always a pleasure to talk about the clean coal 

project that we are undertaking in Saskatchewan, using some 

$240 million from the federal government for a $1.4 billion 

project. It will be leading the way in the country. It’ll be leading 

the way in North America. 

 

I’m happy to advise the hon. member opposite and all members 

of the House that presently SaskPower is entertaining proposals 

from companies across North America to come forward with 

the technology necessary. We’ve engaged in that. In early 

December we’ll be analyzing those proposals and making 

decisions going forward on this very important project to 

greenhouse gas emissions in the province and to the whole 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — All I want to know is how much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, on September 29, the Premier was speaking to the 

Empire Club in Toronto, and this is what he had to say on the 

topic of clean coal. This is the Premier, and I quote: 

 

We’re going to coordinate with Alberta because they’re 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

looking at a few projects as well. We know there’s a risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of CIC tell us what the risk is that 

the Premier spoke about? More specifically, is the risk that the 

ratepayers will be on the hook for all of the cost overruns? How 

much more will Saskatchewan people be forced to pay? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

leading-edge technology that’s taking place right here in 

Saskatchewan. It’s a demonstration project and yes, news flash, 

there is risk involved in this project, Mr. Speaker. But there is 

also responsibility that’s necessary. Saskatchewan is leading the 

way, taking this responsibility on. Yes, we’re communicating 

with the province of Alberta and all provinces in the country, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the opportunity this summer to attend the Midwest 

Legislative Conference where people from across midwestern 

United States are looking to us for leadership on this. That’s 

what they’ll get, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we’re committed 

to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we just want to know how much. 

The minister is on record as saying that the cost does not matter. 

When asked on August 8 of this year if there was a point where 

the clean coal project becomes unaffordable he said, and I quote 

from the minister, quote “We are committed to the project and 

we are committed to seeing it through . . .” 

 

To the minister: how much is too much when it comes to cost 

overruns for the clean coal project? Is there any amount of 

money that will cause the minister to change this project or will 

he insist on passing the cost on to Saskatchewan ratepayers no 

matter what? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, of 

course there’s risks involved in a project like this. We’re 

leading the way; it’s a demonstration project that is necessary. 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite when they were in government, 

they undertook the carbon capture project in Weyburn, and we 

commended them for doing that. There was risk involved in 

doing that. Mr. Speaker, it was the right thing to do. We said it 

then and we say it today. Right now clean coal technology is 

something that needs to be done, not only for Saskatchewan, 

but to be leaders in North America. We’re embarking on that. 

It’s a $1.4 billion project. The federal government is there with 

$240 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — There seem to be a few members who seem to 

be really interested in entering the debate and I would like them 

to give some consideration to the individual who has been 

recognized. The member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, all we want to know is how much. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the full quote, the full quote of the minister 

of August 8 was as follows, and I quote from the minister: 

 

We are committed to the project, and we are committed to 

seeing it through, what I do know is that this is a very 

important project to the federal government. 

 

So what Stephen Harper wants, Stephen Harper gets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if that costs the ratepayers of Saskatchewan 

billions of dollars, that’s just too bad, according to the minister. 

Well we’re with the people of Saskatchewan who say, what 

Stephen Harper wants, Stephen Harper should pay for. 

 

To the minister: why does he insist on putting the needs of 

Stephen Harper ahead of the needs of Saskatchewan families? 

How much more will Saskatchewan families pay for his 

misguided loyalty? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Misguided loyalty, Mr. Speaker? 

Are members opposite against clean coal? We know where they 

stand on nuclear energy — well we know where some of them 

stand — and we know where some prospective leadership 

candidates stand, but there seems to be all over the spectrum, 

Mr. Speaker. Where do you stand on clean coal? Yes, it’s an 

important project. It’s an important project to this Premier. It’s 

an important project to this government. It’s an important 

project to the residents of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, yes, 

it is an important project to the Prime Minister of Canada and to 

the President of the United States, going forward. 

 

We’re leading the way. We’re breaking new ground here. 

There’s risk involved, Mr. Speaker, and we’re happy to be 

taking on that responsibility with this new government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we want to know how much. 

Yesterday the minister said SaskPower was looking for $5 

billion for future infrastructure needs. He has said before, in this 

very Chamber, SaskPower will no longer build, own, and 

operate electrical generation for SaskPower. So what does he 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

need $5 billion for now? 

 

To the minister: is that the new price of the clean coal project, 

or does it include the cost of building new power lines for your 

buddies at Bruce Power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, with respect, here is 

some numbers for the member opposite. The clean coal project 

is budgeted at $1.4 billion. Here’s some additional numbers, 

Mr. Speaker. Over the next 12 years, we will need 2000 

additional megawatts because we have the strongest economy 

in North America going forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I’ll give the member opposite 

some additional numbers. SaskPower in the past has invested 4 

to $500 million in capital expenditures. That hasn’t been 

enough. We have an infrastructure deficit in SaskPower going 

forward. We’re going to be needing to spend upwards of 500 to 

$1 billion a year to ensure that we have safe, reliable electricity 

in this province. That’s the responsible thing to do; that’s what 

this government will be doing. And I hope those numbers have 

satisfied the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Management of Crown Corporations 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, when exactly did the Minister 

of CIC lose faith in the professional managers who’ve run 

Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said before and I 

say again, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations are operated in a 

professional manner by professional employees who have run 

the corporations in a positive respect. 

 

We’ve gone beyond that; we’ve put in boards in place to 

oversee Crown corporations. We’ve asked people that are some 

of the most successful business people in Saskatchewan to sit 

on those boards, to help with that guidance. And the response 

that we’ve been getting back from senior management of the 

Crown corporations is that they appreciate that direction and 

that will indeed strengthen the Crown corporations going 

forward. And that is the commitment of this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s disregard for 

these professionals was evident yesterday. When asked directly 

if the minister had consulted with Crown presidents and CFOs 

[chief financial officer] on whether his changes would help or 

hinder the Crowns, he refused to answer directly, instead 

talking about what he directed the Crown heads to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when did the minister decide that he knew more 

than the talented men and women who run our Crown 

corporations in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, for the information 

of the member opposite, I consult with those individuals on a 

daily basis on a wide range of topics. The Crown corporations 

in this province have $9 billion of economic activity. I have 

direct responsibility for most of them and I continue to consult 

with them on a daily basis. 

 

In reference to that specific question, I consulted with my 

deputy, Mr. Ron Styles, and he was able to articulate the policy 

to all of the Crown heads. And I can tell you that there is much 

support amongst the Crown heads for a Saskatchewan-first 

policy because there is much work to do here in Saskatchewan. 

Whether it’s SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SaskPower, the work to be 

done is here in Saskatchewan and that’s what they’re doing 

today in their offices. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the minister 

is imposing his agenda on the Crown corporations. And we’ll 

remember that last April that minister said, and I quote, “Mr. 

Speaker, I want to be clear for the members opposite that yes, 

we will impose our views on the Crown corporations.” 

 

Well now since the minister’s now calling the shots, to the 

minister: exactly how many years experience does he have at 

the helm of a utility company in this country? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, on November 7, 

2007 we were given a great responsibility by the people of 

Saskatchewan to ensure that the Crown corporations are run in 

an efficient manner and that utilities are provided to the people 

of Saskatchewan at the lowest possible cost when they are run 

in an efficient manner. And that’s the guidance that we’ve been 

given; that’s the guidance that I’ve been giving to the Crown 

corporations; that’s the responsibility that I’ve accepted; that’s 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

the job that I’m doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the minister 

is disregarding the advice of Crown management and charting 

his own direction. Mr. Speaker, we’ve already began to see the 

outflow of talented experts as a result of what that minister has 

said. 

 

To the minister: is Jon Schubert’s departure from SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] in two days related to 

that minister’s decision to stifle Crown corporations in the 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said earlier in 

the House, we have some fantastic, talented people that run our 

Crown corporations at the chief executive officer level and at 

the vice-president level and at every level within those Crown 

corporations. 

 

What has happened here is that the talent of Mr. Jon Schubert 

has been recognized. It’s recognized outside Saskatchewan’s 

borders, but it’s recognized by this government and inside 

Saskatchewan as well. He’s a talented individual who has run 

SGI in an efficient manner. He has had the full support of this 

government and full support of this minister. And he continues 

to have our full support and good wishes as he moves on to 

further his career, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well that’s an interesting observation, given 

that the minister and Mr. Schubert had a difference of opinion 

at a press conference a few months ago. 

 

We’ll know that Mr. Schubert’s departure after 27 years of 

service is a great loss. Mr. Schubert is an expert in the insurance 

industry. The minister has said, and I quote, on May 5 he says, 

“We’ll run Crown corporations like a business.” 

 

To the minister: what other successful businesses does he know 

of that ignores the advice of the people who run those 

companies? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, in this particular 

reference, Jon Schubert has provided excellent advice to this 

government over the first 11 months in operation. I have been 

happy to take his advice. I am happy to see the way that he has 

run the Crown corporation over the last 11 months. 

 

I would like the hon. member opposite — and I know members 

of the media have spoken to Mr. Schubert directly — if you 

don’t have faith in what I’m saying in the House today, you can 

contact Mr. Schubert and ask for his reasons why he’s moving 

to British Columbia to be the head of the Insurance Corporation 

of British Columbia. He’s done a great job here. I wish him 

well going forward. 

 

Yes, we have other talented people that we will bring into 

Saskatchewan to ensure that this corporation is run in an 

efficient manner. And that’s the job that we’re doing. That’s the 

job that we’ve been tasked to do, and we’ll do it with the best 

possible people we can. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a number of talented 

people that are in charge of our Crown corporations. And the 

previous administration worked extremely hard to have experts 

in their field manage and run those Crown corporations. 

 

Can that minister today assure this House and the people of 

Saskatchewan that the person that is appointed to head up SGI 

will in fact have expertise in the area of insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. The 

person that will be chosen will have the credentials to run the 

corporation in an efficient manner. 

 

I know that she’s trying to get at a political inference here. I 

don’t know if that person’s going to be an NDP supporter or a 

Liberal supporter or a Conservative supporter or a 

Saskatchewan Party supporter. That is immaterial. That person 

will have the . . . We’ll conduct a national search. Right now 

Mr. Earl Cameron, a 35-year veteran of SGI, is the interim 

operator. And I would remind members opposite that people do 

leave the province from time to time to explore other 

opportunities. Mr. Lingenfelter comes to mind, and others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — But more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, we welcome them when they leave, but we welcome 

them when they come back. And we’ll be looking forward to 

that individual coming back to make his contribution in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say this. The 

minister has indicated clearly that he is breaking his own 

commitment to run Crowns like a business by ignoring the 

advice of his own Crown managers and by openly imposing his 

views on the Crowns. At the same time, he refuses to guarantee 

that his plans will not harm the bottom line of those Crowns. 

 

To the minister: will he finally admit that his plan has nothing 

to do with sound business management, nothing to do with 

ensuring Saskatchewan people continue to benefit from a strong 

Crown sector, and everything to do with his decision and his 

party’s decision to undermine those Crown corporations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, why all the doom 

and gloom from the members opposite, especially from that 

member? We had a great day in Saskatchewan yesterday. We 

finally turned the corner with the Crown corporations — no 

more bleeding red ink. Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Today again it’s been reaffirmed 

we have the strongest economy in North America, the largest 

increase in wages — year over year, 5 per cent. Saskatchewan 

is leading the way. Mr. Speaker, 10 per cent reduction in EI 

[employment insurance] recipients in Saskatchewan this year. 

That’s good news for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One year ago, the NDP opposite was running around during the 

election talking about the big bad wolf and using some really 

suspect commercials, Mr. Speaker. That was so last year, Mr. 

Speaker. This year, we’re moving forward. The Crown 

corporations are strengthened. The province is leading North 

America. Mr. Speaker, there’s more to come and it’s all positive 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Enhanced Income Plan for Seniors 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this summer the Saskatchewan Party government asked the 

people of Saskatchewan what we should do with our surplus 

revenue, and we listened. 

 

One of the suggestions we heard is that we must care for those 

who helped build our great province. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

to rise today to inform the House about a very important and 

positive enhancement to the support program for 

Saskatchewan’s seniors. We are making a $19.5 million 

commitment to assist approximately 20,000 low-income seniors 

in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To support our seniors, our 

government is announcing that the maximum benefit for a 

senior receiving the seniors’ income plan, formerly called the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan, will increase by 1,200 per year to a 

maximum annual benefit of $2,280. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — For a two-pensioner household, the 

new maximum benefit will be $1,860 per member. Those 

changes, Mr. Speaker, more than double the previous level of 

benefits. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, 

that there has been no adjustment to this benefit program since 

1992, and as a result, 10,000 fewer seniors currently receive this 

benefit. That is until today, Mr. Speaker. With these new 

changes, an additional 10,000 seniors will now be eligible to 

receive the supplement, bringing the number of seniors 

benefiting under this program back to the 1992 levels. 

 

Not only did the lack of attention to this benefit result in so 

many fewer seniors receiving the benefit, but with the inflation 

of nearly 40 per cent over that same period, Mr. Speaker, 

low-income seniors were forced to spend their retirement 

savings at a higher rate. 

 

It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that seniors receiving the 

seniors’ income plan also receive additional health benefits. As 

the number of those who qualified for the program was reduced, 

those same seniors lost these health benefits, which included 

chiropractic services, eye exams, and a home care subsidy. 

 

My colleague, the Minister of Health, was pleased to join in 

making these changes, and as a result, 10,000 additional 

Saskatchewan seniors will now qualify for these additional 

health benefits. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Eligibility for the seniors’ income plan 

is automatically determined based on your income tax return, so 

there’s no need for our seniors to apply. These changes are to 

come into effect January 2009. And seniors will see the 

increased payment or perhaps even their first payment under the 

program by January 28, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the people that built this province, often 

in tougher economic times and without the benefit of many of 

the pension plans and financial planning tools that are available 

today. Our government is committed to ensuring that everyone 

benefits from the prosperity of our province. This 

announcement will help create a better life for 20,000 

Saskatchewan seniors. 

 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, how appropriate that 

they should benefit through the strength of the great province 

that they helped create. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And thank 

you to the minister for sharing her statement prior to the sitting 

of the House today. And I too join in saying this is a good news 

announcement. This is hopeful for seniors. But I do want to say 

some remarks. And so I appreciate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has the floor. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I do appreciate the floor on this occasion. Of 

course there is a historic surplus in this province in this year, 

and this is a very good thing to be doing. And in fact it was on 

April 17, if the minister recalls, I asked about this in committee 

meetings. Now the reason I asked about this, I asked about why 

was that budget line cut. 

 

There was a cut in that Saskatchewan Income Plan last year by 

this government. Of course they were saying fewer, fewer 

recipients only needed a less amount of money. So before they 

clap too, too much and congratulate themselves too much, this 

is an important thing to remember. 

 

I also have to remark, Mr. Speaker, on the name change. This is 

the third name change in less than a week on this program. I 

hope the minister gets it straight when she gets out there. 

 

I do have three concerns. Of course seniors are living in 

challenging times. They are living in challenging times because 

of issues like property taxes that have not been yet addressed by 

this government. They need to address — as seniors do want to 

stay in their homes — but they’re not addressing an issue that’s 

very important for seniors. 

 

The other issue that they have not addressed, and I hope this 

minister addresses this, is about indexing this. Is she willing to 

index this increase so we don’t get into this political game 

again? The federal government has indexed it so it goes up 

every year to the costs of living. 

 

But the third point, and this is one that I will make sure I ask 

questions because this is a question I know several thousand 

seniors will be asking this February. If you’re living in a 

Saskatchewan housing authority house or apartment, this will 

be clawed back because we know the amount of rent that you 

pay is based on your income. 

 

So will that minister guarantee today that she will make sure 

that seniors will not lose this benefit through the clawback in 

their rents in her housing? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is very, very important. Because when she 

talks about this as 19.6 million, I’m wondering how much will 

she get back through her rent. Mr. Speaker, when she talks 

about the increase that seniors will be getting, they will be 

losing several hundred dollars in their rents if they live in a 

Saskatchewan housing authority apartment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m anxious to see the details. This is very 

hopeful, but I’m not sure it’s completely well thought out yet. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 48, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 

2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 48, The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 

2008 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 49, The Ambulance Amendment 

Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 49, The Ambulance Act, 2008 be now introduced 

and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of 

Death Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 50, 

The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 50, The Missing Persons and Presumption of 

Death Act be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read the second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 51, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 51, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

there were some comments made in the Chamber that I did not 

hear at the time they were made. Overnight I had an opportunity 

to review Hansard, and I wish to bring to your attention these 

comments, Mr. Speaker, and ask that the member who spoke 

them withdraw those remarks. 

 

The remarks come from the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing yesterday afternoon, Mr. Speaker. They 

appear on page 1421 of Hansard. The quote that I refer to, the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing said: 

 

Last week in the House, the member from Regina 

Rosemont read some quotes from the August 29 

Leader-Post. I will take a moment now to address those 

false accusations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in case there’s some discrepancy and 

thought as to whether or not this comes from the media or the 

member of Regina Rosemont, later on that same page the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing says, “So 

clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Regina 

Rosemont should get his facts straight before making baseless 

. . . [allegations].” 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Beauchesne’s both the following statements are 

considered unparliamentary: false statements and deliberate 

falsehoods. Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that you cannot do 

indirectly what you cannot do directly. To say that the member 

from Regina Rosemont was making false accusations is 

tantamount to claiming that he is making false statements or 

deliberate falsehoods. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, since the 

language is clear, it’s reported in Hansard, I ask that you call 

upon the minister to withdraw his remarks and apologize to the 

member of Regina Rosemont and this House for making those 

statements. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw those 

comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member for apologizing to the 

House. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to make a point of order as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may state his point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, 

the member from Regina Northeast made a comment in his 

remarks that suggested this government is engaged in violence 

against seniors and that our government would engage in elder 

abuse. On page 1413 of yesterday’s Hansard, the member said 

and I quote: 

 

. . . how did this government treat them? With the back of 

their hand, that’s how they’re being treated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of this side of the House find these 

remarks offensive. Members on this side take elder abuse very 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

seriously as we do any type of violent behaviour. We find it 

offensive that an hon. member would make these kinds of 

comments, and it’s certainly been a long-standing tradition in 

this House that all people are treated with integrity and respect. 

 

I think these remarks violate that long held principle, and I’d 

ask the member to unconditionally stand, withdraw those 

remarks, and apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw those remarks, and I 

apologize to all the members in the House if I offended 

anybody through my speech. It was not intended to do so. I 

withdraw. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would first of all like to thank the 

two House leaders for bringing forward the points of order and 

in the way you’ve done it. And as well, to say thank you to the 

two members for responding to the points of order. Greatly 

appreciate it. Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Calvert.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek, 

the Minister Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 

opportunity to participate in this debate and support the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents in Thunder Creek are very 

pleased with the contents of this Speech from the Throne. 

Saskatchewan’s greatest strength is our people, Mr. Speaker. 

They always have been. The same can be said for the people in 

Thunder Creek. They are a great strength of this province. 

They’re the salt of the earth. 

 

As well people in our business community are very pleased 

with the Speech from the Throne, and people across this 

province have responded very favourably, Mr. Speaker. 

Initiatives in the speech make us more competitive and will 

attract many more people to the province. Mr. Speaker, 

innovation is a fundamental building block of our economy and 

one of our core economic sectors. 

 

This is why we are now busy building the twin sister of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Innovation 

Saskatchewan. In this session of the legislature, I will have the 

pleasure of introducing an Act to establish Innovation 

Saskatchewan as a special operating agency. Our government 

wants Saskatchewan to be at the very forefront of research and 

innovation. The establishment of Innovation Saskatchewan will 

be the next step towards achieving this goal. 

 

Innovation Saskatchewan will be an agency that will be pivotal 

to the continued creation of a knowledge economy by focusing 

and supporting research initiatives that will attract interest from 

around the world. Innovation Saskatchewan will assist in 

coordinating, focusing, and supporting research activities in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. It will place a special emphasis on 

facilitating the commercialization of innovation and technology. 

The goal of Innovation Saskatchewan will be to enhance our 

competitiveness and productivity, which will ensure growth and 

prosperity now and in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a Saskatchewan where innovation flourishes will 

be a stronger Saskatchewan. And this will allow us to build a 

better life, not just for the people of our province, but also for 

Canada and the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the formation of new partnerships, 

Saskatchewan will begin to explore the advantages and 

innovations that can come from the value-added processing of 

this province’s uranium resource. A few weeks ago, Mr. 

Speaker, I, along with the Minister of Crown Corporations, had 

the pleasure of announcing the establishment of a new 

12-person Uranium Development Partnership. This partnership 

will advise the Government of Saskatchewan on the further 

development of our vast uranium resources. 

 

As the world moves to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, many 

countries, including Canada, are looking to nuclear power as a 

source of clean, reliable energy. The expansion of the nuclear 

industry around the world offers an opportunity for 

Saskatchewan to add value to our raw uranium resources, grow 

our economy, create new jobs, contribute to the reduction of 

greenhouse gas emissions. Led by Dr. Richard Florizone, Mr. 

Speaker, a nuclear physicist and vice-president of finance at the 

University of Saskatchewan, the mandate of the Uranium 

Development Partnership is to identify, evaluate, and make 

recommendations on Saskatchewan-based, value-added 

opportunities in the uranium industry. The partnership includes 

representatives from the University of Regina, the University of 

Saskatchewan, urban and rural municipalities, business, labour, 

First Nations, the environmental community, and Canada’s 

nuclear industry. 

 

The partnership will provide a final report to government by 

March 31, 2009. Also, Mr. Speaker, in the near future we will 

be receiving the findings of a feasibility study into nuclear 

power from Bruce Power, a leading company in nuclear energy 

production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan has been established and has been functioning 

very effectively over the past number of months. It’s a special 

operating agency, Mr. Speaker, led by key economic 

development stakeholders to coordinate the province’s growth 

agenda — its bold and innovative approach to creating lasting 

and permanent economic growth like the kind we are currently 

seeing here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The priorities of Enterprise Saskatchewan are to coordinate and 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

develop programs and policies to encourage the growth and 

expansion of our economy. In this regard, the Premier has 

requested that Enterprise Saskatchewan provide advice to the 

government about future priorities in terms of tax 

competitiveness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our campaign platform from a year ago requires 

that a priority be placed on the long-term solution we promised 

to education property tax burdens. However personal income 

tax rates, corporate tax rates, and small-business tax rates are 

also important factors in any growth agenda. We will be, Mr. 

Speaker, conducting a complete review of barriers to economic 

growth presented by the taxes in this province as they exist at 

their current levels. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier has also requested that Enterprise 

Saskatchewan work with the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership, or STEP, to develop a strategy to diversify our 

export markets and capitalize on the global demand for 

Saskatchewan resources and products. Saskatchewan is 

relatively less dependent on the United States market for our 

exports compared to other provinces. But diversifying our trade 

interests is key, given emerging markets and market 

opportunities, particularly in Asia, Mr. Speaker. In a period of 

growing economic uncertainty centred in the United States, it is 

prudent that we capitalize on the opportunity to increase exports 

to new and emerging markets and diversify our trade 

relationships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have always known that greater things were 

ahead for this province through our innovation, vision, and hard 

work. Recent economic growth figures put us in this province in 

the economic driver’s seat in Canada’s new West and indeed 

the entire nation. 

 

In a recent report, Statistics Canada released its data on the 

growth in value of our international exports as of August 2008. 

They were worth $3.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, making the growth 

in our exports, over the preceding 12 months, 104 per cent. That 

was more than 10 times the national average, Mr. Speaker, and 

by far and away the best record in Canada. This, this, Mr. 

Speaker, is the Saskatchewan of today. 

 

This is a Saskatchewan that has what the world needs. We’re 

the world’s largest producers of uranium and potash. We ship 

more oil to the United States than does the nation of Kuwait. 

And we have seen the petroleum industry invest more than $1 

billion and counting in Crown land rights this year alone. 

 

This is a Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, built upon trade — both 

domestic and international. The growth in our international 

exports is phenomenal. We possess half of Canada’s arable 

acres of farm land and have a world-class ag-bio industry to go 

with them. This is a Saskatchewan with the top two fastest 

growing cities in the country — Saskatoon and Regina — and 

that’s according to the economic rankings from the Conference 

Board of Canada. Mr. Speaker, a recent report by the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business rated more than 100 cities 

on business friendliness. Saskatchewan placed four cities in the 

top 10 as being the most business friendly. Lloydminster placed 

first, Saskatoon fifth, Moose Jaw eighth, and Regina ninth. 

 

As a result of our province’s new prosperity, Mr. Speaker, our 

Premier has made a very significant announcement last week. 

He announced the largest amount of debt reduction in 

Saskatchewan’s history. In less than a year, our province’s debt 

has been reduced from $6.8 billion to 4.2 billion — almost, 

almost, Mr. Speaker, a 40 per cent decrease. 

 

The Premier also announced the largest investment in 

infrastructure in our history at $1.5 billion for the next fiscal 

year. This is a $500 million increase from this fiscal year’s 

record infrastructure investment. Mr. Speaker, he also 

announced the largest income tax reduction in Saskatchewan’s 

history, under which 80,000 people will be removed from 

provincial income tax roles. And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this 

announcement is retroactive to January 1, 2008. Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier also announced the fiscal insurance policy that will 

maintain a $1.9 billion real cash balance in the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund. 

 

The message to everyone, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan is 

open for business. 

 

This is an exciting time of change for Saskatchewan people. 

Our population is growing. There are more people working in 

Saskatchewan than ever before. We lead the nation in economic 

growth, and forecasters believe we will continue to lead the 

country in economic growth next year. Though hard work, 

commitment, and dedication, we will deliver on our plan for 

building a stronger Saskatchewan and a better life for all people 

in this great province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, a stronger economy is not the only thrust of 

this government. Today the Minister of Social Services 

announced a program that will more than double the seniors’ 

income plan or SIP [Saskatchewan Income Plan] benefit from 

$90 to $190 per month for single seniors and from seventy-two 

fifty to $155 each per month for couples. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, alarmingly is the first increase in the SIP 

benefit since 1992. Prior to this change, $15,953.64 was the 

maximum increase for a single senior to be eligible to receive 

benefits. The new maximum is raised, Mr. Speaker, to 

$18,593.64 for a couple. And the previous maximum was 

25,964.64 for singles, and the new maximum, Mr. Speaker, is 

$30,188.64. As a result of this new $19.5 million investment, 

the number of Saskatchewan seniors eligible for SIP will double 

from about 10,000 to 20,000. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, our Health minister has 

announced an addition to the financial benefits. Seniors eligible 

for SIP will continue to receive the following health care 

services: a free eye examination every year, free chiropractic 

services without charge, reduced deductible on prescription 

drug plan, home care subsidy, exemption from many of the 

charges under the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 

program, and the loan of some low-cost devices through the 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council, lower cost private and dental 

services, an additional supplementary health benefits for SIP 

recipients living in special care homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of government that we are in 

Saskatchewan now, this in contrast, Mr. Speaker, to those 

members opposite and the government that they ran before the 

last election. 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this Hon. Assembly, the member 

from Regina Northeast said these words, and I quote from 

Hansard, Mr. Speaker. He said, referring to our government, 

Mr. Speaker, he said, “They handed us a province of prosperity 

and how did this . . .” 

 

He’s referring to seniors in this quote. 

 

They handed us a province of prosperity. And how did 

this government treat them [he said]? With the back of 

their hand, that’s how they’re being treated. And that’s 

shameful, Mr. Speaker, shameful. 

 

[14:45] 

 

That’s what he said, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

what I think is shameful. I think it’s shameful that in 16 years 

this bunch opposite didn’t have the decency, didn’t have the 

decency to raise the SIP benefits for the last 15 of those 16 

years. That, Mr. Speaker, is shameful. And for that member to 

stand and call our government shameful, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I am reminded of the fact that 

members are not to comment on Speaker’s rulings or any 

rulings in the Assembly, and I would ask members to be 

mindful of the rules and procedures of the Assembly. Member 

from Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I look forward 

to supporting this Speech from the Throne, and I will not be 

supporting the politically based amendment to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to stand and speak on this important 

occasion to reply to the Throne Speech 2008. 

 

I also want to take a moment and join in the welcomes and best 

wishes to our newest MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], the member for Cumberland. I have every 

confidence that he will do an outstanding job representing the 

good folks of the North. He has a lot of experience and good 

common sense that will serve this House well. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I represent several diverse communities in 

Saskatoon Centre — the downtown area, parts of Mount Royal, 

Westmount, Riversdale, Pleasant Hill, and of course my home 

neighbourhood, Caswell. In fact I believe we are all about 

community — healthy, vibrant, growing, safe, fun, nurturing, 

and inclusive places to raise our families and to work. 

 

Of course there’s been many successes in my riding, and I think 

of the River Landing as a wonderful example and the role that 

the provincial government had in that through the UDA [urban 

development agreement], Persephone, the AKA art gallery, the 

Open Door Society. But of course there’s some extreme 

disappointments. Station 20 West still hangs a pall over the 

neighbourhood. And there are some current challenges. We 

look forward to the St. Mary project being completed. That’s a 

very important one, and we look forward to that. 

 

But I do have to raise the concern about what many describe as 

a food desert in the centre of Saskatoon. Ironically this morning 

as some of you were listening to the radio, you would have 

heard somebody talk from the neighbourhood about the two 

liquor stores that the government has, but will not take part in 

any food initiatives, any retail food initiatives in the core 

communities. In my own neighbourhood, Mayfair Pool is one, 

and it really demonstrates how important infrastructure is. 

 

And of course we read last week about Saskatoon and how it 

may be operating in a deficit soon, and they need help. This 

province is sitting on historic surpluses, and they need to deliver 

on the municipal revenue sharing This is an important issue 

when we talk to people. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the number one issue this winter around the 

kitchen tables in Saskatoon Centre will be affordability. I’m 

very concerned about how quickly the new government and this 

Premier has grown out of touch with the cost of living facing so 

many in Saskatchewan. Of course the news last week was 

encouraging. The news last couple of weeks was encouraging. 

The income tax cuts and the application of part of the surplus 

by the provincial debt — that’s very important. That’s good 

news. But of course this is a continuation of the strategies of the 

NDP in 2000 and years since. 

 

But I can point to a number of areas which affordability is 

affecting the quality of life for everyone, including food, fuel 

prices, utility rates, local taxes, and housing costs. They’re all 

increasing, yet the Sask Party continues to provide very little 

focused relief to many vulnerable families. We’ve seen very 

little property tax relief, no commitment to the lowest cost 

bundle, and a flip-flop on a promise to lower the taxes on gas. 

And in fact they made this promise to reduce the tax on gas 

when they were in opposition. In fact last week the Premier 

acknowledged that this promise was, and I quote, a “gimmicky” 

program. 

 

Now we can only ask what others, what other promises and 

commitments were only a gimmick to get elected. Was his 

pledge for permanent property tax relief a gimmick? Was his 

pledge to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 a 

gimmick? And for the member from Silver Springs who talked 

an awful lot about indexing the minimum wage, was that a 

gimmick? 

 

Now I have to quote the Canadian Taxpayers Federation. I’m 

not used to quoting them, but in a recent news release they said, 

and I quote: 

 

This about-face on gas taxes reminds us of Agriculture 

Minister Bob Bjornerud’s recent confession. “In 

opposition, I could just say about anything I wanted and I 

did on a lot of occasions for 12 years.” Lots of opposition 

thunder, [but] no government rain. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is clearly going to be a topic around my 

kitchen tables in my riding this winter and one this government 

seems to be turning a deaf ear to. Shame, shame. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as the critic for Social Services I want to 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

spend some time now reviewing the vision or lack thereof of the 

Ministry of Social Services. Clearly the government under the 

leadership of this Premier is failing here, after a very rough start 

last year by not recognizing the critical issues of those living 

with disabilities in last year’s Throne Speech, and since 

careening through the spring budget by rewriting sections of it 

regarding the modernization fiasco — and I do have to ask 

what’s happening with that — and a last-minute housing task 

force. 

 

And then this summer was marked by the demise of a very 

important housing program, NHOP [neighbourhood home 

ownership program], running out of cash in less than six months 

and absolutely no new housing starts out of this government — 

and in fact a cut of some $5 million in the housing budget, 

something that is not lost on our post-secondary students as 

they wonder what do they have to do to get the attention of this 

government. And now we hear in the news over the last couple 

of weeks issues being raised about the safety of children in 

foster care by her own employees. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government with a historic surplus now 

had an opportunity to do really something very momentous, but 

they chose not to. So many are talking in Canada and this 

province — in fact around the world — about the elimination of 

poverty. This is a real challenge for our country and our 

province and I challenge this government to make real history 

and join in and make poverty history. 

 

I want to focus my remarks on the lost opportunity. In fact 

many will look back at this time when the Premier was talking 

about, and I quote, “a better life.” But he only meant that for a 

few, not everyone. Well everyone is talking about this and 

asking, what is this government’s plan to eliminate poverty? 

Sadly there is no plan and with the historic resources we have in 

this province, the opportunity to really make history was lost. 

 

Now the member from Regina Northeast quoted, and I want to 

quote this news article that came out on Monday from Ottawa. 

It was about a poll. It says, “Majority of Canadians want gov’t 

action, study finds.” And I quote: 

 

The vast majority of Canadians want the federal and 

provincial governments to lead a war on poverty . . . 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

Ninety per cent said they would be proud if their premier 

took the lead in reducing poverty in their province, it 

noted, adding that 88 per cent also said they want Canada 

to be a leader in poverty reduction, and 77 per cent said 

that a recession is all the more reason to act now. 

 

Well the National Council of Welfare says, and I quote: 

 

A renewed response to poverty in Canada must come 

from not just feelings of charity towards “the poor.” It 

must also come from a strong commitment to an equitable 

and just society, and must address the underlying reasons 

why poverty exists in the first place. 

 

The National Council of Welfare, which advises the federal 

Minister of Human Resources and Social Development, talk 

about a four-cornerstone approach to eliminate poverty, and I 

challenge this government to think about this. 

 

The first thing they talk about is a long-term vision with 

measurable targets and timelines. The second is a plan of action 

and budget. Third is a government accountability, and fourth — 

and I think this is a very important one — a set of agreed 

poverty indicators that will be used to plan, monitor, and assess 

progress in this very important issue. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would urge the government to make the 

commitment to end poverty now and work to make this a 

reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the speech talks a great line about children and 

those at risk, but here we have a minister being allowed to break 

a key promise, being allowed to break a key promise of this 

government to reconvene the Special Committee To Prevent the 

Abuse and Exploitation of Children through the Sex Trade. This 

is very, very important. And of course you’ve all seen the 

letters, and the letter is very public, about the mandate each 

minister is required to do. So we do have that in front of us. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would say that this report — and I know 

many people in this House were part of that — it really is a time 

to take a look at it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s two words not in this report that I think are 

very, very important. Now I wonder if people could take a 

guess what those two words are. Mr. Speaker, the first word 

that’s not in this report is gangs. This report does not mention 

gangs. This is really amazing — nine years ago, what’s 

happening with that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second word — and the Premier would be 

very interested in this because I know last week in his backyard 

in Swift Current there were examples of this very thing — the 

other word that’s not mentioned in this report is the Internet. 

The Internet is not mentioned in this report, but we know . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And it needs work. This report needs 

work, so reconvene the committee. It needs work. Clearly it’s 

time to keep that promise. Don’t break that promise. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, this summer in June the Saskatchewan 

Children’s Advocate called for the adoption of child-centred 

principles by this government. In fact we heard a former 

member of that caucus stand in the House a couple of years ago, 

talk about the principles, and it seemed like they were on the 

verge of endorsing that. But clearly the minister is backing 

away. She said this summer that she is going to hire a senior 

official. We’re looking forward to hearing what the senior 

official will do. And I’ve asked questions — in fact today, 

written questions — to find out if she’s actually making any 

progress on this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we were delighted to hear last week that the 

announcements made by the ministry around those living with 

disabilities are coming forward. I was encouraged that now the 

minister’s actually paying attention to this issue. I think the 

work in terms of group homes and the income security for those 

living with disabilities is a very important issue. We do not 

want to see her falter. We want to make sure this is well thought 

out, all the angles are covered off on this, and we look forward 

to seeing more about this. But I know many of us are concerned 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

about the lack of details. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well this fall saw a series of CBO summits 

were held across the province. That was a very important 

occasion, a very good occasion for people to get together. I do 

have to say the process was good, but it’s creating some 

concerns about, will this continue on? Will this continue on? 

The CBO sector, I met with some of the folks yesterday who 

were very concerned that this was just yet one more gimmick in 

the government’s many list of gimmicks, and do they really 

have the will to make this happen? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we heard today . . . And it was another very 

hopeful announcement in terms of the Saskatchewan Income 

Plan, then it became the Saskatchewan assistance income plan, 

and now it’s the seniors’ income plan. I’m very hopeful that this 

will be well received by seniors, but I know that there are some 

concerns. And I would urge this government to consider 

indexing it like their federal counterparts so it is not a political 

issue — that seniors will know that every year that it will go up 

with the cost of living. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I said in my remarks earlier, I do have 

some concerns — very much, very deep concerns about what 

will happen in January with the rents of many seniors, in fact 

thousands of seniors, who live in Saskatchewan housing 

authority units. And will they see their rents go up accordingly? 

And it should be no surprise to the folks over on the other side. 

In fact all of us will be receiving phone calls from seniors about 

drastic rent increases in February. So I would ask them today to 

make sure that doesn’t happen because I can see that train 

coming down the tracks. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago there was the release 

of the 2008 Saskatoon homeless count. And this was the count 

of the folks who had, by no choice of their own, been forced out 

of homes and they were out on the streets or in emergency 

shelters. And this was taken on May 22, 2008. Very interesting 

results here, Mr. Speaker. They found that there was about 260 

people in Saskatoon — 228 adults and 32 children — who were 

counted as being homeless. What I found most amazing though 

and shameful was the fact that 70 per cent, nearly 70 per cent of 

the people interviewed in shelters were actually employed. And 

so here’s a very drastic example of people who cannot afford 

housing on their own. And this really underlines the issues 

around housing. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And we know, particularly this week as we come close to the 

end of the month, many are going to be faced with that 

challenge of paying rent or being evicted or the challenges of 

paying the bills. And so we worry about this. We worry as the 

second winter of this government comes forward that what are 

the families going to do? We know for example Alberta is 

divvying up $254 million for affordable housing, and Calgary 

alone will get 48 million. But what did we see in this past 

budget? It was the cut of $5 million. So with historic surpluses, 

why didn’t they act this fall? This is truly tragic. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there needs to be a lot of work done 

on this. And as official opposition, we saw that there was very 

sound strategies right across Canada. And we talked about the 

Federation of Canadian Municipalities sustaining the 

momentum, recommendations for a national action plan on 

housing and homelessness that called on three levels of 

government as partners to come forward — both the provincial, 

federal, and the municipal levels of government — to come 

together and make housing a priority. 

 

We know, we know — and I’m looking forward to this year’s 

budget — that the federal government’s commitment to 

homelessness ends on March 31. Will this government pick up 

the slack, or will there be no resources for those who are forced 

to live on the streets? Now we don’t want to see that happening 

at the end of winter. Here’s the second winter of the Sask Party 

government coming forward. We want to see action today. 

 

And I’ve outlined some of the fiascos that have happened: the 

NHOP program this summer — students are wondering what do 

they have to do to get more housing in Saskatoon and Regina, 

right across the province — and of course this homelessness 

count. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down, there’s two issues I do 

want to talk about, issues that are very near to my heart and 

people that are talking about it across the street. I do have some 

concerns. 

 

The environment. The comments that were made about 

environment were in fact very weak in the Throne Speech. And 

I do worry very much about the weakening commitment 

regarding reducing greenhouse emission targets. This is 

worrisome. The whole concern about water and their view on 

water . . . And of course I am very concerned that in the Throne 

Speech there was not at all a mention about recycling. 

 

Last night we were at the SARCAN reception. But in the 

Throne Speech, not a word about recycling. And I know when 

we travel about — whether it’s Humboldt or Melfort, North 

Battleford, Melville — recycling is a priority. And I can’t 

imagine why did it not make it into the Throne Speech. 

 

And I do have to say that I share the concerns from my 

colleague from Prince Albert regarding the panel on nuclear 

energy. This panel I think . . . I think we have to do a lot of 

good work in this area, but clearly this panel, the way it is made 

up is not very balanced at all. And with the three million fund to 

minister, this seems like . . . And he called it a $3 million rubber 

stamp, and I have to tell you, I agree. I wonder about the 

fullness of the discussion in allaying the concerns of citizens 

across this province. Will they have confidence in this panel? I 

have some real concerns. 

 

Three points about labour before I sit down. One, I am so glad 

to see WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] is taking a 

Mission: Zero, but I hope that doesn’t mean a Mission: Zero 

reducing statistics. We want to see reduction in injuries. This is 

very, very important. 

 

I also want to make sure when they talk about youth in the 

workforce, that they make sure youth are in schools and doing 

the things they should be doing in terms of education and 

training. 

 

And I am concerned about what’s happening with minimum 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

wage. I have not heard anything about that, and the noise from 

over there is deafening on this. There’s just absolutely no talk 

about indexing. They were big on indexing when they were in 

opposition, here they have something they can do for seniors 

and those working for minimum wage. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to, before I sit down, say of 

course this is Education Week. And I want to wish the students 

and staff in my schools the very best and right across this 

province. There are many challenges facing students and 

families and teachers, and we want to make sure that this 

government gives them all the support that they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hopes are being nurtured here with historic 

surpluses. This government has put forward some very bold 

and, I think, encouraging ideas, but I want to make sure that 

they don’t dash them on the details. Details are very important. 

Be very clear about that. 

 

In my riding, a lot of people have heard the talk about next year 

country, and they’re saying next year country should be this 

year, but you know some are saying they’re worried that it’s 

actually last year. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, as I say, I see too many questions are 

being raised by this Throne Speech, not enough details and so 

just a don’t-mess-it-up approach. And so I will be voting for the 

amendment, and I will be voting against the main motion. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

privilege to rise and speak in favour of the Speech from the 

Throne. We’ve entered a new mindset in Saskatchewan, a new 

understanding, and a new direction in this province. These are 

exciting times and I’m proud to stand here, with my elected 

colleagues in government, to support the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

I’d also like to express my gratitude to the people of Moose Jaw 

who have shown continued support and encouragement to me 

and to this government. I’d also like to recognize my wife, 

Debbie, who has occasionally had to change plans quick to 

come and support me at some of the functions that we attend 

together. 

 

In the Speech from the Throne there are great benefits for all the 

people of this great province. The potential of Saskatchewan’s 

resources are not new, but now this wealth is being developed 

and transformed into a benefit for all our citizens, even our 

country, and even in fact benefiting parts of the entire world. 

 

We have a responsibility to do the right thing, using a common 

sense approach to develop our resources and to grow the 

province, making it a stronger Saskatchewan, a better life for all 

our citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michelson: — This really is a beautiful province. What I 

don’t understand is why the members opposite believe that 

they’re the saviours of Saskatchewan. Perhaps they do deserve 

a little bit of credit for addressing the deficit back in 1991. 

However as any business knows, you cannot cut your way into 

prosperity. 

 

The NDP cut services. They raised taxes. They discouraged 

investment and rejected growth. Unbalanced labour legislation; 

huge regulatory roadblocks that stopped investment; 

overtaxation; overregulated, unbalanced labour laws did not 

allow this province to grow and to advance. Why was our 

neighbour to the west allowed to get so far ahead of us in 

growth and benefits to its people when Saskatchewan is a 

province that has a huge resource revenue in a variety of sectors 

that need to be developed for the benefit of our citizens? 

 

Let me say this. Our biggest consumer, our neighbours to the 

south, are the biggest consumers of natural gas and petroleum 

products. They’re relying on foreign producers, and they are 

working day and night with their scientists trying to find 

alternatives to the gas and the oil that we possess. And as 

technology increases and the prices come down from the new 

hydrogen cars and electric cars, there will be less value in the 

product that we are marketing to them today. We need to 

capitalize on the market while it’s there, or forever leave what is 

a valuable commodity in the ground and lose the benefit for our 

people. And this government is expanding on that. 

 

Saskatchewan has a magnificence that is unparalleled, and our 

biggest asset of course is our people. We’re a hardy bunch. 

We’re aggressive. Willingness to work, and eager to provide 

with passion and caring and with an innovation spirit. There are 

dozens of manufacturers that help support this economy, and I 

would like to recognize Doepker Industries and congratulate 

them, after 60 years in business, of being inducted to the 

Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame at the ABEX 

[Achievement in Business Excellence] awards last weekend. 

 

Our people in towns and cities and rural Saskatchewan conduct 

business, attend schools and colleges, and worship together, 

caring and sharing. People whose origins come from several 

countries of the world developed a uniqueness of community, 

built an understanding of culture differences, and a commitment 

to share, co-operate, achieve, and assist. Many people who 

struggle through drought and depression, and with 

determination and perseverance were able to fashion a society 

of acceptance and understanding in this blessed province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My parents and grandparents were these kinds of people. And 

whereas my parents have since passed away, Mr. Speaker, I was 

pleased to have my mom’s sister, Frances Keller, attend the 

Speech from the Throne last Wednesday. It was her 92nd 

birthday. This was the first time she had the honour of being 

seated in your chambers and hear the words presented on the 

progress of the new direction of our great province. 

 

This province has more potential than most countries. Consider 

the advantages we have over every other jurisdiction in the 

world. We have an abundance of farm land; almost half the 

arable agricultural land in Canada is in Saskatchewan. The 

world’s largest potash deposits, the world’s largest uranium 

deposits, gas, oil, coal, forestry, diamonds, and even other 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

precious metals. Mr. Speaker, this is our province. This is our 

people. 

 

This is the rebirth of Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan — 

considerate, caring, and a wealth potential from a huge resource 

base. And now a government with compassion, a government 

with a strong sense of forward thinking to benefit all the people 

of Saskatchewan. This was the message of the Throne Speech, 

“A Stronger Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” 

 

Over the weekend I had the opportunity to do some shopping in 

my hometown of Moose Jaw during the Christmas in October 

promotion. I was finding that a 10-minute shopping stop was 

taking 40 minutes, an hour, as people were stopping and 

commenting on the progress of this province. Saskatchewan is 

on a roll, they’d say. Keep on going. We really like what you’re 

doing. Saskatchewan has never done better. Thanks for doing 

what you’re doing because we don’t ever want to go back. 

 

People would actually go out of their way to express their 

appreciation for what this government has and is doing to create 

a stronger Saskatchewan, a better life for everyone. Yes, 

Saskatchewan has been enjoying a rebirth — a rebirth that has 

initiated wealth creation, investment, job opportunities, 

security, and a renewal of social consciousness. 

 

During the summer I met with some of the community 

organizations that were pleading for help. Their stringent 

budgets had drastically limited the support programs. And even 

with their dedicated efforts of many of these community-based 

organizations, they had a difficult time reacting to the needs of 

the people they were serving. I was told that the basic food 

budget for an individual was $4 and change, per day, per 

individual. 

 

They were having a very difficult time keeping qualified staff, 

as these community-based organizations were unable to 

compete with wages. And as you know, a change of staffing 

every few months has a negative effect on the people that they 

were trying to support. 

 

Well early last fall these community organizations received the 

largest single-year increase to assist recruitment and retention. 

And in this Throne Speech, the government is prepared to enter 

into a long-term, stable funding agreement to assist these 

community-based organizations. A stronger Saskatchewan. A 

better life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Moose Jaw has, I suppose, arguably a 

higher than average percentage of senior citizens. Many of them 

do very well for themselves, like my mother-in-law, Mary 

Sinkewicz, who incidentally celebrated her 97th birthday on 

Friday. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, some of our seniors have been faced 

with significant challenges as living costs increase. We have 

heard the cry of many of those seniors, and I am so delighted 

that this government, announced by our Minister of Social 

Services today, said that the seniors . . . announcing a senior’s 

income plan benefit will be increased from 90 to $190 per 

month for singles and from 72.50 to $155 per month for 

doubles. That’s a great announcement. This doubles the amount 

the seniors will be receiving. 

 

This government has also increased the maximum income for 

seniors to be eligible for receiving benefits, doubling the 

number of seniors eligible for seniors’ income plan — doubling 

the amount and doubling the numbers of seniors on the plan. 

This is significant. This is very significant. This is perhaps the 

most significant humanitarian announcement we have made for 

these people who rightly deserve the dignity and respect of a 

province of plenty. 

 

What is difficult to understand is how the NDP ignored the 

seniors of this province. For 16 years, seniors have not seen an 

increase, and it was because again of the uncaring performance 

of the NDP. Since 1992 the NDP did nothing for seniors’ 

assistance. Sixteen years and did not increase the income plan. 

Sixteen years they ignored the seniors even though there was a 

serious need. And the gall to say that we are treating them 

poorly when it was that government that refused to address the 

urgent necessity. Mr. Speaker, this is outrageous and 

disgraceful. 

 

Today we announced the need that seniors were looking for. 

Today seniors will be able to live a lifestyle of respect and 

dignity because this government cares about our seniors. A 

stronger Saskatchewan, a better life for seniors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, families and family life is the 

future of our society, and they will be assisted with an 

additional investment of $1.7 billion for increased licensed care 

child spaces. 

 

There’s been a need for support programs for people with 

disabilities and the Speech from the Throne has addressed this 

along with an increase to the amount people can earn before 

their support payments are reduced. Support for people with 

disabilities is a priority of this government, and we are 

committed to ensuring that everyone in Saskatchewan benefits 

from the province’s prosperity. 

 

Increase in tourism funding, cracking down on crime stemming 

from activities of gangs, new witness protection — it’s all part 

of a strong Saskatchewan and a better life. 

 

The rebirth of Saskatchewan started almost a year ago when the 

ready-for-growth agenda came into being. An unprecedented 

investment to Saskatchewan’s infrastructure was committed and 

has proven to be a strategy for growth. With the financial world 

in an unstable situation as hasn’t been experienced before, 

Saskatchewan has been positioned for growth and is forecast to 

lead the country in economic gains again in the coming year. It 

has been that foresight, that positive, forward thinking, and the 

strategy for growth that has set us apart from most jurisdictions 

in North America. We are looking at continuing the growth 

agenda and even greater investment in infrastructure. 

 

Growth is impossible without infrastructure to support it. After 

years of disrepair and neglect, we are a government that really 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

gets it. Highways will continue to be rebuilt and repaired. A 

significant proportion of the 1.5 billion infrastructure 

commitment will go toward fixing highways. Travel will be 

safer. Products can be transported to and from supply centres 

and marketing points. Travellers and vacationers can tour 

Saskatchewan to enjoy the parks and recreation facilities. 

Highways build a stronger Saskatchewan, a better life. 

 

Through this infrastructure program, schools will be built where 

needed. Repairs will be made as required. So far over $117 

million has been committed and an additional $60 million has 

been announced for projects to begin in 2009. 

 

My constituency in Moose Jaw has received funding for health 

and safety upgrades at Central Collegiate, improved 

accessibility at Peacock Collegiate, and mechanical system 

upgrades at St. Agnes School. We are also committed to 

ensuring schools have the best technology available. Education 

providing skills and knowledge build a stronger Saskatchewan, 

a better life. 

 

The city of Moose Jaw was approved for industry loans to help 

meet the growing demands for residential lots and 

infrastructure. And Moose Jaw is really no different than many 

of the Saskatchewan communities where the challenge of 

growth are becoming burdensome, and this government is 

committed to helping with the growth initiative program and is 

further committed to a long-term solution for a new 

revenue-sharing agreement with municipalities. Supporting 

municipalities creates a stronger Saskatchewan, a better life. 

 

Health care has continued to be a challenge and our government 

has moved to provide additional nursing staff with the 

recruitment of 300 Filipino nurses and more to follow. We have 

increased the number of undergraduate seats and new residency 

seats. And we have unveiled plans to add 40 new undergraduate 

seats and 60 new residency positions, as well as a 

comprehensive physician recruitment strategy, and a 

patient-first review to measure the quality of patients’ 

experience with the health care system. 

 

At this time I want to assure my constituents and all the citizens 

of Moose Jaw, and in fact the citizens of the Five Hills Health 

Region, which include the constituents of my colleagues in 

Thunder Creek and Wood River, that the plans for the Moose 

Jaw Union Hospital are moving forward. The plan for the union 

hospital is not like any other construction project. The planning 

stage encompasses time of identifying, planning, and processing 

the needs of the city and the region. 

 

Understanding the needs, calculating the current structural 

conditions, assessing the outlook of the entire Five Hills Health 

Region, and creating a plan is part of the preparation steps, and 

these are being done. The Moose Jaw Union Hospital is a 

priority, and for the local health board this has been an 

important issue for years. The city has also recognized this and 

added a hospital levy to the residential tax for the city portion of 

the upgrades. 

 

It is unfortunate that the former government had no record, no 

intentions of upgrading the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. It is 

apparent that the NDP agenda was to move the services to 

Regina and close the medical facilities in Moose Jaw just as 

they have closed dozens of rural hospitals in the 1993. The plan 

for the upgrades of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker, are moving forward. Quality health care makes a 

stronger Saskatchewan, a better life, and we’re working towards 

that. 

 

Infrastructure is an important part of the rebirth of our province. 

I’ve been told by numerous constituents that we are on the right 

course. However infrastructure is only part of the growth 

agenda for a stronger Saskatchewan and a better life. The 

reduction of tax is a major step to a better life. Now everyone 

over 18 who files a tax return in Saskatchewan will benefit from 

this tax reduction. That’s over 700,000 residents. 

 

If you pay income tax currently, you will see a significant tax 

cut. If you are lower income and don’t pay income tax, you will 

see a larger refundable tax credit payment that you will receive 

every three months. Some residents will benefit from both 

measures, depending on the income, and 80,000 Saskatchewan 

residents will no longer pay provincial income taxes at all. A 

stronger Saskatchewan, a better life. 

 

Another significant part of a stronger Saskatchewan is the debt 

reduction. This government has paid down the provincial debt 

by one-third and will continue to work toward debt reduction. 

The debt reduction will save $90 million in interest over four 

years . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 900 million. Debt 

reduction, tax cuts, infrastructure investment are important 

points for the growth of this province. Along with this growth is 

the caring of our people, our less fortunate, our aged, our 

disabled, our First Nations and Métis. As Saskatchewan 

continues to grow everyone is entitled to benefits. The Speech 

from the Throne provides benefits to all citizens of the province 

in an affordable, caring concept, enriching the lives of every 

citizen. 

 

This government is committed to the common sense of making 

our province a stronger Saskatchewan, a better life, and these 

values are reflected in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I am in support of the Speech from the Throne for a stronger 

Saskatchewan, a better life. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just 

check my little watch here and away we go. It’s a privilege to 

take part in this debate and I’m glad to do so. The good people 

of Regina Elphinstone-Centre have sent me to speak to some of 

their concerns, and I will certainly try to live up to advocating 

in their interest in this speech, as I do in the job that I have the 

privilege to do day to day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do want to start off by saying thank you to my wife, Kelly, to 

my father and my mother, to family and friends. As is often 

pointed out in this House by a number of MLAs, it’s very hard 

to do that job with its varying demands and pressures on 

schedule, on family time, that you couldn’t do it without the 

support of your family. So I want to say thank you very much to 

my loved ones right off the top, Mr. Speaker. 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

I want to say thank you to Colleen Smith and the folks who help 

me do my job, the constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

There’s always a lot going on there, Mr. Speaker. And I am 

very well served and the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

are very well served by the diligent, compassionate work of a 

person like Colleen Smith. And I want to go on record stating 

my thankfulness for being able to work with her. 

 

And lastly, for the immediate thank yous, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to say thank you to the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre for 

again sending me to this Assembly to work with them, to work 

for them. Regina Elphinstone-Centre is such a diverse place. 

It’s a very exciting place. It’s got its problems to be sure, Mr. 

Speaker. But in terms of diversity, in terms of down-to-earth 

people that are generous, that are caring, that are 

compassionate, that are community minded, Mr. Speaker, I 

couldn’t ask for a better place to live or to have grown up and to 

make my home there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say some congratulations, off the top, as well. And 

first off is to the new member for Cumberland. And I’ve known 

this individual for a number of years. When he stepped forward 

for the by-election or for the nomination, it wasn’t the first time 

I’d met him. But I’ve always been struck by his thoughtfulness, 

by his passion for people, by his down-to-earth nature. I think 

he brings a lot of common sense to this Assembly and to our 

caucus, and certainly a lot of grace under pressure as well, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d seen him work very hard in the by-election, and I 

know that that work has continued from there. 

 

And I know that the constituency of Cumberland, it’s such a 

varied and beautiful place. And again, in terms of the different 

issues that face the people of northern Saskatchewan and the 

people of Cumberland, I think they’ve chosen well in terms of 

selecting somebody that’s going to work very hard on their 

behalf and on their interests. 

 

And I know as well he’s also a proud Métis individual and is 

tied very well into the First Nations communities of 

Cumberland as well. And I guess in terms of the work that I 

strive to do as the First Nations and Métis Relations critic for 

the official opposition, I look very much to Doyle in terms of 

advice and to help me in the job I do as a . . . [inaudible] . . . 

politician. But I’m very glad to be in this Assembly with the 

new member from Cumberland, and I look forward to the great 

work that he’s going to do in caucus and on behalf of the people 

who sent him here. 

 

[15:30] 

 

I also want to say a word of thanks to my leader, to the Leader 

of the Official Opposition, the member for Riversdale. Of 

course there’s been a great deal of interest in the House as to 

what are his future plans and what’s to come with the NDP. But 

I want to go on record saying that this is an individual who’s 

done so much for the province in advancing the cause of social 

democracy in Saskatchewan and in Canada. This is an 

individual who led a government that was very much guided by 

his maxim that you must have economic progress to secure 

social progress but that you must not make economic progress 

that doesn’t bring social progress. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Mr. McCall: — So we weren’t always successful. We had our 

failures certainly. We had things that we would have liked to 

have done more of. We had things that certainly we look with 

great interest on the resources at the disposal of the members 

opposite and the choices that they have the great fortune to be 

making in terms of public policy. 

 

But I know this for a fact, Mr. Speaker, that under the 

leadership of the member from Riversdale, we had more than 

our share of victories won and progress made too for the 

people. And that son of South Hill, Moose Jaw led us well, 

served the people of Saskatchewan well, and I want to thank 

him for it. And as we determine the next leader for the 

Saskatchewan New Democratic Party, we know that the current 

Leader of the Opposition has done much to add to the very high 

standards that we’ve got in the CCF-NDP [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party] for our 

leaders. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCall: — I’d like to say a bit about the way that the 

Throne Speech intersects with the issues that are raised with me 

in Regina Elphinstone-Centre and the way that I think it’s being 

received by the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

And it’s always interesting to listen to political speeches, Mr. 

Speaker, depending on who’s giving them of course. Credit for 

everything good is taken by one side and blame is given to the 

other side for anything bad. Of course I’m not going very much 

in that course, but I am going to try to be somewhat thoughtful 

in pointing out where I think good things are being done and 

equally thoughtful in pointing out where this government needs 

to pull up its socks and where I think the job isn’t getting done. 

 

And I’ll try to do this first in regards to how I see the Throne 

Speech affecting the constituents I represent, the issues that 

they bring forward, and then I’ll move into some commentary 

based more in my critic duties around First Nations and Métis 

Relations. 

 

In the announcements that immediately preceded the Throne 

Speech, there was talk around paying down debt and the debt 

actually paid down. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 

great. I think that they should pay down the debt because of 

course, as has been owned up by members opposite in some of 

their more honest moments, they had something to do with it 

being racked up in the first place. So I’m glad to see the debt 

paydown. 

 

In terms of infrastructure, again it’s good to see. You’ve got the 

money; you should be investing in infrastructure. In terms of 

the $1.9 billion in reserves, well you know, Mr. Speaker, how 

the times have changed. I haven’t been in this House for 100 

years, but I’ve certainly been here long enough to recall the 

members opposite practically losing their minds about the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund — how it was a slush fund and a 

mountain of money and a card trick and so on. And that of 

course was when we put aside a few hundred million dollars. Of 

course $1.9 billion, you know we had no idea, Mr. Speaker, 

how much you could put aside. So how things have changed. 

 

Tax cuts, again okay by me. Good to see some of the money 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

coming back to the people of the province. Glad to see the 

benefits to families, and also glad to see the increase to the 

low-income tax credit. Glad to see today’s announcement 

around seniors, but a number of questions arise. 

 

First, how will this net out? Will we see the government giving 

with one hand only to take with the other? The cost of living is 

going up dramatically. Taxes are one very important component 

of the cost of living that the government controls. For example, 

Mr. Speaker, the Crowns provide another important 

cost-of-living advantage for the people of Saskatchewan. We 

went forward with the low-cost utility bundle. It was mocked at 

the time by the members opposite. And of course they’ve 

chosen to do away with that. 

 

And again we see continued games with the Sask Party as it 

relates to the Crown sector and as it struggles to realign itself 

with the history and the beliefs of members opposite in terms of 

the virtue, or lack thereof, when it comes to the Crowns. So 

we’re going to be watching very closely. And I think today was 

a fine example of the good work by the member for Coronation 

Park in terms of holding those members to account around the 

Crowns. 

 

I think of students, Mr. Speaker, I think of students and the rise 

in tuition that will almost surely come this spring. Again maybe 

it’s the member from Silver Springs, who says a lot of colourful 

things, but commenting on behalf of the then official 

opposition, he talked about how tuition in Saskatchewan should 

be at the national average at a minimum. And of course, we saw 

how that evolved into the campaign. And they promised one 

year of a freeze, but we’d see after that. But you know, Mr. 

Speaker, students pay an awful lot of tuition. 

 

We put forward a plank in our platform that we thought spoke 

to that. And we still think that members opposite, if they’re 

looking for a tuition-management plan, they should look closely 

at something like tuition cuts and in terms of pegging it to the 

rate of inflation because again, in terms of the investment that a 

society can make, there are few investments more important 

than what you put into education and post-secondary education. 

 

There’s a lot talked about on the other side about the innovation 

economy, the knowledge economy, and if you don’t have 

people getting that post-secondary education or if they’re held 

back, if they’re barred at the door because they haven’t got the 

finances to do it, then we all suffer for that, Mr. Speaker. So 

again I am interested to see what’s to come in the days ahead, 

but I fear that of course tuition’s going to go up and whatever 

gains are made on the one hand in terms of government 

measures will be wiped out on the other. 

 

I think of the cost of housing and the availability of affordable 

housing. Many stories are hitting the press about this, and it’s 

certainly the number one issue raised by a landslide in my 

constituency office, Mr. Speaker. Yet last year the members 

opposite cut the budget for Sask Housing by $5 million. And 

when they finally woke up to the crisis that many people are 

facing in housing, they threw a task force at the problem. Some 

good has come of that, but the fact remains that this government 

has not turned a single spade of dirt on new affordable housing 

units in inner city Regina. 

 

The only new building going on in my home neighbourhood of 

north central Regina is because of Habitat for Humanity, and 

thank goodness for them, Mr. Speaker. But they should not be 

going it alone. One of the things I take great pride in are the 

housing projects that have played a critical role in improving 

the quality of life in inner city Regina. 

 

When we finally got the money together, Mr. Speaker, when we 

finally had the financial wherewithal to go forward with 

housing projects, the first large-scale outbuilding of social 

housing in inner city Regina in two decades, Mr. Speaker . . . 

And we couldn’t build in the ’80s because we had a government 

that could care less, and we couldn’t build in the ’90s, Mr. 

Speaker, because we of course didn’t have the money. 

 

So in terms of the building that’s been able to go forward under 

the leadership of the member for Riversdale, you know, I 

couldn’t be prouder. And I find it passing strange that of course 

one of their first priorities is to do nothing in terms of the 

capital project around housing. 

 

I think of things like the Renaissance retirement village. 

Government partnered in with private sector, securing the 

availability of a number of affordable units in that great new 

building — or that great reused building. It used to be the 

Derrick Building, Mr. Speaker. People called it the derelict 

building. I can remember the then minister, Joanne Crofford, at 

the first meeting for it. I can remember being there for the grand 

opening with the member for Athabasca, and I’m glad to have 

that housing available in downtown Regina. 

 

I think of the Regina Rescue Mission Souls Harbour House on 

the 1400 block of Angus — again another great project, the 

partners with the Porters, the Carrolls, and government 

partnering in with them. I was very happy that that was a 

decision made in terms of the allocation of money. And I was 

very happy to see that project go forward and come along, Mr. 

Speaker. And again the members opposite were happy to be 

there for the ribbon cutting. 

 

And they’re also very happy to be there for the ribbon cutting at 

Maple Leaf Estates in Regina Douglas Park. But you know, it’s 

just a bit outside of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker, 

but it’s right in the middle of core community, one of the larger 

neighbourhoods in my constituency. And I know that that is 

having a good impact in terms of some housing being made 

available and affordable in inner city Regina. But again that was 

a project that we turned sod on, that we put the money forward 

for, and they were of course very happy to show up and cut the 

ribbon. 

 

But would that they could turn some sod on other projects. I 

think of the upwards of 70 units of stand-alone affordable 

housing, two of them right on my home block in the middle of 

north central, Mr. Speaker. I think of the new Canadian family 

from Somalia that lives in the one and the Aboriginal family 

that lives in the other and that — you know, one had been a 

slum house on that lot before, that burned down; the other had 

been a vacant lot that was filled with weeds — and the 

difference that that new affordable housing has made to the 

block and to the neighbourhood and most importantly to those 

families and to those young children that are being brought up 

in a decent, safe, affordable unit of housing instead of being 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

brought up in squalor. 

 

I think about the work that had been done in conjunction with 

The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act and the bylaw 

standards enforcement team in terms of, you know, going 

through chapter and verse, root and branch in terms of going 

after problem housing, substandard housing and the great 

strides that were made there. And of course those entities are 

still doing their work. 

 

But the problem now, Mr. Speaker, whereas before if you had a 

family in a house that needed to be placarded, that should have 

been placarded . . . in some cases they were placarded and then 

demolished, Mr. Speaker. The problem now is that when 

you’ve got people living in substandard housing, there’s a bit of 

a dilemma because there’s no place for these people to go. So 

you get civil servants that are confronted with a choice of do I 

leave people in substandard housing that I know to be 

substandard, or where do I move them to? 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, the fact that before those people were 

able to be moved into other rental housing or into some of the 

new social housing that had come on stream, the fact that there 

hasn’t been sod turned in a year in inner city Regina on new 

affordable social housing, it’s a big problem, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s a big problem that plays itself out in terms of people living 

in conditions that should not be lived in and neighbourhoods 

not being able to live up to their full potential. 

 

So again the members opposite . . . There’s an old adage, Mr. 

Speaker: to whom much is given, much is expected. And of 

course they like to holler back and forth about what did you do, 

and this, that, and the other thing. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 

I think that we did what we could with the resources we had, 

and we worked to build economy, and we worked to build that 

social safety net. 

 

And you know, I’ll have to admit I can’t imagine what it’s like 

to have a mid-term where it’s $3.1 billion in surplus, and the 

kind of choices that you’d be able to make in terms of housing 

and the important issues like that. But if they’re not making 

those decisions, Mr. Speaker, it’s very hard to see how that 

benefit is going to translate to the great many instead of the 

privileged few. 

 

Other great things, the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company] bus depot, the shared facility at Scott Collegiate, the 

new treatment centre over on Victoria, the skills and trade 

centre, the increase to PTA [provincial training allowance], the 

CBO [community-based organization] increase, child care 

spaces in pre-K [pre-kindergarten], I was glad to see them 

address that in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll see 

how those come along. They weren’t in the platform of course, 

but glad to see them catching up. Measures on disabilities — 

sincerely, my compliments — we’ll be watching very closely to 

see how they work out. There are many other things to 

comment on in this regard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I guess the last things I’d like to talk about deal with First 

Nations and Métis relations, and there are some . . . I can’t think 

of another sector in or another area in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, where the challenge is as great. And when you go to 

First Nations and Métis communities and you talk to First 

Nations and Métis people, they know the problems. They know 

the problems in terms of standing on the outside looking in. 

They know the problems of being plagued by poverty in the 

midst of plenty. And it’s not surprising, Mr. Speaker, that you 

see the patience and the goodwill in those communities is 

rapidly coming to a halt. 

 

This past summer . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . If the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest wants to shout me down, I’m not 

going to be shouted down, Mr. Speaker. In the past year, in 

2006 and 2007, the off-reserve Aboriginal employment 

numbers increased by 4 per cent the one year and 4 per cent the 

next. 

 

And you know what happened in the first six months of them 

being on watch, Mr. Speaker? Do you know what happened in 

the first six months of them being on watch? They went down 

by 4 per cent. They went down by 4 per cent. And you know, 

Mr. Speaker, I shake my head that you’ve got this prospering 

economy and you still got First Nations standing outside, 

you’ve still got Métis people standing on the outside saying, 

you know, shouldn’t we be participating? Shouldn’t we be 

sharing in the abundant wealth of this province? 

 

[15:45] 

 

And so it’s no wonder that you have an FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] assembly where you have the 

chief of the FSIN, Lawrence Joseph, get up and say, you know, 

the Premier’s turned into an invisible man. You have headlines 

like “Joseph rips [and again this is from a press article] rips 

Wall,” rips the Premier; that the bridges are being burned. You 

see the blockades at Enbridge and again in Treaty 4 territory. 

Even in Oka there weren’t blockades, Mr. Speaker, that were 

condoned by the leadership of First Nations. So that you see the 

leadership of the FHQ [File Hills Qu’Appelle Tribal Council], 

of Treaty 4, Treaty 6, you see those people coming forward and 

saying enough, enough. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s not hard to understand why, when 

you see the gains in employment being walked backward, when 

you see the increases being made to things like PTA and adult 

basic education. You still got a waiting list for adult basic 

education in this economy, Mr. Speaker. And there are many 

First Nations and Métis people on that list. 

 

You see the federal government rip up the Kelowna accord. 

And in the wake of that, Mr. Speaker, we try to move forward 

with things like taking post-secondary education on-reserve. 

We try to move forward with things like funding for SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], and we want 

to see them go further with it, Mr. Speaker. They’re not going 

far enough. 

 

We want to see things like Jordan’s principle that we called on 

them to adopt last February. We’re glad to see it in the Throne 

Speech, but you know we’ll see how it plays out because we 

know when push comes to shove with the federal government 

and Stephen Harper, we know how these people opposite act, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there are a lot of issues in First Nations, Métis relations that 

we’re going to be raising in the days to come. Duty to consult 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

ties up a lot of these issues. And you know, you had individuals 

here yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that were here for another round 

table. And you get the sense that those people are starting to 

feel that it’s not so much round tables as round and round 

tables. So where’s the benefit for them? Where’s the sharing of 

the prosperity in this province? They’re very anxious to see 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you visit the communities and when you know the 

statistics and you know the grim reality on the street, you know 

why they’re desperate in this circumstance, Mr. Speaker. So 

we’re going to be looking very close to see what action comes 

from the members opposite. 

 

To conclude, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be voting for the amendment, but 

I’ll be voting against the Throne Speech because it doesn’t do 

enough for the people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased and 

honoured to rise today and enter the debate on the 2008 Speech 

from the Throne. I would like first of all to congratulate the new 

member from Cumberland on his election. I’d also like to 

sincerely thank my family, my constituency assistants, and my 

constituency for the support they have shown thus far. 

 

A fitting theme indeed, Mr. Speaker. It does speak of a stronger 

Saskatchewan, a better life for Saskatchewan people. This 

Throne Speech is surely a victory for our people of 

Saskatchewan. In this speech we see more promises kept, more 

preparation for growth, continued vision for the future, and 

making certain all Saskatchewan residents benefit from our new 

prosperity. 

 

Saskatchewan has transitioned, Mr. Speaker, from a have-not to 

a have province. We have experienced a rebirth to become this 

year country, in the words of our Premier. This change in large 

part I believe is due to the change in attitude and policy of our 

new government. A positive attitude and a balanced policy 

shift, a feeling of optimism, one that formerly one had to travel 

outside of our borders to feel, Mr. Speaker, but now one has to 

come to Saskatchewan to experience. Is it a shift in the tapestry, 

Mr. Speaker? I’m not sure. Now I’m not certain if this is a 

paradigm shift, I’m not sure if this is a nexus, or an aperture in 

time. But I have to check with the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, because I’d have to check with that member to know 

for sure. But the people of the province are liking it. 

 

I’d like to take this opportunity to talk about the people with 

this new positive attitude, which I’m so honoured to work with 

on this side of the House, the members of our government 

caucus, Mr. Speaker, members with such diverse backgrounds it 

gives us a wide range of knowledge and experience to draw 

from. Members who believe, as I do, we most approach the 

affairs of the province as we approach the affairs of our own 

homes and businesses, in a sound and balanced manner. 

Individuals with backgrounds in health, business, agriculture, 

corrections, municipal administration like my friend from 

Rosetown over here; military, as the member from Wood River; 

education, government background, social advocacy, law. We 

have one baby lawyer. Apparently he hasn’t practised yet, but 

I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, a young man so intelligent, so 

capable, that it’s hard to describe. And some with such diverse 

backgrounds, they are almost impossible to capture. For that I 

would have to point to my friend from Saskatoon Northwest 

here — diverse background indeed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on a serious note, a Premier with traits only 

that can be described as those of a true leader. One with only 

the people of the province’s best interests at heart. And quick to 

remind us of why we are here. One occasion I would like to talk 

about, Mr. Speaker, in joking with the Premier as he walked 

past my desk one day last spring, a passing comment I said to 

him was, I’m here for you, buddy. He stopped in his tracks, he 

turned, and with all sincerity he looked at me. He says, no, 

Greg, you’re here for your kids; you’re here for your family. 

And that’s the type of man I respect, Mr. Speaker — a man that 

speaks from the heart and reminds us of why we’re here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — But, Mr. Speaker, back to our province’s 

turnaround. Sure this prosperity and economic growth does 

bring with it some challenges, but I feel it’s better to face the 

issues of growth rather than the hardships of decline. It has been 

mentioned many times how the Premier has asked his MLAs to 

go out and talk to constituents, to the Saskatchewan people, to 

see where they wanted their government to focus. And that 

exercise is the basis for this year’s Throne Speech. 

 

A majority of the people said they liked our balanced approach 

so far but wanted to see more in the way of debt reduction, of 

tax cuts, of infrastructure investment. They wanted us to help 

those in need, to be prudent in our planning. 

 

From this, Mr. Speaker, developed what I would refer to as the 

foundation, the four pillars of this year’s Speech from the 

Throne: record tax cuts to benefit all; record debt reduction that 

benefits all, that in large offsets the tax cuts to the residents; 

record investment in infrastructure to help keep the economic 

momentum and benefit all; and an insurance policy for the 

people of Saskatchewan in the provincial savings to benefit all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those tax cuts that benefit 700,000 people in the 

province who file a tax return; 80,000 people will no longer pay 

any provincial income tax — all retroactive to the beginning of 

this year. Cuts that benefit the lowest income people the most, 

the ones that need the help the most. 

 

Debt reduction of 2.6 billion in the first year. That’s nearly 40 

per cent off the debt, Mr. Speaker — 7 million per day, 

$300,000 per hour, $5,000 per minute. That’s about 50,000 

bucks so far, Mr. Speaker. A reduction that, as I stated earlier, 

in large offsets the tax reductions due to the interest savings of 

the debt — a truly sustainable plan. 

 

Infrastructure investments up 500 million next year to 1.5 

billion. An investment in hospitals, schools. An investment in 

our roads and highways of which close to 1500 kilometres were 

fixed this spring and summer. In fact, Mr. Speaker, as I 

travelled the province this summer extensively, I really had to 

stop myself from being frustrated. I found myself almost 

cursing the Minister of Highways’ name a couple of times, this 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

because, Mr. Speaker, of all the road construction delays I had 

to run up against. I wasn’t accustomed to seeing that much 

improvement. I’m looking forward to upcoming and exciting 

announcements, further promise, and, no doubt, for my 

constituency of Yorkton. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, a fiscal insurance policy of $1.9 billion 

balance in the Growth and Financial Security Fund to ensure 

and protect the future of our province in unstable world 

economic environment, an environment that in large has 

impacted Canada less than other countries of the world due in 

part to the federal government policies which now places 

Canada at the top of the G7 countries for its economic stability 

and Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the strongest economy and 

growth forecast of all provinces in that Dominion of Canada. 

 

Our province with its strong presence in agriculture and food, 

resources, energy capacity, innovation, I would argue, Mr. 

Speaker, the safest place to invest in the world. 

 

I’ll touch on a few more things from the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, just generally. There’s exciting news in almost every 

avenue you could imagine. Enterprise and innovation — 

exciting new investments in that respect. Investments in energy 

and resources, Mr. Speaker, an expanding energy and resources 

sector. 

 

Our environment. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to applaud the Minister 

of Environment. I’ll tell you the way she’s been moving along 

so far has been really exciting. I’ve got to draw your attention to 

a story I personally experienced in Yorkton during the federal 

candidates’ debate at the Wellington West Room at the 

Gallagher Centre where, Mr. Speaker, the Green Party 

candidate — a very young, smart, forward-thinking young girl 

— three times, Mr. Speaker, congratulated myself and my 

government and specifically the Environment minister and the 

Premier on our environmental plans. Now, Mr. Speaker, this is 

the Green Party candidate congratulating the Saskatchewan 

Party on our initiatives. Now that deserves applaud even from 

the member from Athabasca. Thank you very much. 

 

Investments in advanced education, employment and labour, 

Mr. Speaker, in education, ongoing movement in treaty 

education in our schools, additional investment in our schools, 

announcement on Monday about the investment in our library 

system. 

 

The exciting investments just recently, Mr. Speaker, in regards 

to our disabled population. Shorting a 440-person waiting list, 

more money for capital, Mr. Speaker, initiatives to move those 

off of social assistance to a long-term disability plan to just 

encourage them and to give them some humility, Mr. Speaker, 

just to give them some dignity. 

 

And now today, the announcements today by the hon. member 

from Humboldt, the Minister of Social Services, doubling the 

amount of people, the seniors that can apply for that 

low-income assistance — doubling the eligibility, the income, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if that isn’t a step in the right direction. You know, I’ve 

got parents, I’ve got parents-in-law that are seniors, Mr. 

Speaker. All of them, Mr. Speaker, will benefit from this as 

well as some of my other aunts and uncles getting up in years, 

and very shortly a few members on this side of the House 

possibly would be able to apply. 

 

I’d like to talk about the initiative we took on through Social 

Services this summer, Mr. Speaker, the summits of the CBO, 

community-based organizations, able to go out to them to have 

them give their input on the direction we should take. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I touched base with some of those at the SARC 

banquet last night. Very excited group of people, Mr. Speaker. 

They were so happy with the initiatives we’ve taken. They’re 

astounded, simply astounded as to how quickly things are 

moving. They expected us to drag our feet. 

 

I heard one comment about cotton batten in the ears. The cotton 

batten must be out of the minister’s ears, which I can assure 

you, the minister from Humboldt does not have cotton in her 

ears. And it’s proof in the pudding is the announcements that 

have come out since that CBO summit, Mr. Speaker — a very 

short time — delivering on a lot of those aspects that are 

already here. 

 

We’ll move on to some more initiatives. There’s just so much, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be hard to get through all this. 

Exciting initiatives in health care, more investment in physician 

seats, more investment in infrastructure. 

 

Some movement on First Nation and Métis issues, Mr. Speaker. 

As the member across is pointing out, Jordan’s principle. We’ll 

be moving on that very shortly, continued movement in that. 

 

Investments in culture and sport, our provincial parks. It’s 

astounding the way the Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport is moving on that file, Mr. Speaker. Parks people are 

excited. 

 

We’re moving on the arts professions Act, which will 

encourage a lot of the artists in the province and give them 

ownership of their property, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Exciting movement on the Crowns. The member from 

Saskatoon, the Minister of Crown Corporations, some exciting 

announcements, moving in the right direction as he termed 

today, stopping the bleeding of the red ink. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’ve spoken to many people that I know in the Crown 

corporations and saying, this is a very positive move to make 

these Crowns more positive, more strong and sustainable, and 

delivering the proper services and good services to the people 

of the province. This is a move in the right direction. So we’ve 

got some agreement there. 

 

Movement in agriculture. Municipal Affairs. Yorkton has 

benefited greatly from the last Municipal Affairs initiative, Mr. 

Speaker. The SIGI [Saskatchewan infrastructure growth 

initiative] announcement, Yorkton getting almost $12 million in 

low-interest loans to help with the water treatment plant and lot 

development for the expanding borders of the city of Yorkton. 

So exciting news there, and my hat’s off to the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs. Continued commitment in revenue sharing. 

 

The Minister of Policing and Public Safety, some really good 

initiatives there. More police on the street. At least 30 this year 

he’s committed to and, you know, hoping to get some of those 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

in Yorkton which will be very well appreciated. 

 

Strengthening democracy, Mr. Speaker. We are fulfilling our 

promise on fixed election dates, proceeding with some other 

initiatives and moving towards an elected Senate, Mr. Speaker. 

Just all exciting news. All exciting news. A hear, hear from the 

Premier. That’s very well received. Thank you very much. 

 

The opposition attempts to take credit for this rebirth, Mr. 

Speaker, and I suppose that’s to be expected. Months ago we 

heard how we were handed a resource-rich province and shortly 

after how we were left $1 billion. Now we inherited $3 billion 

surplus. Every time things get better the opposition lays claim. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now the resources, I believe, no one can take credit for except 

for the Lord, and through his blessing of this truly great land, 

this province. However I could introduce to members opposite, 

to many people, investors that I personally met over the past 10 

months, 11 months, that quite frankly say if not for the 

philosophy and policy change along with a new government, 

they simply would not be here, Mr. Speaker. And I could 

introduce those members opposite to a lot. 

 

I’m not going to expand on the potash Act. The member from 

Wood River — I think he did a very good job explaining the 

potash Act. But quite simply, Mr. Speaker, if that wasn’t 

repealed we wouldn’t be seeing the investment we do now. It 

sets a bad tone; it sets a really sour tone for resource investment 

coming to the province. When people coming to invest billions 

and millions into our province, Mr. Speaker, and they look at 

that potash Act in 1977 — not that it was ever going to be used 

again — but it sets the tone and it sets a fear with those people 

wanting to invest. They’re simply scared to see any socialism, 

nationalism of industries happen again. 

 

Our policy and legislative changes in the past number of 

months is, in large, why the people of Saskatchewan are now 

enjoying this new growth in prosperity and opportunity.  

 

Let’s just look at what some of the people of this province are 

saying, Mr. Speaker. Well here we have something from 

Marilyn Braun-Pollon: “It’s a well-rounded package, looking 

after the debt, looking after infrastructure and also making sure 

that we’re competitive (on taxes.)” Another one from Marilyn: 

“It puts purchasing power in the pockets of workers, and it’s the 

best way to put money in the pockets of lower-income earners.” 

CEO [chief executive officer] of Sask Chamber of Commerce, 

Steve McLellan: “This is great for them, great for the economy 

and certainly great for a labour situation.” 

 

Now I’ll admit, Mr. Speaker, these are, you know, 

business-minded people. So let’s move on. Larry Hubich, 

president of the Sask Labour Federation: 

 

If they’re putting money into the pockets of low-income 

workers and their families, that’s positive. It’s hard to 

criticize the government for doing that. 

 

Larry Hubich again, Mr. Speaker: 

 

There are a couple of ways you can improve the lot of 

those who are at the lower end of the earning scale, and 

one of them is through the kind of initiatives that the 

government has decided to embark on. The other one is 

through the provision of services . . . 

 

That’s funny, Mr. Speaker, we’re doing both. Here’s another 

one, Jack Vicq. Well Mr. Vicq is well respected by both sides 

of the House, and I know that, Mr. Speaker. Jack Vicq: 

 

“I think it’s the right thing to do.” Said Jack Vicq, now 

director of the Saskatchewan office of the Canada West 

Foundation. “If there was one thing to do with the 

personal income tax system, this is it, because of the 

number of people involved that you can help and because 

the marginal tax rates at that low end are equally high.” 

 

Just a few more, Mr. Speaker: 

 

It’s important to pay down the debt. It’s important that 

citizens somehow are rewarded as well and the income tax 

changes I think are wonderful. 

 

Mayor Pat Fiacco. That’s the mayor. 

 

Let’s listen to some of the members across. The Leader of the 

Opposition, Lorne Calvert, simply “It’s good news.” And Harry 

Van Mulligen, a member across “Well I think by and large it’s 

good news for Saskatchewan people to have these particular tax 

changes.” And I’m mentioning the names of those members, 

Mr. Speaker, because they are specified in the quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of my constituency of Yorkton, the 

third largest trading area in the province, are very happy with 

this Throne Speech. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out my friend, the 

member from Lloydminster, him and I have this debate as to 

who’s the third largest. I know for a fact, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton 

is the third largest trading area. It is larger. But I know the hon. 

member from Lloydminster is very proud, as are his 

constituents, of the fact that Lloydminster is probably the third 

strongest economic region in Saskatchewan as well as currently 

being voted the best place to start a business in Canada. Hats off 

to the member from Lloydminster and the people from 

Lloydminster. 

 

There’s no grudges here, Mr. Speaker. We all equally share in 

the gladness and the glee and the opportunities that are 

happening in all different areas of the province — the optimism 

across the province, Mr. Speaker. I know they’re equally proud 

of this Throne Speech. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will end my comments by saying that 

I will not support the amendment, but I will support the main 

motion put forward by the hon. member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy and seconded by the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased this afternoon to stand and participate in the Throne 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

Speech. Mr. Speaker, to deal with this Throne Speech you have 

to put it in the context and the time in which this speech is 

delivered. Mr. Speaker, this speech is delivered at a period of 

time when we have unprecedented wealth. And that 

unprecedented wealth should be returned to the people of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, for this Throne Speech to be truly 

examined, you have to look at it in the context of its time and 

what it’s doing for people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into my comments, I’d like to 

congratulate the member from Cumberland on his election and 

like to wish him many, many years of service to the people of 

his constituency and to the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take the opportunity to once again 

thank the residents of Regina Dewdney and those who day after 

day support those of us who are in elected life. It’s not an easy 

life necessary for any members of the House; it’s very 

time-consuming. But nonetheless, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

people of Regina Dewdney continue to support myself. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to start talking about this Throne 

Speech from the perspective that when this government was put 

in power just about one year ago, they were left with 

unprecedented amounts of money in the bank, Mr. Speaker — 

nearly $2 billion between the money that was in the Crown 

corporations and that was in the General Revenue Fund, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this government came to power at a time 

when there was ample money in the coffers, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s kind of ironic that they want to talk about paying down 

debt, Mr. Speaker, when much of the money that they’re using 

to paying down that debt was in fact money that was left behind 

by the previous administration. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the concept of paying down debt, of 

course, is a good concept. People enjoy seeing their debt paid 

down, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and of course that benefits all 

Saskatchewan people. But, Mr. Speaker, we have to look at 

where we came from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1991 we had nearly $15 billion in debt. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when this province had $15 billion in debt, we 

were also facing a situation that this province was nearly broke. 

This province was at a point in its history in 1991 where we 

could barely afford to pay our bills, or it was about making 

choices between paying the salaries of those people who work 

for the government and for paying down any portion of the 

debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But over a period of time through careful management we got 

ourselves to a position where, when there was a change in 

government, that we had been able to pay down about $8 billion 

worth of the debt and also been able to put aside $2 billion 

roughly to be there after the election for whoever was the 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, paying down $1 billion additional debt, the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan appreciate that. I think everyone 

would appreciate that. That is what they expect of their 

government. But, Mr. Speaker, people need to understand in the 

context in which that was done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing unprecedented economic growth. We 

had about $3 billion midway through the year in surplus 

revenue, Mr. Speaker, and that’s largely attributed to the 

decisions made many years ago, many years ago to change oil 

royalty rates, to put money into the base and the stability of our 

economy, in lowering business taxes and lowering the PST 

[provincial sales tax], and broadening and diversifying our 

economy, Mr. Speaker.  

 

This didn’t happen in the last year. The benefits we’re seeing 

today happened because of things done over a very long period 

of time, done by the previous administration. Now that’s not 

saying anything negative about what the current administration 

is doing, but the reality is the foundation for what happened 

today was built long before this government came to power. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we all enjoy paying down debt. We all enjoy 

seeing less going in interest to debt payments, but, Mr. Speaker, 

that isn’t the whole picture, and we need to talk about the whole 

picture. 

 

The people of the province also enjoy infrastructure spending, 

but the people of the province also realize that it is a balance 

between putting more money into infrastructure and driving up 

the costs of actual construction because that occurs when 

there’s more available tenders in the market than there is 

companies to actually perform the work. You can actually 

artificially drive up, you can artificially drive up the pricing. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so it’s a balance, and every government has 

to in fact work with that balance. 

 

So it’s necessary, when a government’s looking at ramping up 

its infrastructure spending. to ensure that we have the capacity 

within the province to continue that growth without artificially 

increasing prices. And we need to work together to do that. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will always be 

happy if we have better infrastructure. But, Mr. Speaker, once 

again we need to ensure that the government is working to 

balance that with increased costs that may come from not 

having sufficient capacity within the province to deal with that 

ramped-up expectation of infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to deal with the issue of taxes, lower 

taxes for everyone, Mr. Speaker. People do appreciate tax relief. 

Who wouldn’t appreciate lower taxes? But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, once again we need to look at this issue in this context. 

With a $3.1 billion surplus we have a $300 million tax cut. So 

the people of Saskatchewan will get a 10 per cent return on 

what is their money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out when the personal 

income tax changes were made by the previous government, the 

average family got about $1,000 return — the four-member 

family — when we had a surplus of only $9 million, not $3.1 

billion, Mr. Speaker. So we see a very small return of what 

actually is there of the people’s money at this point in time. Mr. 

Speaker, the previous government, the NDP government cut 

taxes for the average family of four by $1,000, and this 

government cut it by $1,320. But the situation was vastly 

different, Mr. Speaker, because in the first case when the 

previous government did it, we had a $9 million surplus — not 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

a $3.1 billion surplus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to point out that the previous 

government cut the sales tax, that cost $400 million in a period 

of time which we didn’t have a $3.1 billion surplus. We cut 

business taxes, Mr. Speaker. We cut business taxes, corporate 

taxes, in order to make a competitive environment for business. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they liked those cuts. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from an article that is 

written by Mr. Seymour who is director of the Frontier Centre 

for Public Policy. And it says: 

 

Judging the consequences is subjective [talking about tax 

cuts], but one way to assess them is a comparison to what 

has happened in the past, what is happening elsewhere, 

and what the government’s stated goals are. 

 

The previous administration [referring to the previous 

NDP administration] vastly simplified the income tax 

system but also significantly reduced rates, in line with 

what other provinces have done and are considering 

doing. With considerable political bravery, it slashed taxes 

like company, corporate, and capital taxes. Cutting these 

has little short term voter appeal but great long term 

economic benefit. It’s called leadership. 

 

And that’s what the Frontier institute is talking about the NDP 

government, the previous government, that made some pretty 

brave decisions about cutting corporate taxes at a time where it 

was necessary to build the economy so that we can benefit from 

the surpluses we have today. And now that we have these 

surpluses today, Mr. Speaker, now that we have those surpluses 

today, people have the right to have an expectation, to have an 

expectation that those benefits will be returned to them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we heard for months and months and months 

when the current government was in opposition about the need 

to cut property taxes, Mr. Speaker. And we haven’t yet seen any 

cut to property tax for the majority of Saskatchewan citizens. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, today with a $3.1 billion 

surplus, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to expect that 

property tax cut now — not a year from now, not 18 months 

from now, but now. Mr. Speaker, they have a right to get that 

money returned to their pockets rather than remaining in the 

pockets of the government, Mr. Speaker. Because after all, 

governments don’t have money that don’t belong to the people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they need to act quickly on property tax as 

they have said they would in their platform, Mr. Speaker. They 

need to do it. They absolutely need to see this government act 

on its commitment to property tax and significantly lower the 

property tax rates in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, if they 

were brave enough, they would completely remove property tax 

on education, Mr. Speaker. They would take that entire portion 

off, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, they can afford to do it. 

It’s a matter of having the leadership and the bravery to do it. 

And as the Frontier institute said about the previous NDP 

government, they had that leadership. They had that bravery to 

do what was necessary to make this province a better place and 

to build that economic foundation that allows us to have the size 

of surpluses we have today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are yelling from their 

seats and they’re chirping, Mr. Speaker, but the reality is, the 

tough decisions about our economy haven’t been made by this 

government. They were made by the NDP administration many 

years ago. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, so we have a tax cut where the 

people of the province got 10 per cent, 10 per cent of their 

dollar value back. They got $300 million out of $3.1 billion, 

Mr. Speaker. They got 10 per cent. I don’t know. We do 

appreciate anything, Mr. Speaker. The average taxpayer does 

appreciate any benefit. But, Mr. Speaker, they need to do much 

more. They can afford to do much more. And the people of 

Saskatchewan have a right to much more from this government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes talking about 

education, Mr. Speaker. Education was a primary concern of the 

people of this province and is of major concern to families in 

this province today. We heard prior to the election, time and 

time again, that schools shouldn’t be shut down in rural 

communities. Mr. Speaker, today we still have schools being 

shut down in rural communities. This government talked about 

changing. They had this grandiose plan to improve education in 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Those people are 

disappointed today. Schools are still shutting down in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This government isn’t living up to 

what it committed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to now talk a little bit about post-secondary 

education. Those young people who have had the opportunity to 

go to university have had a tuition freeze for a number of years. 

They’ve had their tuition being held constant for a number of 

years, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, we hear today, we hear 

today rumblings from the minister that we may see that freeze 

on tuition being lifted — that we may actually see increases in 

tuition fees to students. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s shameful. That 

is absolutely shameful that we actually see tuition increases for 

students in universities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We should be striving to open the door so that more students go 

to post-secondary education, so every student has the 

opportunity in this province to reach their full potential. But, 

Mr. Speaker, tuition increases are a barrier to many students 

being able to go to university and we shouldn’t increase that 

barrier. In fact we should continue the freeze on tuition in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We need to freeze the tuition, Mr. 

Speaker, for the foreseeable future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to spend a couple of minutes 

talking about children and families. Mr. Speaker, today we still 

have far too many children living in poverty. Far too many 

families living in substandard housing because there isn’t 

adequate housing available. Mr. Speaker, we are facing a 

significant issue with those who are most vulnerable in our 

society, Mr. Speaker, both in the issue of housing and, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re seeing poverty rates going up in our province. 

Mr. Speaker, we need to deal with these issues. We need to deal 

with poverty and we need to deal with, Mr. Speaker, we need to 

deal with affordable housing for those most vulnerable in our 

society. 

 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it can be argued, why didn’t we deal with all 

these things, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t have 

the money that’s available today. We started, Mr. Speaker, from 

a situation where we had to build the foundation and the base of 

an economy in which to get the surpluses we’re experiencing 

today. And, Mr. Speaker, it is about making choices, and we 

made choices to build this economy so that we would have 

surpluses like this. And today we have them. Let’s spend them. 

Let’s do it for those in our society who need it the most, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s deal with poverty. Let’s deal with affordable 

housing for the most vulnerable in our society, Mr. Speaker. We 

need to do that. 

 

We have families facing 4 and $500 a year increases in rental 

situations in some of our cities, Mr. Speaker. We have cities 

like Estevan where you can’t rent a property, you can’t find a 

property in the city of Estevan to rent, either an apartment or a 

home. We have communities like Saskatoon and Regina facing 

virtually the same situations, Mr. Speaker. And these people, 

Mr. Speaker, deserve — now that we have the money to do it, 

now that we have $3.1 billion in surplus — they deserve to get 

their fair share and they deserve to be treated with the dignity 

and respect that this government isn’t showing them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see today assessments going on in cities 

and towns across the province, seeing significant property tax 

increases. Now, Mr. Speaker, those affect those who are most 

vulnerable the most. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a 

commitment about property tax that hasn’t been delivered on, 

Mr. Speaker. Let’s get that delivered on as soon as possible. 

Let’s let the families of this province enjoy the benefit of what 

they’ve built. Because, Mr. Speaker, they made the sacrifices in 

the past for us to be able to build this economy and they should 

be the ones that benefit from what we’ve done. It shouldn’t 

matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that anybody in this Assembly 

doesn’t want those who are most vulnerable to be better off. 

And the foundation has been built and that foundation meant 

that they made sacrifices like every other Saskatchewan citizen 

to build that foundation. Today, they need more than any of us 

to feel the benefit of our fruits, Mr. Speaker, the benefit of what 

that foundation has delivered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need significant new injections into 

multi-family housing, affordable housing, a homes first 

program to help low-income people get the opportunity of home 

ownership. We know how important the issues like home 

ownership are to individual people, Mr. Speaker, and we need 

to strive, Mr. Speaker, to open the doors to allow those young 

people today that are entering the workforce, wanting to buy a 

first home, and can’t buy a first home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to develop and look at programs that help families, 

young families, have the opportunity of home ownership, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we had a HomeFirst program which 

money was set aside; the demand far exceeded the dollars. And 

people have called my office in the last year talking about how 

they went to seminars about the homes first program, were 

approved, go to the bank, Mr. Speaker, and then find there’s no 

money, Mr. Speaker, for that program any longer because the 

money has expired. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about health care. We had 

a promise from the previous government that health care would 

be improved. Yet we saw a report this year from the Fraser 

Institute this year that said waiting times have actually 

increased in many surgical areas and diagnostic areas, Mr. 

Speaker. Now you can’t necessarily fix everything overnight, 

Mr. Speaker, but this is another area where significant resources 

need to be put in order to put the people’s health in our province 

first, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear the Environmental minister and the 

Premier talking about the potential of a carbon tax because 

they’re not going to be able to meet their own targets in 

greenhouse gas emission reduction, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, are we having a carbon tax or aren’t we? We need to 

know, Mr. Speaker. This government needs to come clean and 

let us know what their true intentions are. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks talking for a 

few minutes about our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. Our 

Crown corporations have delivered for the people of this 

province for many years a very, strong, viable product and 

services to consumers, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had the lowest 

utility rates in the country. 

 

You could afford to drive a vehicle here as a young person 

much cheaper than you could in most jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

Our natural gas rates were among, if not the lowest in Canada 

year after year. Our power rates also were competitive, Mr. 

Speaker, not to mention our telephone and telecommunications, 

Mr. Speaker, the most, shall I say, competitive environment for 

a Crown corporation in Canada, Mr. Speaker, remain 

competitive, remain profitable, and deliver services for the 

people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can do nothing that erodes that base, that 

confidence in these Crown corporations, or do anything that 

leads to the privatization or the losing of the fundamental base 

of these Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think the people of Saskatchewan need to be concerned after the 

changes made this week by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to be concerned about the future of our 

Crown corporations and we do actually . . . I, Mr. Speaker, 

implore the government to be very careful in what they do with 

the Crowns so that these Crowns remain profitable enterprises 

in our province, delivering the cheapest possible utilities to the 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan today has the 

opportunity to live . . . We have the opportunity to live, pardon 

me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a province with prosperity like 

we’ve never seen — but prosperity that was built through the 

sacrifice of the people of the province and built largely by the 

previous government. Now, Mr. Speaker, we can’t squander 

this. We have to use that benefit very carefully for the 

well-being of all the people of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, there are several things that 

have not been addressed by this government. There are things 

that they have not said that they would do. And, Mr. Speaker, 

one of the most obvious is, Mr. Speaker, we have not seen the 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

property tax cut that was promised during the election, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have a right to have, 

Mr. Speaker. It should be done now, not a year from now, not 

18 months from now, not two years from now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I’m not able to support the 

Throne Speech. But, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Carrot River. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would 

like to start by congratulating our newest member from 

Cumberland. And I’m sorry that, or I imagine he feels sorry, he 

didn’t get a choice of seatmates. But I know what it’s like, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because when I take a look around here, us 

backbenchers sometimes just get caught with, you know, 

whatever. 

 

I would like to bring greetings to this Assembly from Carrot 

River Valley which, as everybody knows here, is the nicest 

constituency, the best constituency in all of Saskatchewan. And 

I would like to thank the people, I would like to thank the 

people of our constituency for supporting me. I would like to 

thank our executive. I especially would like to thank my CA 

[constituency assistant] who does all the hard work in the 

constituency. And I would like to thank my family for letting 

me do this job and stay away from our homes for quite some 

time. 

 

I would actually like to have a quote here. Now this is actually 

on a little bit more serious basis, but I have a quote here and it 

actually goes for all members of our Assembly here. It’s a quote 

that was done by Alexander Sanders, who is the circuit court 

judge in South Carolina, and he gave this quote to the 

graduating class at the University of South Carolina. And I 

quote: 

 

As responsibility is passed to your hands it will not do as 

you live the rest of your life to assume that someone else 

will bear the major burdens, that someone else will 

demonstrate the key convictions, that someone else will 

run for office, that someone else will take care of the poor, 

that someone else will visit the sick, protect civil rights, 

enforce the law, preserve culture, transmit values, 

maintain civilization and defend freedom. You must never 

forget that what you do not value will not be valued, that 

what you do not remember will not be remembered, that 

what you do not change will not be changed and that what 

you do not do will not be done. 

 

This is a great quote for all the members of this Assembly. And 

I know that we sometimes sit here and we have our differences 

— actually more than sometimes — but I think everybody in 

this Assembly tries to work their hardest and move forward. A 

good example is this Throne Speech. It is a very, very exciting 

Throne Speech, and I think it should be well supported. I know 

I certainly support it. 

 

We were challenged, we were challenged by our Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, to go out into our constituencies this summer and 

travel our constituencies and find what the people wanted — 

what was best for Saskatchewan, what was best for their 

constituency. And I think that is exactly what we did, Mr. 

Speaker. We came back, we came back and that is what the 

Throne Speech reflects. 

 

The reason I got into politics, the reason I got into politics, Mr. 

Speaker, was because of our children. We’ve all seen over the 

years where our children have moved out of province, have left 

this province with less and less people at all times. And how, 

how, Mr. Speaker, are we going to support our infrastructure if 

we keep on seeing businesses leave, people leave? How is this 

going to support the infrastructure that we so desperately want 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

Well guess what? Since we have changed this government, 

since we have gotten in, since back in November 7 of last year, 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen our population increase by 16,000 

people — 16,000 people. My son came out of university and 

got a job. Got a job right here in Saskatchewan. He doesn’t 

have to go and work in Alberta like I did and a lot of my friends 

did. This is great. I have a daughter who is in university, in her 

second year of university. I am expecting her, I’m expecting her 

to be able to stay in this province and get a job when this is 

done. 

 

[16:30] 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan is 

leading the country. We’re leading the country in wholesale 

trade growth. We’re leading the country in export sales growth, 

retail sales growth, and we’ve got so many other numerous 

achievements. Who would have thunk it just a few years ago? 

We are moving forward. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I was just at a CPA [Commonwealth 

Parliamentary Association] meeting a couple of weeks ago in 

Winnipeg. And there, of course as everybody here knows, they 

had members from all across Canada. Everybody, everybody 

there was talking about Saskatchewan; how Saskatchewan is 

moving forward, how Saskatchewan is moving ahead. 

 

You know, coming from a farm background, it’s been well said; 

you know this is next year country, Mr. Speaker. Well I, along 

with the members on this side, sit back and say, next year 

country is here. Next year country is here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A real good example, being from rural Saskatchewan, our 

regional parks were suffering. Our regional parks were basically 

going broke. They just couldn’t supply what we needed in rural 

Saskatchewan. Our minister increased it from $75,000, the 

grants to regional parks, to $300,000 in just one year. Just in 

one year. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They took away the wiener roast tax. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: —Yes sir, Saskatchewan right now is set to 

weather the storm. You know, we’re being prudent. We’re 

lowering debt. By the end of this fiscal year, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we will have lowered the debt just about 40 per cent, 

38 per cent. That’s going to mean hundreds, hundreds of 

millions of dollars to save in the years to come. Moving 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

forward. 

 

On top of that, in case something may go wrong, in case maybe 

the economy does slow in Saskatchewan somehow, although I 

don’t know how, we’re putting away almost $2 billion in the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund. 

 

An Hon. Member: — That’s real money. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — You’re right. You’re right. This is real 

money. This is actual money, not just a place to go and borrow 

money from. It’s cash. And as our Premier has said, Mr. 

Speaker, many a time, cash is king. This is our insurance policy. 

You wouldn’t have a house without insurance. You wouldn’t 

have a car without insurance. And I know that my wife insists 

that I have lots of insurance on me. Mind you I won’t tell her 

how much because I might not be around if I did. And I do want 

to be around for a while. That being said, this government will 

not run this province without an insurance policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t talk about 

infrastructure, $1.5 billion in this Throne Speech going into 

infrastructure. Now I don’t have to tell anybody about the road 

systems that we had in this province or lack thereof. And you 

know something? Nobody, nobody is complaining, Mr. 

Speaker, about having to stop on the roads because of 

construction. In our area everybody’s saying, attaboy; that’s a 

good job. Fourteen hundred kilometres, 1,400 kilometres of 

road being done this year — this is absolutely fantastic. 

 

Also we know about our health care system, Mr. Speaker. Our 

health care system . . . I’ve spoke about hospitals before. I 

originally was born in Arborfield and Arborfield’s my 

hometown. And then we moved to Carrot River when I was 

young. A matter of a few years ago, the previous administration 

shut down the hospital in Arborfield. They shut down the 

hospital in Arborfield and told everybody don’t worry, don’t 

worry; Carrot River is only 15 miles away. Four years later, 

four years later they shut down the hospital in Carrot River and 

said, don’t worry; Nipawin is only 25 miles away. Boy am I 

glad that we won the last election because they probably would 

have been saying, after that, don’t worry; P.A. [Prince Albert] is 

only 117 miles away. 

 

We are moving forward. We’re moving forward on the health 

system, and we’re also, our government is committed to putting 

in support programs for rural doctors. We’ve taken action. Our 

government has taken action on recruiting and retraining. We 

said during the election campaign we would put 800 new nurses 

into the province within four years, Mr. Speaker. We’ve already 

done half of that in only one year — half of that in one year, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re moving forward, and we have to. We have 

to because — let’s face it — our province is increasing in 

population. Let’s get the people in here. We’ve got to service 

the people. 

 

We also added 24 undergraduate seats and 24 new residency 

seats, and that’s soon going to be upgraded to 40 and 60 

respectively. This is a commitment, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government has made. 

 

Just the other day we had an historic announcement from our 

Social Services minister of $76.9 million for people with 

disabilities. Now, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly relate to this. Our 

first-born had cerebral palsy, so I know first-hand how much 

this is needed and how much this is appreciated. It’s just 

another example of good government on this side of the House, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to also mention the monies allocated to our local 

municipalities. You know we originally said that we would give 

them 7 per cent to help with their infrastructure. Then we went 

up to 15 per cent, all within one year. Do you realize what this 

is going to do for our local municipalities, for our bridges, for 

our roads? Not only that, we threw in $75 million interest free 

so these towns that are expanding now can put in new lots, new 

residential areas, because this province is growing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the province is growing, we’re going to need 

more power. SaskPower’s going to need more power. I think 

last winter we were at something like 98 per cent capacity when 

it was very cold. Mr. Speaker, we have 30 per cent of the 

world’s uranium sitting here right in Saskatchewan. Now what 

we should do, what we should do is look at getting a nuclear 

reactor set up within this province. Let’s do the enrichment of 

uranium. Let’s go. Let’s go full hog. Let’s make it move. 

 

We’re also talking about having the world’s first carbon capture 

sequestration plant for the coal generating. Now I know that the 

other side has complained about this quite often. But they sat 

there and they said, you know you’re putting a whole bunch of 

money into this; what are we getting out of it? But yet they 

wanted to help protect the environment, and yet what did they 

ever do? They didn’t do anything. We’re trying to move 

forward. This is brand new technology that is going to move 

Saskatchewan not just into the forefront of Canada, but in the 

forefront of the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another thing near and dear to my heart is 

involving our First Nations people. We have two First Nations 

communities within the Carrot River Valley constituency — 

Red Earth and Shoal Lake — Mr. Speaker. We need the 

training, and we need the education to help them move forward, 

to help them move forward and help improve Saskatchewan and 

our population in total. 

 

We also have said that we are going to teach the treaties in the 

schools. This, Mr. Speaker, is going to help alleviate some of 

the misconceptions that are out there amongst non-First Nations 

people. And I give a lot of credit to our minister from 

Kelvington-Wadena for moving a lot of this stuff forward. 

 

We all know that Saskatchewan seniors have offered much in 

the past, Mr. Speaker, for this wonderful province and they still 

do. Mr. Speaker, we owe a debt of gratitude to them. 

Unfortunately income assistance program for low-income 

seniors has not increased since 1992. 1992 was the last time that 

some of the most important people within this province have 

had an increase. 

 

This government has just made a huge announcement for 

low-income seniors that’s going to improve their quality of life 

by providing them with as much as $1,200 more per year. Mr. 

Speaker, this government is committed to making life better for 

everybody in the province. And let’s do absolutely everything, 

the determination to provide our seniors with nothing but the 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of our seniors also come from an agricultural 

background. Now we, we as a government have not forgotten 

our roots, Mr. Speaker. This government is committed to help 

our farm families. You know, we have a Minister of Agriculture 

who understands what agriculture absolutely is in this province, 

who has people working in his department who come from an 

agricultural background. We’re going to be moving the ag 

stability administration right here to Saskatchewan, so when 

farmers call up, when farmers call up, the people in the office 

actually know what they’re talking about. We had a 

commission to go around the province to study the crop 

insurance, and that is another commitment we have made to 

move our crop insurance forward, to move it into a new type of 

crop insurance for Saskatchewan that is more benefiting to the 

farmers. 

 

Another thing we’ve done for the farmers is looking for 

long-term, secure water supplies for southwestern 

Saskatchewan where they’ve had a drought for quite some time. 

These are things, Mr. Speaker, that our government is moving 

towards. 

 

Another bone of contention in this great province of ours has to 

be income tax, and this Throne Speech has certainly addressed 

that. For far too long, far too long, Mr. Speaker, we have stifled 

our economy. We drove out business, and we created a loss of 

not only opportunity but population and prosperity. To say that 

this has been addressed is an understatement, Mr. Speaker. This 

is the largest, the largest tax cut this province has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, 80,000 people will be taken 

off of the tax rolls — some of the lower income people who 

really, really need the money. A family of four in Saskatchewan 

will have the highest level of personal tax exemptions in all of 

Canada — not just the Western provinces, not the Eastern 

provinces, but in all of Canada. These measures will reduce 

taxes for Saskatchewan people by $300 million per year. 

 

And that is not all the good news. That is not all the good news 

from this government, Mr. Speaker. To top it off, this 

government will introduce a new low-income tax credit which 

will increase the amount of money that the people at the low 

end will receive from our government. 

 

I guess my time is moving up here, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Do you want more? Do you want more? Okay. 

Let’s talk a little bit more about Saskatchewan. Now we’ve all 

heard over the years how Central Canada was always the 

economic driver, the economic driver of Canada. You know 

something? It’s here right now, right now. The Ontario 

government announced Wednesday that they probably will be 

having problems with their economic house, and here in 

Saskatchewan we are just doing so well. 

 

One of the reasons we’re doing well is we’re diversifying. We 

don’t have to sell strictly to the United States. We don’t have to 

sell strictly to Eastern Canada. We’ve got overseas markets. 

That’s why Saskatchewan is doing so well. We’re doing well on 

oil. We’re doing well on potash. We’re doing well on grains. 

We’re going to be doing really well on uranium, and hopefully 

within given amount of time, we’ll be having enriched uranium 

going out to help the world supply their power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want as a government to assist every aspect of 

every man, every woman, and every child in this great province 

called Saskatchewan. This Throne Speech is higher, broader, 

and nobler than any other Throne Speech I have ever heard. 

That is why I support the Throne Speech and I do not support 

the amendment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to make comments on 

the Throne Speech. First of all, before I make my comments I 

would, as everyone has, like to extend my congratulations and 

my sincerest welcome to our newest member from Cumberland. 

Also would like to thank my constituency assistant, Tracy 

Goodheart, for all the work that she does for the constituency 

and the constituents of Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

I want to make special mention today of the Parkridge Centre 

and the staff and volunteers at that Parkridge Centre. The staff 

have over the years put together different programs for 

fundraising. They hold a fall country hoedown, and last year I 

was here making a statement on Pennies for Parkridge. And 

most recently, they have installed computers for the residents. 

They have computers and the ability to also have video 

connections through the Internet, Mr. Speaker. They have their 

own print shop. The residents work on developing cards for all 

occasions and all seasons. And our office, Mr. Speaker, has 

made use of those cards throughout the year. And with that, I do 

want to commend all the staff and the volunteers at the 

Parkridge Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on another front I’d also like to make mention of, 

at one point in time we had some overcrowding in some of our 

high schools on the west side of Saskatoon. And the previous 

NDP administration was able to assist in building two new high 

schools, Bethlehem and Tommy Douglas. Both are connected 

with a world-class pool and gymnasium. Mr. Speaker, all this 

came by because of the result of work between the city of 

Saskatoon, the two school boards, and the previous 

administration working together to make this a reality. 

 

Both the Parkridge Centre, its activities, and the high schools 

and the new pool, which is a state-of-the-art pool with stainless 

steel bottom, Mr. Speaker, which allows the swimmers to get 

the best speeds . . . And we expect that we’ll have many people 

travelling for meets across the United States and Canada to 

improve their speeds. And both of these have brought great 

benefits to the constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the election, I had over the past few months 

had the opportunity to do some door knocking and I met a good 

number of people. And a good number of those people were 

potash workers who are constituents of mine and unfortunately 

they’re involved at present in a strike. This strike is causing 



October 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

hardship for their families and I want to acknowledge those 

potash workers at this time — and some of whom were here, 

Mr. Speaker, and who I had an opportunity to introduce at the 

legislature. And I just want to say to them that everybody in 

Saskatchewan is watching and hoping that there is an early 

resolve to their situation that they find themselves in. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a great province with a lot of resources and I 

only wish the best for our people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was also out door knocking, I heard from 

the constituents of Saskatoon Fairview. And we’ve heard many 

speeches here today — the government taking credit for the 

wealth that they find themselves in their coffers. I must point 

out that the constituents of Saskatoon Fairview tell me they’re 

not fooled by the Saskatchewan Party at all. 

 

And in fact what most of them on the doorstep . . . They’re 

actually quite livid and exasperated, Mr. Speaker, because they 

want to say things like, can somebody please tell them that it 

was you that created this wealth that they are now enjoying? 

Can somebody please convey this message, convey this 

message to the Premier? It is absolutely, if I may, driving them 

to distraction that the days that they listen, when they turn on 

their TV and hear the Sask Party saying, Mr. Speaker, that they 

have created this wealth. How did they arrive at this, they ask 

me. How did they arrive at this? In which province were they 

living before they were elected? 

 

Now one of the things that they also say is, could you please 

remind them that it was the NDP Premier Romanow and 

Premier Calvert who brought us from, Mr. Speaker, what I 

would say what we were is an economic basket case of the ’80s 

to where we are today? And that’s plain and simple. The 

Conservative . . . Sask Party, whatever the name of the day is, 

drove this province into debt and it was the NDP that got them 

out. Simple. They drove us into debt, we got them out. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I accept that there was a fair and democratic 

election. And I accept, humbly accept that the people of this 

province chose the Saskatchewan Party. But in finishing, in 

discussions also at the doorstep I just tell the good people of 

Saskatoon Fairview to be patient because November 2011 will 

be here before we know it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this summer I had the good fortune of 

travelling throughout the province, and I was driving through 

Weyburn. And, Mr. Speaker, it does look like there is good 

fortune around Weyburn. The oil patch activity . . . And I think 

the member from Big Muddy, Weyburn talked about that and 

we hear the new Bakken play is driving exploration and Crown 

sales through the roof. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy making his address to the Throne Speech. He’s come a 

long way. Some people said, great job. But I think I want to talk 

about what he said . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I did learn 

something. I did. 

 

Here’s what he said. Mr. Speaker, here’s what he said. I’ll 

quote: 

 

When you look at schools, and I know Weyburn 

Comprehensive in Weyburn for one example, the 

Weyburn Hospital is another, that is a really pressing 

concern in Weyburn and area. We’re a growing 

community and we have a quite old hospital facility and 

so I’m sure the Minister of Health will be listening very 

closely to this . . . 

 

Now he clearly says, Mr. Speaker, that he hopes the Minister of 

Health is listening. Now isn’t that something? I would just say 

go — he’s sitting close to the Minister of Health — and talk to 

him. Talk to him. Talk to the Minister of Education. Tell them 

you need a high school. Tell them you need a hospital. Tell 

them. Maybe he could get two, two high schools for Weyburn. 

Maybe he could. 

 

Now the member says he hopes that the minister was listening. 

Now I can recall that it was the Sask Party on an ongoing basis 

would talk about nothing coming back to their communities 

from the oil and the resources that were there. And now here we 

have the member from Big Muddy, Weyburn saying nothing is 

happening in the community. We don’t have schools, we don’t 

have health care facilities, and on top of that he hopes, he 

hopes, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Health is listening. 

He’s hoping that he’s listening. 

 

Now I know that they’re not listening to the people of this 

province, because we’ve been talking about certain issues all 

year and they haven’t been listening. Now I don’t recall seeing 

the Minister of Health dozing off, so I don’t think it’s because 

he was dozing off that he’s not listening, but maybe he doesn’t 

care. Maybe he’s just tuned out. Maybe he knows all the 

answers, and he doesn’t think the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy needs assistance. 

 

But I also understand and hopefully, hopefully I can assist the 

member from Weyburn get muddy — Big Muddy — to get his 

needs. Because obviously the Minister of Health is listening 

now. He’s listening now. I’ve obviously got his attention. Now 

maybe, maybe he can ignore his own members, but he’s 

obviously listening now, and that’s good. 

 

Now unfortunately maybe the words . . . maybe he will treat, 

maybe he’ll treat, maybe he will treat the member the same way 

he does us, and so I would wish all the best of luck to the 

member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Now also the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy didn’t stop 

there, Mr. Speaker. He went on to highways. On highways he 

was talking about, he said, and I quote, “You drive around 

places in parts of my constituency, and it is quite evident that 

the highways have little if no, next to none, next to zero.” Mr. 

Speaker, they have been here almost a year and there’s been 

zero. They’ve had zero done in their communities. 

 

And they’re sitting, sitting there together, and I see the Minister 

of Health, he’s chirping from his seat. In fact I see them 

smiling. They’re sitting there smiling. They think this is 

actually funny. Well I don’t think, I don’t think it’s funny, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t think it’s funny at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, soon they’ll be blaming. Soon they’ll be blaming 

and taking out and saying it’s the NDP’s fault; it’s the NDP’s 

fault for leaving them $2 billion. That’s our fault too. 

Everything is our fault. And maybe, Mr. Speaker, maybe the 3.1 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard October 29, 2008 

billion pile of money . . . And they’ll still say somehow that’s 

our fault, because now what can they do? They don’t know 

what to do with it. 

 

Obviously the member from Weyburn Big-Muddy is saying, 

could you fix our roads, build a school? How about a hospital? 

Is he going to be sitting there next year saying, build a school, 

fix our roads? We’re waiting. We’re waiting. I’m waiting with a 

bated breath to see what’ll happen here. This is very interested. 

 

Well I would just have this to say, Mr. Speaker, to the member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy. How’s it working for you? How’s it 

working? How’s this working for you? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the constituents from Saskatoon 

Fairview and the people of this province are also waking up to 

the fact of a 20 per cent increase in their SaskEnergy rates, 

natural gas rates. And they wondered, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being past the time of adjournment, the 

Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 o’clock a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1433 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1433 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1434 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1434 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1434 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1434 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Education Week: Howard Coad School 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1434 

 Funding for Community-Based Organizations 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1435 

 Academic Education and Physical Fitness 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1435 

 25e anniversaire de la Fédération des aînés fransaskois/25th Anniversary of the Fransaskois Seniors Federation 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1435 

 Remembering Founder of the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1436 

 A Stronger Saskatchewan and a Better Life 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1436 

 Nashi Fundraiser 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1436 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1437 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1437 

 Clean Coal Project 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1438 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1438 

 Management of Crown Corporations 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1440 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1440 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Enhanced Income Plan for Seniors 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1442 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1443 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1443 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1443 

 Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1444 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1444 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1444 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1444 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1444 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1445 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1445 



 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1447 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1450 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1452 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1456 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1458 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1462 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1464 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


