




















































Hansard: April 08, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 22B  TUESDAY, APRIL 8, 2008, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 695 

 April 8, 2008 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 7 o’clock, the House 

is now in session. We’re on the proposed motion from the Hon. 

Mr. Gantefoer: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures for the sitting times of the 

Assembly and the sitting times for standing committees 

shall be varied on an interim basis for the remainder of the 

first session of the twenty-sixth legislature as follows. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

continue my remarks that I started earlier this week and, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to start by just talking about history repeating 

itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first thing that the Devine government in 1986 

did after their re-election is that they moved a unilateral motion 

to change the rules, Mr. Speaker, regarding quorum. Mr. 

Speaker, history does in fact repeat itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we see the new Sask Party government 

doing the exact same thing we saw the Grant Devine 

government of 1986 do after re-election. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

abuse to parliamentary democracy when a majority uses its 

power to abuse the minority is not a funny matter. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a very serious matter and it’s one we should all take very 

seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are today debating a motion made by the 

government that would unilaterally change the sitting hours of 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And why are we doing that? Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to talk about why are we doing that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Just prior to the hour of 5 o’clock, I took the opportunity to go 

through the pieces of legislation, nos. 8 through 21, Mr. 

Speaker. Yesterday I took great pains to go through Bills 1 

through 6 many times to try and allow the members opposite to 

understand. Mr. Speaker, I tried to get the members opposite to 

understand just what we’re dealing with. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I went through Bills 8 through 21 and I 

happened to skip Bill No. 7 and, Mr. Speaker, I need to go back 

and talk a little bit about Bill No. 7. But I want to tell you why I 

skipped Bill No. 7, Mr. Speaker, so the members opposite 

would understand. Mr. Speaker, we already passed Bill No. 7, 

so, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t want to spend too much time on it. I 

know the members opposite might take a week or two to figure 

that out, but I want to tell them, Mr. Speaker, we passed Bill 

No. 7. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, I went over another Bill rather quickly 

in the Bills 8 through 21, Mr. Speaker, and that was Bill No. 16. 

And again I want to point out to the House there’s a reason why 

I went over Bill No. 16 because, Mr. Speaker, we already 

passed it. So I don’t want the members opposite to be 

concerned there’s a couple of Bills we hadn’t sort of indicated 

where we might be on them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just to recap, the majority of the Bills, 8 

through . . . in fact 8 through 14, and then Bill No. . . . I believe 

it was 19, Mr. Speaker, are all pieces of legislation that 

members on this side of the House worked on very diligently 

when we were the government in preparation for the next sitting 

of the House, Mr. Speaker. So as a result, Mr. Speaker, the 

legislation you’re bringing forward is in fact our legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re likely to vote for it. We’re not likely to 

spend a great deal of time talking about legislation that we in 

fact not only spent a great deal of time developing, Mr. 

Speaker, but that we believe in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the Bills 8 through 21, Mr. Speaker, with 

the exception of Bill No. 16 which we already passed which 

was the budget Bill, The Appropriation Act, Mr. Speaker, Bill 

No. 9 was the one exception. Bill No. 9, which I often refer to 

as the double-dipping Bill, Mr. Speaker, where people can be in 

fact be on pension and collecting their full salaries at the same 

time and get 140 per cent of their salary one day after getting 

just 100 per cent of their salary, Mr. Speaker . . . 170 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I don’t believe the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and I don’t 

believe your constituents would support that, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t think my constituents would support it, and certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think the average citizen of this province would 

support it. If they understood that they are paying twice for the 

same piece of work, Mr. Speaker, for the same job being done 

by the same individual, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that they 

would believe in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is a proper and an appropriate role for retirement and for 

pension, Mr. Speaker, and when you retire, you should get your 

pension, and it should be income replacement, Mr. Speaker. But 

you shouldn’t be able to do your job and stay in your same desk 

and continue employment with the same employer, Mr. 

Speaker, and both collect your pension and in fact collect your 

salary, Mr. Speaker, because we as taxpayers all of us would 

pay that, Mr. Speaker. So we’d pay 170 per cent of the salary 

the day after the person retires compared to 100 per cent the day 

before, and the person could be doing the exact same job, never, 

never having left his desk, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Bill No. 9, when that was brought forward by the 

bureaucracy, the members on this side, we opposed that. We 

didn’t put that Bill forward because we didn’t believe it was in 

the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan to pay twice for 

the same job. Some of you guys might believe that, Mr. 

Speaker, but I don’t believe our constituents would. I don’t 

believe our constituents would believe in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so Bill No. 9, Bill No. 9 we didn’t support. I know you put 

it forward. You can expect, as I did the first time you brought 



696 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

the Bill forward, I will oppose it. I asked you to go back and 

review the Bill and understand fully what it meant, and what 

did I get back, Mr. Speaker? Well I don’t know; it’s still on the 

order paper. They haven’t withdrawn it. 

 

Well maybe, Mr. Speaker, they’ll take the time not to proceed 

with that Bill as well, or maybe at least carry it over till the fall 

and do some consultation with people outside the people who 

would directly benefit from it. Do some consultation with their 

farm neighbours. 

 

I know my aunt and uncle and others who live out on the farm, 

they certainly don’t want to see their tax dollar going to pay for 

the same salary twice for the same person, Mr. Speaker. They 

just don’t have an interest in doing that and I don’t think many 

of the people of Saskatchewan do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite who claim to be the 

guardians of the public purse and to be, you know, the 

responsible government that they think they should be, Mr. 

Speaker, well a responsible government wouldn’t pay twice to 

get the same job done. So, Mr. Speaker, I think they need to 

look at that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have dealt with each and every piece of 

legislation, or I’ve dealt with each and every piece of 

legislation, all 21 Bills that the government has put forward — 

indicated very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of these 

Bills are in fact supported by the opposition because of course 

we did the work to put them forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s some extremely good work there that some of my 

colleagues, the member from Saskatoon Meewasin and the 

member from Regina Lakeview and others, spent a great deal of 

time making this legislation both relevant and important to the 

people of Saskatchewan and examining all the potential pitfalls 

and benefits of the legislation and putting forward good, solid, 

balanced legislation that will benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, are we going to support that legislation that 

we worked hard to put forward? Of course we are. Of course we 

are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a few minutes to have some 

discussion about, you know, how the hours sort of add up. How 

the hours sort of add up about this imaginary crisis we have. 

And I’m going to call it an imaginary crisis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now the hours from now on would be from — if this 

legislation passed without an amendment, Mr. Speaker, and we 

haven’t necessarily decided what we’re going to put forward in 

an amendment, Mr. Speaker, but — without an amendment, it’s 

from 10 o’clock to midnight with one hour off for supper. So 

you do the math. That is 13 hours a day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s 13 hours on Monday, 13 hours on Tuesday, 13 hours 

on Wednesday. Mr. Speaker, it’s 13 hours on Thursday. And on 

Friday, well it’s . . . look Friday’s a short day — short day. So 

we’re only working 5 hours on Fridays, Mr. Speaker. So what 

do you have? You have 13, 13, and 13 and 13; you have 52 and 

5 — 57 hours a week, Mr. Speaker. All right, 57 hours a week, 

57 hours a week. And we’ve got, we’ve got five weeks. So 

that’s 235 hours, Mr. Speaker, 235 hours. 

 

We need 75 hours for estimates. So you subtract 75 from 235, 

what do you have? What do you have, people? You have 160 

hours left. You have 160 hours left. You’ve got a couple of 

pieces of contentious legislation so you might spend 40 hours 

on those. So then what are you down to? You’re down to 100, 

120 hours if you wanted to spend the full 20 hours on it. And 

then the rest of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, there might be 10 

to 12 hours on it. 

 

All of a sudden we’ve got about 120 hours more than we need, 

Mr. Speaker. About 120 hours more than we need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how does this work? Why do we have a crisis? We’ve got 

120 hours too much. Mr. Speaker, their own proposal puts 

forward about 120 hours more than is required to pass, to pass 

their budget and to pass their legislation and to . . . [inaudible] 

. . . the House, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t know how their math 

works, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how their math works. 

 

You know, I don’t know if they’ve got a phony calculator or it 

doesn’t add. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, this 

isn’t about making the hours work; this is about my way or the 

highway, Mr. Speaker. So what are we going to do? So we’re 

going to start working longer hours and we’re going to be done 

about May 1? So then what are we going to do for the last two 

weeks, Mr. Speaker? How does that work? 

 

So we have an imaginary panic, Mr. Speaker. They hit the panic 

button. They hit the panic button because they don’t even know 

how to manage the House themselves. They don’t want to work 

with the opposition. So we have a crisis that isn’t a crisis. We 

don’t have a crisis, Mr. Speaker, but we have a crisis that isn’t a 

crisis because they don’t know what they’re doing. 

 

So what do we do about this little problem, Mr. Speaker? 

We’ve tried, I have tried now for the better part of 10 hours, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spent the better part of 10 hours trying to 

educate the members opposite about their mathematical skills, 

about their principles and values, Mr. Speaker, about how this 

Assembly should run, Mr. Speaker, and about how they could 

possibly cut a deal with the opposition and do the right thing 

without having to change their rules unilaterally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What did I get for results, Mr. Speaker? Well you see it, you see 

it. They haven’t changed their position; they haven’t met with 

the Opposition House Leader. They’re still playing bully 

politics, saying they’ll do exactly what they want to do, when 

they want to do it, and how they want to do it, Mr. Speaker. 

You’d think they were trying to sell a used car to somebody 

who didn’t know how to drive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how do we get ourselves in this type of situation, Mr. 

Speaker? I think you’ve got some people (a) who want to show 

that they’re the boss, and that fits in well with the bully 

mentality. Mr. Speaker, you have some people who really don’t 

know how to come to a deal, Mr. Speaker. It’s their way or the 

highway all the time. That fits in well with the bully mentality. 

And, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got some members over there who 

are dredging up every conceivable potential horror story and 

problem, Mr. Speaker, when they don’t exist. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s paranoia. That has nothing to be with being a 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 697 

bully, that’s just pure paranoia. 

 

But you know what? A lot of bullies are paranoid as well. 

They’re paranoid somebody else will find out that they’re a 

bully because they like being a bully but they don’t want 

anybody to think they are a bully, Mr. Speaker, except those 

that they abuse. Understand, Mr. Speaker, and that’s exactly the 

same situation that we have here. They want to be a bully. They 

want to unilaterally change the rules in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

but they don’t the public to know that. They don’t want the 

public to know that. They’re paranoid that the public might 

catch on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, where are we at? Mr. Speaker, I spent some 

time here trying to create some openings for the members 

opposite to do the right thing and try to talk to them about doing 

the right thing but, Mr. Speaker, they just have absolutely no 

desire to work with us, Mr. Speaker. This is about being 

unilateral, Mr. Speaker, and doing things their own way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they want to sit longer hours. They want to 

sit longer hours and for what reason, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, 

they want to sit longer hours. Might is right in their minds, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they are so determined that they want to 

sit longer hours, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, we’d like to accommodate them, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would like to move an amendment. I would like to move the 

following amendment, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That all the words in clause 1 be deleted and replaced with 

the following: 

 

Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays 

shall be 10 a.m. to 1 a.m., with a recess from 5 p.m. to 6 

p.m. 

 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we can debate the amendment for a 

considerable period of time. 

 

[19:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has moved the following amendment: 

 

That all the words in clause 1 be deleted and replaced with 

the following: 

 

Notwithstanding rule 6(1) the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sitting of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays 

shall be 10 a.m. to 1 a.m. with a recess from 5 p.m. to 6 

p.m. 

 

Question. All those in favour of the amendment? I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour . . . Mr. Speaker, I would 

like the member from Regina Dewdney to hear what I’m going 

to say so maybe the two members can stop in their exchange 

and settle their bets outside. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to follow the member from Regina 

Dewdney in this debate. I don’t believe that I can be as 

eloquent, as pithy, as concise, or to put as much content into as 

few words as he was able to do. And I want to assure the House 

that I know that the member from Regina Dewdney did not take 

his seat for a lack of breath, for lack of stamina, for lack of 

energy, for lack of ideas, or for lack of arguments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the . . . perhaps he took his seat because it’s 

approaching his grandson’s bedtime. But I believe that the 

member from Regina Dewdney was willing to speak until 10:30 

tonight and was willing to speak on these important issues 

tomorrow and the next day if necessary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that certainly a central reason the member from Regina 

Dewdney took his seat, surrendered the floor to me, is because 

the tie that I’m wearing this evening is a gift from my daughter 

upon her return from Italy, and the member from Regina 

Dewdney wanted her to be able to see the tie which she may not 

have seen. I might have been wearing something else tomorrow 

or the next day when the member from Regina Dewdney took 

his seat. 

 

Now I’m afraid to break to the member of Regina Dewdney that 

my daughter, I think, has more important things to do this 

evening than to watch this debate. The member from 

Kindersley says so does everyone else. But unfortunately for 

the member from Kindersley that, unlike my daughter, he ran 

for public office, and he is here as we are here to do the public 

business. And as my old friend Eric Cline was fond of saying, 

was fond of saying, Mr. Speaker, we fight hard for these jobs, 

and nobody wants to hear us complain about them. And I’m 

sure nobody wants to hear the member from Kindersley 

complain about his job that he sought quite eagerly. 

 

Well I’m afraid that members of the opposition come with the 

job, Mr. Speaker. And I suppose that’s the thesis of the debate 

and the thesis of the argument is that an opposition is pretty 

fundamental to the operation of our system, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s what we’ll be coming to in this evening’s discussion as 

we have over the last little while, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have some comfort and solace as well, Mr. Speaker, for 

the member from Saskatoon Northwest. Early in the discussion, 

early in the remarks from the member from Regina Dewdney, 

the member from Regina Dewdney quoted the comments 

Stockwell Day made, I think, at the time he was leader of the 

opposition in Ottawa; leader of the Canadian reform alliance 

party or the Conservative Reform Alliance Party or another 

version like that very appropriately named but quickly changed 

and eventually of course became the Conservative Party of 

Canada. And the member from Saskatoon Northwest was very 

much amused, very much amused, Mr. Speaker. I thought 

surprisingly so that a social democrat from Regina Dewdney 

would be quoting a Conservative. I thought that was quite 

amusing. I don’t know if he was loud enough to make Hansard, 

but he was certainly loud enough to be heard on this side of the 

floor, Mr. Speaker. He was very amused that the member from 



698 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Regina Dewdney would quote a Conservative and so . . . 

 

I forewarn the members opposite that I may make passing 

reference to quotations from Churchill; perhaps Edmund Burke; 

James Madison, certainly a conservative in the American 

tradition of perhaps John George Diefenbaker. And not just for 

the enjoyment and pleasure of the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest, but at least I know that one member on the 

government side will enjoy some small part of my speech. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It won’t be me. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — And the member from Kindersley says it 

won’t be him. But I think I’ve already figured that out, Mr. 

Speaker. I think I’ve already figured that out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we now have before us both a motion and 

an amendment, and I did want to address the spin that the 

government members and the Government House Leader 

particular wanted to put on the reasons for this motion. I think 

the amendment, to a certain extent, addresses those arguments 

on its own. But as you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that we had 

been told, the public has been told that the reason that the 

government’s motion has been made is because the opposition, 

Mr. Speaker, didn’t want to work. And this debate is, to a 

certain extent, Mr. Speaker, about laziness. 

 

I think the amendment shows the opposition’s willingness to 

work longer hours than the government would suggest. This 

discussion is caused by three failings of the government in the 

management of the House in which they have a majority, Mr. 

Speaker. Laziness is certainly one of them. Complacency is 

another. And arrogance, Mr. Speaker, is the third. 

 

First to the issue of laziness, and there’s been some commentary 

on this, and I think the public is somewhat aware of how the 

government got into the trouble that they’re in. And it’s not 

because the opposition didn’t want to work. It all happened 

when the government realized that the opposition may very well 

want to work. That’s what caused the problem. That’s what 

caused the problem. When they were complacently thinking, 

well we’ll judge our opposition by the way we were in 

opposition, they didn’t think they had a problem. When they 

realized that they were dealing with a different opposition than 

they have provided to this province, an opposition that would 

want to do its job, Mr. Speaker, that’s when the panic occurred. 

 

You will remember, Mr. Speaker, from the previous discussion 

that took place, that Minister of Labour concerned about 

contentious legislation that he was responsible for, whether he 

had read it or not yet, Mr. Speaker, but concerned that that 

legislation might be contentious in the House — which it may 

be to a certain extent; it’s difficult to say at this point, Mr. 

Speaker — the concern that that legislation might be 

contentious in some way, asked the question of his officials, 

said how do we ensure that the priority Bills of this government 

— of which there are six — how do we ensure that these Bills 

pass? 

 

Because we only sat for two weeks in December for reasons of 

the election. And we introduced the Bills. We didn’t want to sit 

. . . And this is where the laziness comes in, Mr. Speaker, 

begins to come in. We, the government, did not want to sit at 

night. So they were short hours, those two weeks in December. 

I suppose everybody was tired from the election, but it’s the 

government that decided that complacently that they didn’t 

need to do the work to get their legislation passed. 

 

So that being the case, Mr. Speaker, officials provided a 

calendar. And as I think the member from Regina Dewdney . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . yes, a simple planning tool, one of 

the members says. You don’t have to, you don’t really have to 

read. You just have to be able to count the numbers on the 

calendar. 

 

And what did the calendar set out? Well the calendar set out 

that, assuming that the opposition wanted to scrutinize the Bills, 

assuming the opposition wanted to play the role that an 

opposition plays, assuming that the opposition would want to 

give the public time, the public time to scrutinize the Bills . . . 

And that’s a very important feature in the role of the opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. I know you know this. 

 

And commentators have commentated on it — I think that’s 

one of the comments that John Diefenbaker had made and I 

might be referring to later — that it’s not just so that the 

opposition has time to discuss the Bills in the House and look at 

the Bills in the House. It’s so that the public has time to look at 

the Bills. And that’s why the opposition might suggest that a 

couple of these Bills, not being urgent — central services Bill 

perhaps not being that urgent unless we expect a blizzard in 

July to kill somebody — that some of these Bills could go to 

public hearings over the summer and be scrutinized by the 

public. 

 

But that’s not the result of what happens here, Mr. Speaker. The 

result of what happens here is that we cram the whole 

examination of all these Bills into more hours in the same 

period of time. So members of the legislature, both government 

and opposition, don’t have the time in the constituencies. The 

debate takes place at midnight in this legislature, not when the 

public is likely to be following the debate. Everything around 

these Bills has been designed to avoid public scrutiny of these 

Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Introducing them in a short sitting in December, then getting up 

without debate . . . and this all the government’s plan and I use 

the word plan advisedly, Mr. Speaker. It’s all the government’s 

plan. And then coming here and avoiding not only a week of 

question periods — you know those impertinent questions that 

an opposition asks the government — avoiding a week of 

question periods, but avoiding a week of debate on their 

legislation which they call their priorities, Mr. Speaker, and a 

week that they were told they needed to have. 

 

Because we’ve seen the calendar, Mr. Speaker. That’s assuming 

that the 20 hours are needed, we have to go back on March 3. 

And if you do that, you’re guaranteed your legislation on March 

14 — not much, not much room there. For a while we heard 

that we weren’t going to back — oh May 14 — not much room 

because our final day’s May 15, so May 14 is our, you know, is 

almost the last moment. But it could be done, could be done. 

 

Well government members didn’t want to do that work. They 

didn’t want to do the work in December of putting in some 

debate time on these Bills. They didn’t want these Bills 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 699 

discussed over December, January, February having been 

debated in the legislature. They didn’t want to come back in 

March, early March — when they were advised to — and 

debate these Bills. 

 

And so it’s this government that didn’t want to do the work 

necessary to manage their own legislative agenda. It’s this 

government that wants to go out to the public say oh we have, 

we have a crisis. And we have crisis caused by the opposition 

not wanting to work. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the crisis was caused by the fear on the 

government side that the opposition did want to work, that the 

opposition did want to do its job, and that the opposition would 

do what the government was warned back in February, I 

suppose, that the opposition could do. 

 

Which takes me to complacency, the second failing of the 

government evidenced by what’s happened here. Laziness, 

complacency — together they add up to incompetency. What 

the government was thinking was, it doesn’t matter if we want 

to actually put in the work. We can brag about the 

accomplishment of 100 days. We don’t actually have to put in 

any work, or we don’t have to put in any more work than 

necessary because we are the government. We won the election. 

And because we are the government and we won the election, 

what we want will happen. 

 

And you hear it from the members opposite: we won; you lost. 

What you don’t hear so much now from the members opposite 

you used to hear and I think it got out into the public and it 

didn’t play very well, Mr. Speaker, was, we had a consultation 

on November 7, 2007; that’s all the consultation we need. 

 

[19:30] 

 

They stopped saying that. They stopped saying that, Mr. 

Speaker. I think they’ve learned that that doesn’t go over very 

well, but that still is the attitude that’s within the crisis that the 

government now perceived that made this motion necessary, is 

a complacency about their majority combined with a laziness 

about doing the work to manage their own legislative agenda. 

 

I mean, if you can imagine that this was actually deliberate, Mr. 

Speaker. I mean, imagine if you will a caucus meeting where 

the Government House Leader goes to the caucus and says, 

we’ve been advised that we must go back on March 3 to pass 

our legislative agenda, but our plan is not to do that. Our plan is 

to avoid four question periods and go back the following week. 

And if it turns out the opposition actually insists on having a 

public discussion about some of this legislation, we’ll declare a 

crisis. We’ll move a motion, and you — the government 

members — you can all come into the legislature till midnight 

to solve this problem. 

 

I expect a meeting like that didn’t actually happen, Mr. Speaker. 

If the Government House Leader wanted to run that scenario 

past his caucus, if he had done that, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I think that April Fool’s Day 

would have been too late to make a change, I think, because 

they would already have missed that first week of March that 

they needed, Mr. Speaker, and that they knew they needed. 

They’d been advised that they needed it, Mr. Speaker. 

So of course that meeting didn’t take place. If that meeting had 

taken place, I think even the newer members of the government 

might have said, just a second; is that how things around here 

are supposed to work? Is that how they usually work? No, I 

don’t think that would have happened, Mr. Speaker. So it’s 

unfortunate that the House Leader didn’t run this scenario of 

how he would work this House in this kind of lazy, complacent 

way past his caucus, because I really can’t believe that he did, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the third failing of this government that has brought us to 

this situation, Mr. Speaker — and they’re all related, of course, 

the three together: laziness, complacency, and arrogance — is 

arrogance. We don’t need, we don’t need to discuss legislation. 

 

The private members of this House, in the view of the 

government, the private members of this House are there to put 

up their hands and vote. And the members of the opposition are 

there to put up their hands and vote on the losing side. That’s 

the view of this government. That’s the view of this government 

about the role of a Member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And a matter of fact, I mean that’s far more restrictive for 

private members on the government side than it is for us. I 

mean we’ll have far more latitude on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, far more ability to exercise our right to speak and 

debate and discuss than government members will in a 

legislature which the government treats as a voting machine, as 

a mere rubber stamp, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And with the greatest respect to the House Leader — who I 

know was hanging on every word of the member from Regina 

Dewdney but is perhaps maybe giving some of my remarks a 

pass, but they are for the record so I won’t worry — but with 

respect to him, and I do want to say with the greatest respect to 

the Government House Leader, Mr. Speaker, I think he 

exemplified the arrogance that brought the government to this 

situation when he was speaking to the motion, when he 

originally moved it on April 7, 2008. 

 

And on that date in Hansard this is what the Government House 

Leader suggested the opposition do — the opposition do — to 

extricate the government from the government’s mess, a mess 

created by the government’s laziness and the government’s 

complacency. And what should be done? The opposition should 

extricate the government from this situation. That’s our role. 

And this is what he said, quote, to us: “. . . just start the debate 

and sit down and let it come to a vote after an hour or 20 

minutes or whatever . . .” 

 

So that’s the government’s solution to the problem the 

government created through its unwillingness to work, its 

complacency about the role of the legislature, and about what 

might take place in its first sitting — its first spring sitting, its 

first session of the legislature and the beginning of its term — 

this complacency that, well we’re the majority. It’ll all sort of 

sort itself out. And that that is the . . . 

 

There’s been a lot of talk, Mr. Speaker, about offers and 

whether they were reasonable or unreasonable. Well that was 

the offer of the Government House Leader on the record, Mr. 

Speaker. The offer of the Government House Leader on the 

record was: “. . . just start the debate and sit down and let it 



700 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

come to a vote after an hour or 20 minutes or whatever . . .” 

 

Well you know, I think the Government House Leader can tell 

his members that, Mr. Speaker. But isn’t it the height of 

arrogance for the Government House Leader to tell the 

opposition that, Mr. Speaker? Isn’t it? Isn’t this just the height 

of arrogance, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And this is a government that in a very short time, in a very 

short time has been marked, marked by incompetency and 

arrogance, Mr. Speaker — incompetency and 

mean-spiritedness, Mr. Speaker. And I say with some 

immodesty, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney I 

think was quoting me when he said that a colleague had said 

that it took Grant Devine four years to raise a demonstration of 

2,000 people against the actions of his government. It may have 

taken more. Let’s be generous to the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Party government. Let’s be 

generous to them and say it took five months to do the same. It 

took five months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Regina Dewdney also referred in this context 

to how what we are seeing now in imposing majority will on 

the minority within the legislature, and how that is a repetition 

of the history of the Grant Devine government and its attitude to 

the legislature, which by the way took a real toll not just on 

opposition members but government members eventually, Mr. 

Speaker. But I’ll come to that later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney said that 

history repeated itself. And of course he was referring to . . . 

One epigram, I think, is those who do not learn their history are 

failed or doomed to repeat it. But there’s another. And I’m 

afraid I’m not sure I can attribute the right speaker to this 

quotation, but that history does repeat itself — the first time is 

tragedy; the second time is farce. And if that’s true, Mr. 

Speaker — and that seems to be true here in Saskatchewan — 

the tragedy is the Devine government, and now we are 

witnessing the repeat of history, but as farce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been asking myself since I realized that I 

might be in this debate and I might be in this debate for a little 

longer than, oh, 20 minutes or whatever — as the Government 

House Leader would have given the entire opposition in his 

solution to his problem — I’ve been pondering why I have the 

opportunity this evening to talk at some length, the luxury of 

talking at some length about democracy, about the important 

role of opposition, about the importance of the majority not 

imposing its will in direct contradiction and repression of the 

rights of the minority, why I have this opportunity. And other 

members of the class of 2003 — and I would use the example 

of the member from Saskatoon Silver Springs who was also 

elected in 2003 for the first time, as I was myself, Mr. Speaker 

— why I had this opportunity and over four years the member 

for Saskatoon Silver Springs never had an opportunity like this, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know why, Mr. Speaker? Because the government of 

which I was a member respected the rights of the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs when he was in opposition. The 

government of which I was a member did not so mismanage the 

House that it could not pass its own legislative agenda. And if it 

had had difficulty, if that government had difficulty with its 

legislative agenda, that government, the government of which I 

was a member, Mr. Speaker, complied with the rules it had 

negotiated with the members opposite when they were in 

opposition and paid the price, took our lumps. The government 

of which I was a member did not tromp on the rights of any 

opposition member including the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs to save face really, as a matter of pride, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what we’re looking at here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Look at the priority Bills. Look at the priority Bills and the 

reason why we’re changing, unilaterally changing by majority 

vote, like that’s what’s anticipated, Mr. Speaker, the rules of the 

legislature. It’s merely a matter of pride. I think the member 

from Regina Dewdney pointed out quite well that what are the 

consequences of any of these Bills having been put off till the 

fall if indeed the opposition had wanted to spend 20 hours on 

each one of them. 

 

Matter of fact one of the consequences, Mr. Speaker, would 

have been that the opposition would have saved the government 

from breaking promises. Remember the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs saying, sitting from his seat, while the 

member from Regina Dewdney was on his feet, making 

remarks that the reason this legislation had to be passed is 

because the government needs to keep its promises. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, two pieces of the six pieces of legislation 

break commitments of the government. By preventing these 

pieces of legislation from being passed, we would keep the 

government to its word. Allowing the government to pass these, 

as we eventually will have to, Mr. Speaker, allowing the 

government to pass these pieces of legislation will actually 

cause them to break commitments. 

 

Of course those two pieces are Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker, which 

is contrary to what the Saskatchewan Party held out to the 

people of Saskatchewan they would do in the way of balanced 

budgeting. I don’t have a problem with Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker. 

In large part it just renames Fiscal Stabilization Fund, is a 

recognition by the government that what they had previously 

called a smoke and mirrors, you know, a non-existent fund, 

actually like their party, only really needs a new name to 

become quite okay. 

 

But it’s contrary to what they committed to do. So I mean they 

don’t need to pass that piece of legislation to keep their 

promises. Just the opposite, Mr. Speaker. When they pass it, it 

would be a broken commitment — not a major broken 

commitment, Mr. Speaker. I wouldn’t take them too much to 

task for that, Mr. Speaker. But still, I mean, you can’t argue 

that, well we need to do this to keep our commitments when the 

exact reverse is true. 

 

The second piece, of course, is the essential services legislation. 

And, I mean, both the Premier and the Minister of Health were 

quite clear that there wasn’t going to be such legislation when 

asked directly if there would be. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to argue against the concept of 

essential services. We actually haven’t seen the legislation that 

the government means to propose in this respect because they 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 701 

have amendments, or they say they have amendments. I don’t 

know if the Minister of Labour has actually read the 

amendments. I don’t know if the amendments are actually 

written or not, but the legislation that the government proposes 

that we pass isn’t the legislation that we’ve seen. 

 

And in any case the argument that’s been made — albeit from a 

seat and not from a member on his feet — the argument that’s 

been made is that we need to pass this legislation to keep our 

commitments. In fact as long as the opposition could prevent 

the government from passing that legislation, require public 

hearings, require public consultation, we would be preventing 

the government from breaking a commitment made by both the 

Premier himself and the Minister of Health. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I find myself in a position that I’m quite 

happy, I suppose, to be in. I mean it’s an opportunity to talk 

about some values that are very important to me but again an 

opportunity that was never extended to any member of the class 

of 2003 sitting on the government benches when they were in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, because well, Mr. Speaker, the 

government of which I was a member simply didn’t do this, 

wouldn’t have done this. Wouldn’t have used its majority to 

change the rules it had negotiated with the opposition because 

that government was unable to manage the House. 

 

That government was not as incompetent as this government by 

a long stretch, Mr. Speaker. And that government was not as 

arrogant as this government already is, Mr. Speaker. After 16 

years, Mr. Speaker, that government was not as arrogant as this 

government is after 16 weeks. 

 

So I do have the occasion which I want to take, Mr. Speaker, to 

talk a little bit about, and I think it’s important for all members 

of the House. Clearly it’s important now because the 

government has sort of set the tone. 

 

The StarPhoenix editorial board pointed out that in many ways 

the government set the tone that people of Saskatchewan might 

fear to expect, other decisions to be made in the same tone, in 

the same manner, missing character by the cancellation of 

Station 20 West. 

 

The government has sort of set the tone for its commitment, if 

that’s the right word, Mr. Speaker. Before, I used the word plan 

advisedly, and I use the word commitment advisedly — its 

commitment to democracy by what it’s doing here. 

 

And I think it’s important, particularly maybe for new 

members, particularly for new members of the House to think 

about the role of a legislator. Because not every member on the 

government side is a member of cabinet, is a member of 

Executive Council. They are here, as we are here in opposition, 

as legislators, and they might think carefully about the role that 

they have and the role this legislature has and about history 

repeating itself because a majority government is only a 

majority government because it has the confidence of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s my recollection that the reason that Grant Devine paid 

for public expenses at the end of that government by special 

warrant is because Grant Devine, Premier Devine, though he 

had a majority in the House, did not believe he could pass a 

budget, Mr. Speaker. He could not, did not have confidence that 

he had the confidence of the House even though he had been 

elected with a majority government five years before in 1986. 

 

And members of the government, the private members on the 

government side, quite happy to accept the Government House 

Leader’s explanation that this is somehow the opposition’s 

fault, after a while that argument might wear a little thin. And 

they might think about the fact that they are here as legislators 

and not just as voting machines for a government, Mr. Speaker, 

which I guess brings me to the first remark of Winston 

Churchill — maybe the only one that I’ll use this evening — 

but the first remark of Winston Churchill, which, you know, I 

point out to the member from Saskatoon Northwest, was 

probably made while he was a Conservative and to the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest’s enjoyment and appreciation. He 

may have made it while he was a Liberal, but I expect he made 

this one as he was a Conservative. I’m pretty sure that he did 

because I think he made it when he was prime minister. 

 

And a young cabinet minister said to Prime Minister Churchill, 

isn’t it a remarkable system that we have? Isn’t it a remarkable 

system that we have that here on one side of the House you 

have a government and two sword lengths away you have the 

enemy? And Prime Minister Churchill said, that’s not the 

enemy. And, Mr. Speaker, the government should keep this in 

mind. He said, that’s not the enemy — that’s Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. The enemy, Churchill said, is behind us in 

the backbenches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s something the government might remember. It’s 

what all government members might remember, is that across 

the way from them is not the enemy. And I know that’s easy to 

forget. It’s been easy to forget over the last few days probably, 

Mr. Speaker. But it’s worth remembering Churchill’s words. 

Across the way from the government benches is not the enemy. 

It is Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Now I think it’s commonly believed, perhaps, popularly 

believed that, you know, after years, centuries of dictatorship, 

societies evolve into democracies and that that’s a natural order 

of things, that societies just become more and more democratic. 

But in fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the case. Societies become 

democracies and democracies become dictatorships, Mr. 

Speaker. And democracies become less democratic, more 

relevantly perhaps to the discussion this evening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people who gave us the word democracy, the ancient 

Greeks, the Athenians — democracy, rule by the people — 

weren’t always sure that their limited democracy was 

necessarily the best system. None of their neighbours looked at 

them and said, oh look at successful Athens; we should adopt 

democracy. I don’t think there are any major philosophical 

works from the day of early Greek democracy explaining why 

democracy was such a wonderful thing. Many, many, many 

people will be familiar with, at least by title, Plato’s Republic. 

It’s a great philosophical work of the days of Athenian 

democracy. Plato’s Republic is a book-long argument against 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s what comes down to us from Athens — the word 

democracy and a major philosophical work of western 

civilization, an argument against democracy. Plato, who 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

believed in the philosopher king as opposed to rule of the 

people by the people, went off and at the invitation of a tyrant 

of Sicily or Syracuse — I can’t remember exactly which — 

very disappointed I think to find that kings weren’t necessarily 

interested in being guided by philosophy. But I’m not sure that 

it changed his opinion of democracy. I think maybe he was an 

anti-democrat to the very end, the very end, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was interested recently to read about an American senator 

from West Virginia, a state that I don’t believe existed before 

the civil war, Senator Byrd. And when some of the members 

opposite were calling across to the member from Regina 

Dewdney as to the relevance of his remarks to the topic of the 

motion, to the topic at hand, Mr. Speaker, it reminded me of 

what I had read about Senator Byrd, who spoke for I think nine 

days it said, in the American senate. The topic was a line item 

veto by the president of the United States. 

 

His exposition was on the Roman senate and how the lessons of 

the fall of the republic addressed the issue of whether this 

power of the legislature of the American senate should be 

conceded to the American president. And I thought, well, Mr. 

Speaker, it would probably be the easiest thing for me this 

evening to read into the record at least portions of that nine-day 

speech on the fall of the Roman republic. But I thought the 

members opposite might think that was cheating, Mr. Speaker, 

and I won’t do that. 

 

But the thesis of Senator Byrd, who is one of these gentlemen 

— and I think this is relevant to much of the proceedings in this 

legislature over the last few days and some of the matters of 

public discussion — is one of these gentlemen whose views, 

certainly his public views, dramatically changed over his life. 

As a young man he was an active segregationist and abandoned 

those views. Whether he sincerely believed that he had been 

wrong or whether he saw that the times they were a-changing, 

and modified his outlook or at least his public outlook 

accordingly, who’s to know? Who’s to know the inner mind 

and inner soul of a person? You can only judge them by what 

they say, Mr. Speaker, and by what they do, and more perhaps 

by what they do than by what they say. 

 

Anyways, to return to Senator Byrd’s thesis about the surrender 

of power from the legislature to the executive, which the 

government is asking us to do with this motion. Well not asking 

us to do, requiring us to do, but at least we’re being allowed to 

speak to is for some small period of time. Senator Byrd’s thesis 

— and I think an unusual one and some day I’ll have to read his 

entire remarks — was that the emperors didn’t seize powers 

from the senate, the senate surrendered power to the emperor. 

 

And again to sort of follow on the theme, Mr. Speaker, people’s 

confidence in democracy is often fragile. And when they see a 

threat . . . and it doesn’t have to be much of a threat. Sometimes 

I think in a legislature or parliament it can just be the threat of 

inefficiency, just the idea that, well this would so much quicker 

if we just didn’t have to do this — if we could just write the 

legislation, put it in place, and not have to deal with this. You 

know, questions across the way and calls for public discussion 

and all that, if we could just do all that, life would be so much 

simpler. And I think that’s often the greatest threat to 

democracy is the appeal of simplicity and security and certainty 

against the messiness of trying to deal with opposing issues, 

particularly minorities. 

 

I mean who do they think they are, Mr. Speaker, and why do 

they think that they should be heard? They’re the minority. If 

they were important they’d be the majority. If they were 

persuasive, they’d be the majority. If everybody agreed with 

them they’d be the majority. Why should we be concerned 

about them? And I think that it’s that tendency to irritation, 

frustration. 

 

We hear it from some of the government members in this 

debate and prior to this. I think it’s that sort of frustration that 

can whittle away at democracy and, without people really 

noticing that, you know, that what we’ve gained in efficiency 

and ease as government, we’ve lost in respect and in the ability, 

I think the member from Regina Dewdney said, to incorporate a 

broader, a broader vision. And I will come to, I will come to at 

some point the appeal for public hearings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 

has asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, seated in my gallery are a 

number of people, but one in particular that has just come in 

that I wanted to draw to your attention and members of the 

Assembly. He’s a retired public servant for many years with the 

Provincial Library system, well regarded, developed an 

excellent reputation for his work. He’s now busier than ever as 

a retired person in our community. I’m very pleased that he 

could join us tonight, and I wonder if all members would join 

me in extending a warm welcome to Bob Ivanochko. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

will return to the point about the call for public hearings. 

 

But I guess the central part of the thesis of this part of my 

speech is that the easy, easy temptation on the part of a 

government with a majority — if they’re allowed to do it and if 

they’re allowed to do it by all private members in the House, 

Mr. Speaker; all members of the House should be concerned — 

that executive power would completely usurp legislative power. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

And that, Mr. Speaker, should be a concern. There’s certainly 

many, many reasons, much evidence from history, Mr. Speaker, 

to have that concern. 

 

And it’s a difficult, it’s a difficult position to defend, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s a position that is argued almost 

exclusively by the minority. It’s a position that’s argued almost 

exclusively by the people who find themselves in the minority 

in the opposition, Mr. Speaker, and they’re arguing that they 

should have greater power, that they should have greater rights, 

that that’s good for democracy. And the majority doesn’t want 

to listen, Mr. Speaker. The majority doesn’t want to listen to 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a very difficult position, but it’s the duty, it’s the duty of an 

opposition to make this argument, Mr. Speaker. It is the duty of 

an opposition to make this argument. And if, given the 

opportunity by a government to make this argument we did not 

make it, Mr. Speaker, we would be failing this institution. We 

would be failing democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I want to skip ahead, Mr. Speaker, because I appreciate the 

members are impatient for a movement away from ancient 

Rome and I only have another two and a half hours, Mr. 

Speaker, so I can’t spend too long in the ancient world. 

 

The second or third, I guess, example in history where we did 

not become more democratic — we became less democratic — 

would be the restoration of the monarchy in England. And I do 

not want to suggest that I have any republican sympathies 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. And later on I might be quoting 

James Madison. I also do not want that to be read the wrong 

way. I am truly a member of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, 

and loyal to the Queen as I have sworn to be. 

 

All that said, with the fall of Charles I who believed in absolute 

monarchy, absolute executive power, very frustrated with the 

powers that had developed in parliament, declared war more 

than once on his own parliament and on his own people, Mr. 

Speaker, with his fall there was obviously something of a 

democratic flourishing . . . and with the restoration of Charles II 

— again believed strongly in an absolute monarchy, again a 

retreat from democracy. 

 

And I’ve been very interested to read, although I haven’t 

finished, a book called The Tyrannicide Brief, Mr. Speaker. 

And I owe the fact that I have this book both to I think the 

magical powers of the web and the affection of my family for 

me, a combination of those two, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I came downstairs one morning to hear, I think, Michael 

Enright interviewing the author of a book, and he was talking 

about a man I’d never heard of. I guess I must have realized that 

such a man would exist, but I had never heard of John Cooke, 

who was the man who prosecuted Charles I. And I caught that it 

was about the prosecution of Charles I. I didn’t catch the name 

of the prosecutor. I didn’t catch the name of the book. And I 

didn’t catch the name of the author, as I had come too late to the 

interview, Mr. Speaker. But I talked about this book because of 

a story that the author told, and my family found me this book, 

and I received this book for Christmas. And this is the story that 

I heard on the radio, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Charles I was brought to trial for declaring war on parliament 

and on his own people, and the puritan lawyers of the day were 

very reluctant to prosecute the king, and the job fell to the son 

of a tenant farmer who had gone to Oxford on a scholarship, 

Mr. Speaker, and had become a lawyer. He became not 

Attorney General but Solicitor General to the English 

government. And Mr. Cook read out or was there in court as the 

prosecutor reading out the indictment against King Charles, 

who had a cane, Mr. Speaker, and a cane with a silver tip. And 

he struck the prosecutor with the cane, suggesting somewhat 

violently that the prosecutor stop. 

 

And the suggestion that the author, an English barrister, Mr. 

Speaker, the suggestion of the author is that if the prosecutor 

had stopped in this very unique unheard of proceeding, a public 

trial . . . There had been secret trials of kings and queens in 

England, Mr. Speaker. I was there last summer at the Tower of 

London where Anne Boleyn and many executed monarchs and 

noble people were buried after secret trials. But this was the 

first public trial of a head of state in history. And now we’ve 

had other trials by heads of state but in a sense this is the 

precedent for those trials, which are still quite rare, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it’s a precedent for the concept that you can commit crimes 

against your own people, that a government can be held 

responsible for crimes against its own people in international 

law. In any case at this very exceptional trial, the king struck 

the prosecutor once. The prosecutor did not stop. He struck him 

again. The prosecutor did not stop. He struck him a third time, 

and the silver tip of the cane fell off, Mr. Speaker, and rolled 

onto the floor. And the king, who’s not used to picking up after 

himself, motioned for the prosecutor to pick up the silver tip. 

Well the prosecutor did not do that. He proceeded with the legal 

proceedings taking place in the courtroom. And the king leaned 

over and picked up the silver tip of the cane. And an intake of 

breath was heard in the court room as all the spectators gasped 

at the spectacle of a king — the absolute executive power — 

bowing down to the robot, Mr. Speaker. The king later said that 

he thought that was a bad omen and, after a trial and a 

sentencing, was beheaded. 

 

In part I’ve stopped reading, in part I have stopped . . . I think, 

Mr. Speaker, you understand the argument I’m making. I 

stopped reading the book at one point partly because I’m busy 

and partly because I know what happens next. Charles II 

returns. John Cook is tortured to death. Oliver Cromwell, 

fortunately for Oliver Cromwell, was dead. I saw his grave, Mr. 

Speaker, in England. When you’re walking around historic 

London, historic Canterbury as it was, you have to get used to 

walking on dead people because there’s one wherever you go. 

But Oliver Cromwell is not there. He was dug up and hanged 

while dead. And his remains . . . where his remains actually are 

is unknown and unmarked in history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, case after case after case where democracy does not 

just expand automatically as a natural thing, Mr. Speaker, 

where democracy actually falls back into dictatorship, and 

where executive power always, always resents the 

inconvenience of the legislature, of the law making and 

particularly of the minority within legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next example I think is an American one, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

been interested to see two episodes of a mini-series about John 

Adams, Mr. Speaker, who was I think the second president of 

the United States. Not as well known as George Washington or 

Thomas Jefferson, his contemporaries, Mr. Speaker, but a very 

interesting story told from his point of view. And there’s a 

moment in the second episode that gives me pause because we 

get very worked up in here about the issues in which we deal 

very heated debate. 

 

And I think it’s partly the building, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes we 

forget that the work we do is important, but maybe we’re not as 

important as we think we are. And in any case, we can get quite 

self-absorbed and perhaps not as humble and modest as we 

should be. 

 

And this episode — which, you know, may not have happened 

exactly the way it’s portrayed but could very well have 

happened — takes place after Thomas Jefferson has been asked 

to draft a Declaration of Independence and has in fact drafted 

the first declaration of human rights to a certain extent. And he 

and John Adams and Benjamin Franklin are meeting, and 

Benjamin Franklin has a suggestion that sacred be replaced with 

self-evident, that the truths be self-evident, that it smacks less of 

the pulpit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they decide to take out the condemnation of slavery, slave 

trade in the document because they want to put off that debate. 

And that debate gets put off for 90 years, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

not resolved peacefully as we all know. They want to put off 

that debate because this is about independence, and this is about 

unity. And I guess any politician looks at that discussion and 

appreciates the compromise that’s necessary to accomplish 

things in some cases. 

 

But part way through, after a while they’re working on the 

Declaration of Independence, Mr. Speaker, Benjamin Franklin 

asks Thomas Jefferson how he invented the swivel chair that 

he’s sitting on. And so here’s this group of farmers and country 

lawyers who are starting a republic, building a country, fighting 

a war of independence against an empire, and inventing office 

furniture. 

 

And I guess history demands of us what it does, and we try to 

meet the challenges that . . . And some of us just aren’t made to 

face the same challenges and the same trials. But I think it does 

teach a little bit of humility. 

 

But the framers of the American republic weren’t too sure about 

democracy themselves, Mr. Speaker. And I think when I come 

to some of the things that James Madison had to say about 

protection of the minority from the majority, which is what this 

discussion is all about, Mr. Speaker, I think some of his 

concerns about democracy might come through as well. The 

founders, or at least some of the founders, of the American 

republic believe strongly in a republic. They didn’t necessarily 

believe strongly in democracy and didn’t see those to be the 

same things at all, believed them to be alternatives. 

 

Now the last . . . the case of a democracy slipping easily into a 

dictatorship I’ll take from 20th century Europe, Mr. Speaker, 

and I’ll be very brief in this subject. 

 

[20:15] 

I think many people assumed — I once did — that democracy 

in Austria fell when the Nazis invaded, Mr. Speaker. But in fact 

it fell before that. Austrian independence may have ended for a 

few years because of that invasion, but the democracy itself did 

not fall. 

 

Austria had a minority parliament, and when a couple members 

from the larger party — but still not the government — exited 

the room, a motion was passed which gave power to the 

executive and was the end of democracy in Austria. 

 

Now the way I’ve read the story, a general strike was called, 

Mr. Speaker, but as often happens in history, little accidents 

mean so much. The first people to go out were the telegraph 

operators, and other unions didn’t hear about the strike, and the 

strike failed, Mr. Speaker, and that democracy was lost. It 

probably wasn’t long-lived anyways given the circumstances 

that were going on in Europe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But democracy is not, once achieved, necessarily eternal, Mr. 

Speaker. And there are many, many, many lessons from history, 

and I’ve only mentioned a few to show that that is not the case 

— not only, not only is it very difficult and perhaps arrogant to 

believe that we can plant the roots and establish fully formed 

democracies in countries that have not gone through the history 

that I have briefly canvassed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Maybe there’s an example of that in Japan, but it took some 

time. I have a teacup at home that has painted on the bottom, 

“made during the Japanese occupation,” and it doesn’t have 

1945, 1946, 1947, 1948, 1949, or 1950, but has a much later 

date in the ’50s on it. That occupation of Japan continued for 

some period of time. But after that occupation was ended, Japan 

joined other industrial democracies as a member of G7 and as 

an active member of the United Nations and is a democratic 

country within the world. But that’s a rare example. We haven’t 

had an example yet of democracy being imposed from outside 

although there is now currently some attempts on a country 

without a broad middle class, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s not an easily instilled concept. And it’s not necessarily there 

as a birthright that does not require our vigilance and our 

protection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And within our democratic institutions, the same is true, Mr. 

Speaker. It is, I think, tempting for members of the government 

to reduce the idea of democracy to the one pillar, the one 

concept, the will of the majority. And here we have a 

government that has, I think, said what we do is democratic. We 

received 50 per cent of the vote, maybe a little bit more. We 

have two-thirds of the seats in the House. We express the will 

of the majority. That’s democracy. And what is the opposition 

talking about, Mr. Speaker, from the government’s point of 

view, that there is anything undemocratic going on here? And 

it’s just we have the . . . You know the will of the majority is 

being expressed, both the will of the majority of the people in 

the last election and the will of the majority of the people in this 

House. It’s as simple as that. 

 

The will of majority is the sole guiding principle of a mob, Mr. 

Speaker. It is not the sole guiding principle of a democracy. 

Democracy rests on four principles, Mr. Speaker. It relies on the 

will of majority. It relies on protection of individual freedoms. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

It relies on respect for minorities. And it relies on the rule of 

law. 

 

And I had many occasions, Mr. Speaker, to speak at briefly — 

more briefly than this evening — the swearing-in of judges in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And when I spoke at the 

swearing-in of Provincial Court judges who are the 

appointments of the provincial government, Mr. Speaker, I 

would speak on the subject of the importance of the Provincial 

Court and that that court, because it is the only court that many 

people, many victims of crime, many accused of crime, many 

unrepresented litigants will ever see, Mr. Speaker, is in some 

ways, in my view, the most important court in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And Provincial Court judges like to hear that, 

Mr. Speaker. But I don’t say it because they like to hear it; I say 

it because I believe it’s true. 

 

And it really is because of the circumstances of the people who 

appear before the court — 90 per cent of criminal cases, all 

small claims — because of the circumstances, people who 

appear before that court really is, not only the first court but 

their final court. And therefore whatever the Charter of Rights 

may say and whatever interpretation may be given to the 

Charter of Rights or victim protection legislation by higher 

courts, if Provincial Court doesn’t provide those rights and that 

protection to the people who appear before it, those rights and 

protections mean very little, Mr. Speaker, very little indeed. So 

it is a very important court. 

 

But that’s not to take away from the importance of the superior 

courts that are appointed by the federal government. And I had 

occasion to speak at the appointment of a number of members 

of the Bar or lower courts being appointed to the Court of 

Queen’s Bench or the Court of Appeal, Mr. Speaker. And when 

I did that, I set out what I believe an Attorney General should 

believe and an Attorney General should say and that is that, 

although unelected, members of the judiciary have a very 

important role in a democracy because democracy is not all 

about the will of the majority. Democracy is also about 

protection of individual freedoms, respect for minorities, and 

the rule of law. 

 

Now what I believe, I believed it when I was Attorney General, 

I believe it applies to this Attorney General or current Attorney 

General. I hope he believes it as well. I believe it still — 

although it’s probably not as important any more for the time 

being, Mr. Speaker — that we as legislators and as government, 

as executive government, should not leave to the courts 

protection of individual freedom, respect for minorities, and the 

rule of law. We should not for political purposes take action 

that we actually believe is unconstitutional or unlawful and let 

the courts sort it out and blame the courts if the decision’s 

unpopular, that we should not always fall to the default position 

— which this government is in this case, in this motion — 

default position that the will of a majority and that’s the answer. 

There aren’t any other things to balance. There’s nothing to be 

balanced in a strong democracy, but the will of the majority. 

That’s not true. 

 

All four of these pillars are important, Mr. Speaker, and all four 

of these pillars should be important to all branches of 

government, Mr. Speaker — not just to the executive, not just 

to the judiciary, not to the executive, not just to the legislature 

but to all branches of government, they should be important. 

 

And the protection of individual freedom, should it be 

important to this government as well, Mr. Speaker, as important 

to them as the will of the majority. And I can understand why 

they care more about the will of the majority, Mr. Speaker. I 

understand that, Mr. Speaker. But it’s their responsibility as 

members of a government, even the executive branch of 

government, to be concerned with issues of individual freedom 

and, in the context of this motion, Mr. Speaker, particularly 

freedom of speech. 

 

And unfortunately we see a Government House Leader’s 

commitment to the freedom to speak of members of the 

opposition in this House, Mr. Speaker — people who are not 

part of the majority. We see his level of commitment in the 

quote that I’ve read. Quote, “. . . just start the debate and sit 

down and let it come to a vote after an hour or 20 minutes or 

whatever . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes whatever. 

Whatever, they call across. Whatever, they call across. The 

member from Moose Jaw North calls across, whatever, 

whatever. I assume since 20 minutes is shorter than an hour, a 

whatever is shorter than 20 minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if the commitment to the freedom of speech — the ability of 

members in this legislature to speak and debate on what the 

government considers to be priority Bills of the House Leader 

— may be as expansive for the entire opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

on the part of the Government House Leader to an hour. The 

commitment of the member from Moose Jaw North who, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, should be concerned about his rights as a 

member of this Legislative Assembly but apparently is not, his 

commitment is something less than 20 minutes for the entire 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, because his commitment is to, as he 

calls out, whatever, Mr. Speaker. So that’s the commitment 

from across the way to the pillar of democracy, the pillar of 

democracy of individual freedom and particularly freedom of 

speech, which takes me to the respect for minorities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the Premier recently delivered a well-written and 

well-presented speech on the subject of respect for minorities, 

Mr. Speaker. And he, he . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes well you should be thanking him for 

making you look good. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I would thank the member from Wood River 

for his comments if I thought they were sincere, Mr. Speaker. I 

would really be thankful, Mr. Speaker, if I thought, if I thought 

they were sincere. 

 

But the Premier’s remarks about minorities did put me in mind 

of remarks he had made earlier in the sitting because there’s 

popular minorities, Mr. Speaker, and there’s unpopular 

minorities. And really when we’re concerned about democracy 

and having a true democracy, Mr. Speaker, we have to be 

concerned about the unpopular minorities, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think the Premier wanted to more associate himself with the 

popular minorities — the minorities that the majority is more 

likely to feel affection towards. 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

But the comments that came to mind of the Premier’s is, when 

the contentious legislation, either Bill 5 or Bill 6, were 

introduced into the legislature and leaders of the trade union 

movement attended in the rotunda, and the Speaker — not the 

Speaker; I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker — the Premier rose in this 

House and referred to those leaders of the trade union 

movement as quote “swearing and sputtering” in the rotunda, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

A remarkable statement for a premier, I thought, a remarkable 

statement to make about any minority, any unpopular group or 

unpopular with the government. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, I can’t 

think of a premier in recent history that would say such a thing 

in the legislature about any group that opposed legislation, 

whether they were swearing or sputtering in the rotunda or not. 

 

And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, the Premier is a fine sputterer. He 

is an expert sputterer. He is practised at the art of sputtering. 

We see it often, Mr. Speaker. So coming from the Premier, that 

remark must have stung because he knows of what he speaks, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can’t imagine that this Premier would say that about any other 

group of people, any other interest group. I can’t. There’s not a 

group, there’s not a group that he would say that about, Mr. 

Speaker, without apologizing. And if he has apologized for the 

swearing and sputtering remark, then I apologize now. I’m not 

aware of that apology, but I would withdraw my remarks quite 

happily, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He has, but 

that’s the respect for minorities that we see in the recent 

behaviour of our Premier, Mr. Speaker. If he doesn’t agree with 

you, you’re sputtering in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

the attitude of this government, and that’s inappropriate. 

 

I do want to say a few words . . . I mean what I just said now 

. . . 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and to all members of the House through you, 

Mr. Speaker, a young lady sitting up in the east gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this young lady was so interested in the topic that 

we have been debating the last couple of days, she came to get 

some of my materials so she can write in fact a report for 

school, Mr. Speaker. And that young lady, Mr. Speaker, that 

young lady is the daughter of a good friend of mine. And I’d 

like to introduce to the House, Ms. Kristi Chester. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

issue of respect for minorities is central to the discussion that 

we’re having, Mr. Speaker, because it’s a minority within this 

legislature that is being oppressed by the government. 

 

The rules are being changed unilaterally by the government. 

They’re using the majority to do that, Mr. Speaker. It is directly 

contradictory to one of the fundamental principles of a 

democracy — the respect for minorities, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

clearly, clearly the case, Mr. Speaker, and very central to my 

argument, very central to my thesis. 

 

But I do want to talk just for a moment, Mr. Speaker, about 

invisible minorities because that’s very relevant to some of the 

discussions that have been going on in the public and to a 

certain extent within this legislature over the last few days. To 

be discriminated against as a visible minority of course is 

wrong, and it’s oppressive, and I’m not as eloquent as the 

Premier was in his prepared statements on this subject, but he 

spoke very well in that respect. 

 

What I would call invisible minorities suffer from, in some 

respects, a greater burden. You can’t necessarily identify 

members of the invisible minority, Mr. Speaker. And therefore 

members of an invisible minority are more likely to pretend that 

they are members of the majority, Mr. Speaker. And so what 

members of visible minorities are compelled to do, to band 

together in self-defence and solidarity, is not so easy for 

invisible minorities where members of the minority may 

pretend, perhaps by attacking the minority either in jokes or in 

other ways, to be part of the majority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Much more difficult to advance the cause of invisible 

minorities, whether it’s Jews pretending to be Christians during 

the Inquisition or gay people pretending to be straight in current 

times. In some ways it’s more oppressive not to be a member of 

a visible minority but to be part of a group that suffers 

discrimination if discovered and seen, Mr. Speaker. But I do not 

want to spend a great deal of time on that aspect of respect for 

minorities because it isn’t close to the central matter under 

discussion. 

 

Which takes me to the rule of law, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

understand it we have a government that, being faced with 

proclaimed legislation changing the character of the Gaming 

Corporation . . . I think it’s the Gaming Corporation. Instead of 

coming into the legislature and repealing that legislation, in 

cabinet repeals the proclamation as if that’s repealing the 

legislation. That speaks to arrogance, but it also speaks to 

complete misunderstanding of the rule of law and the role of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course we’ve seen their disrespect for independent 

commissions, particularly the Labour Relations Board. But it 

sets a tone that I think would make anyone concerned as to the 

independence of any commission, independent commission in 

this province, worry about the attitude of this government 

towards the rule of law. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

But the rule of law of which we are directly speaking in this 

debate . . . if I can call it a debate, Mr. Speaker, if I can call it a 

debate, a discussion I suppose. The member from Regina 

Dewdney and I have been the only ones who have spoken since 

the Government House Leader, and I don’t have the sense that I 

am debating with him. 

 

But the rule of law that we’re talking about is the rules of this 

legislature. I mean the reason that we have laws and the reason 

why democracy depends upon the rule of law . . . You can have 

the rule of law without having democracy, but you can’t have 

democracy without having the rule of law. Democracy requires 

some certainty. It requires some certainty as to what your rights 

are, what your freedoms are, as limited as they might be under 

whatever laws you happen live. It requires some certainty as to 

your redress, as to your measure of equality before the law. It 

requires some certainty as to how the law is to be changed. 

 

Now how the rules of this legislature changed, while they were 

negotiated between this party when it was in government and 

that party when it was in opposition, that party understood the 

rules, understood the certainty it gave them. Members talked 

about things that have happened in the past that predate my time 

in this legislature. These rules were to improve that situation. 

These rules were in place because members of the opposition, 

members of the government, recognized that previous 

circumstances had been unsatisfactory. And how do we prevent 

that from happening? How do we provide some certainty that 

that won’t happen? How do we come to a mutual understanding 

of how this legislature will work to the benefit of government, 

to the benefit of the opposition? And we negotiated these rules, 

Mr. Speaker. And we exercised as the society that is this 

Legislative Chamber. As this Legislative Assembly we acted 

under our own rule of law. 

 

But what’s happened to the rule of law in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker? Well it’s gone. It’s gone. The majority has said oh 

forget about your freedom to speak and the public’s freedom to 

hear what you have to say about legislation. Forget about those 

individual freedoms. Forget about our respect for you as a 

minority and, as I will come to later in my remarks, an essential 

part of how our represented democracy works. 

 

It doesn’t work very well without an opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

Forget about that — that respect for minority that is essential to 

how our democracy works — and forget about our rule of law. 

Forget about our rules, Mr. Speaker, because we are guided by 

the sole guiding principle of a mob which is the will of the 

majority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now all this is being done, this abandonment of commitment to 

the freedom of members, this abandonment of respect for a 

minority within this legislature, and for the legislators on both 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker, the non-members of the cabinet 

of the Executive Council, the disrespect for all of us — the 

member for Wood River and I, really, Mr. Speaker — and 

disrespect for our rules and the rule of law and how we change 

our rules. 

 

All of that, Mr. Speaker, is being done why? Why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because the government has a legislative agenda that 

they were too lazy and complacent and arrogant to organize — 

with advice, even with advice, Mr. Speaker — to organize so 

that they could have it approved with certainty within the rules. 

That’s why it’s happening. That’s why it’s happening. 

 

It’s a matter of saving face. All of this, all these principles of 

democracy are being tossed aside because the government 

wants to save face on passing this legislation. Well I don’t 

know if you’re saving face, Mr. Speaker. How are they saving 

face? Sure they pass these pieces of legislation, but to do that 

they have to change the rules of the legislature. And they have 

to do it in public. I mean, I know nobody’s watching now, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m not that naive. 

 

But in the larger sense, I mean, this discussion is taking place in 

public, Mr. Speaker. They have to do that in public. And then 

the new rules, well I think the press might notice that the hours 

of the legislature have changed, Mr. Speaker. So I’m not sure 

how much face they’re saving by doing that. 

 

But they put some priority, symbolic priority, I think, primarily, 

Mr. Speaker, on the six pieces of priority legislation. And as I 

said before, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Silver 

Springs from his seat said, well we have to pass this legislation 

because we have to keep our election commitments. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, two Bills here, Mr. Speaker, are 

contradictory to the commitments of the governing party. 

They’re things they said they wouldn’t do. So if they pass this 

legislation, it’s to do things that they said they wouldn’t do. So I 

guess you keep three or four promises. You break two. I 

suppose the balance kind of works out for the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. I guess it kind of works out for the 

government that you’re keeping more commitments than you’re 

actually breaking. 

 

But in a way, Mr. Speaker, if we as an opposition had forced, 

had forced the government to send off to public hearings Bill 5, 

it would have had a salutary effect, Mr. Speaker. First of all, it 

would have put off the day that the Premier and the Minister of 

Health broke their commitment not to bring in essential services 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. It would put it off. 

 

It would also allow the public to look at this legislation because 

the concept of essential services I think is widely liked, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s approved of. It sounds good. I mean, nobody 

should have their safety put at jeopardy because of a work 

stoppage. I think it’s a very hard concept to argue against, Mr. 

Speaker. But the public, I think, needs to see how the 

government is going to do this. Some comments, not left wing 

commentators, Mr. Speaker, have called this legislation a little 

ham-handed, a little bit extreme, perhaps more than was 

necessary for the government to achieve its stated purpose. 

 

I think the opposition would have been assisting the 

government if we had been allowed to do our job and perhaps, 

in the case of this legislation — maybe one other piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker — put the government in the position 

where they had to go to the public or had the opportunity to go 

to the public, as they did over the winter and did not take but 

might take over the summer, Mr. Speaker, and talk to the 

public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The examples of how that has improved legislation are a 

number, Mr. Speaker. And I have to say — and with some 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

humility — that as minister of Justice I brought in amendments 

to The Consumer Protection Act around a number of matters 

including, I think of most interest to the public, fitness club 

membership, Mr. Speaker. That went to public hearings. 

 

I thought as a minister of a government with a ministry, with all 

these officials — and we had done consultations, Mr. Speaker 

— I thought, how can this legislation possibly be improved? 

What is the point of going through this process of having 

members of a government, members of the opposition who 

were then members of the Saskatchewan Party, looking at this 

legislation in detail, hearing from people who could have 

expressed their views to the government previously? What is 

the point of doing that? 

 

For the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the legislation is improved. 

The legislation is improved for the input of the opposition. The 

legislation is improved by the input of the public. And the 

minister doesn’t know everything, Mr. Speaker. The minister 

didn’t know everything when I was the minister, and the 

minister certainly doesn’t know everything now that someone 

else is the minister. 

 

Another example where changes were made to legislation that I 

thought was required, urgently required — some members of 

the public certainly did not agree — was The Gunshot and Stab 

Wounds Mandatory Reporting Act, Mr. Speaker. That 

legislation was drafted, that was an improvement on the only 

similar legislation in the country, Ontario legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. We had the benefit of similar legislation from the 

United States, from many states and, as I said, had a ministry 

available to me, a department at the time available to me with 

officials, with professional draftspeople, people who do nothing 

but draft legislation. We consulted with health organizations in 

particular, Mr. Speaker, and we thought the legislation was 

pretty good, but we took it to public hearings. 

 

[20:45] 

 

The opposition had suggestions. Now we didn’t take all of 

them. The public had suggestions. The public suggestions were 

for changes that were contradictory because some of the public 

was on one side of the discussion; some of the public was on 

the other side of the discussion. But the legislation was 

improved. 

 

And again, as a minister I had to admit that I didn’t know 

everything, that not all expertise, not all wisdom, not all 

knowledge falls within executive government, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is a humility that the members opposite, particularly the 

members of Executive Council, will need to learn, Mr. Speaker. 

For their own good, they’ll need to learn it. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re losing the opportunity. They’re depriving 

themselves of the opportunity to learn that. 

 

Another example, and it’s not about legislation as such, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think a case where it wasn’t so much that the 

government of the day learned a lot from public hearings, but 

the opposition of the day learned a lot from public hearings. 

And it’s an experience that many of the members opposite 

might want to think about when they want to deny the public 

the opportunity to scrutinize any of these Bills. And that’s the 

TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 

discussions and the TILMA hearings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will remember . . . You won’t remember from being here, 

Mr. Speaker, but others will remember from being here and 

others will remember from following the news and people 

active in political parties would remember in any case, Mr. 

Speaker, that the now Premier, then leader of the opposition, 

demanded at any number of question periods that the 

government sign TILMA today. TILMA could not wait. Why 

had TILMA not been signed? How could we allow 

Saskatchewan to fall behind and not join TILMA with BC 

[British Columbia] and Alberta? How could we do this? Why 

was it not signed yet? 

 

Well the government didn’t reject TILMA, Mr. Speaker. The 

government held public hearings, Mr. Speaker. And at the 

beginning of those hearings . . . my daughter went to some of 

those hearings, Mr. Speaker, and expressed some sympathy for 

her father that I would have to put myself through the boredom 

and the lengthy discussion of public hearings. Now of course I 

wasn’t on the committee, so her sympathy was misplaced in this 

particular case, Mr. Speaker, but she still had sympathy for 

legislators who had to do that. But that was necessary and 

important work. 

 

And I think members of the Saskatchewan Party who attended 

those hearings as committee members or otherwise, first of all 

began . . . very critical of speakers who spoke against TILMA 

But it turned out, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn’t just the usual 

suspects. It wasn’t just the trade union movement that opposed 

TILMA. It turned out . . . And the opposition didn’t realize this, 

Mr. Speaker, that municipalities, credit unions, and many other 

institutions within our province had concerns about TILMA, did 

not think that was the way to go, believed in freer 

interprovincial trade across the nation, but did not see the value 

and saw some dangers in TILMA 

 

And a leader of a party who had called stridently on occasions 

inside this Assembly, inside this Chamber and outside, for 

immediate signing of TILMA said if I became government I 

would not sign TILMA that day. And he hasn’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what changed our now-Premier’s mind, the then leader of 

the opposition’s mind? Public hearings, Mr. Speaker — public 

hearings changed his mind. What is the concern of the members 

opposite about public scrutiny of these Bills? What do they 

think is going to happen in the province of Saskatchewan, 

where essential services have been provided during work 

stoppages, where nobody has died as a result of a strike in the 

summer — I think even in the winter in Saskatchewan — what 

do they think is going to happen in the province of 

Saskatchewan? What do they think is going to happen if the 

essential services Bill had to go to public hearings for the 

summer because of or not necessarily because of actions taken 

by the opposition? 

 

And The Trade Union Amendment Act, the government has 

changed. The philosophy of government has changed. There’s 

going to be changes to this legislation. That surprises no one, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what is the rush? Member of this government after member 

of this government, instead of answering the question that is 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

asked in question period, talks about the successes of the 

Saskatchewan economy. Saskatchewan is number one in this. 

Saskatchewan is number one in that. Population growth, GDP 

[gross domestic product] growth, every kind of investment — 

number one, number one, number one, number one. And guess 

what, Mr. Speaker? Not only were all those accomplishments 

accomplished in 2007 under an NDP [New Democratic Party] 

government, they were accomplished under the current trade 

union Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So okay. The members opposite believe that we need what they 

would call a more competitive labour environment, even though 

all the accomplishments that they tout were accomplished 

within this labour environment. Surely they see not a great deal 

of urgency in having this legislation passed this spring as 

opposed to this fall. I’m not suggesting that necessarily Bill No. 

6 would have to go out for public hearings, but what would 

have been, what would have been the great evil if in fact it had, 

Mr. Speaker? What would have been the great evil in that? 

There would have been none. There would have been no evil in 

any of these Bills not passing. 

 

The reason why, the reason why we have to have this 

discussion, the reason why we have to have this debate, the 

reason why the members opposite to sit with pained expressions 

through my remarks is not entirely clear to me, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s not entirely clear. What was so important about breaking a 

commitment on essential services? What was so important 

about breaking their commitments on balanced budget 

legislation? What’s so important about changing the labour 

environment in Saskatchewan, a labour environment in which 

the Saskatchewan economy leads the country, Mr. Speaker? 

What is so important about bringing in the privatization 

provisions of the essential services Act, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The government has set up its advisory board. The advisory 

council under the Enterprise Saskatchewan legislation has been 

set up. It’s up. The members of that board were introduced to 

us. I joined in their introduction in this legislature. I remember 

that, Mr. Speaker. They’re there. They’re meeting. They’re 

taking direction from the Premier and the Minister of Enterprise 

and Innovation and the Minister of Labour. And maybe they’re 

actually listening to somebody else now. I don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s just how they started. But they’re up and 

running. 

 

So the only provisions that are needed . . . the legislation not 

needed to get that advisory group going, that advisory group is 

up and running. The only provisions that are in the legislation 

that I see that a government would need to do something 

different are in section 23 of that Bill. And section 23 of the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan Bill is the section that I call 

privatization by stealth. It’s the section that allows the 

government to transfer Crown property and Crown employees 

over in Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Now members opposite, well they don’t seem to be shouting 

out that that privatization by stealth is an unfair 

characterization. They may consider that to be unfair 

characterization. The acting chief executive officer of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, the deputy minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation, said that the provisions that allow for the transfer of 

property, Crown property, from the Crown into Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and then to be sold, are just there so the agency 

Enterprise Saskatchewan can get furniture and equipment from 

the Crowns, I guess in case Staples or Home Depot runs out of 

the type of equipment that they might need down there at 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

That was an interesting remark because at some point in 

estimates I will ask the minister, or the deputy minister if the 

deputy minister wants to answer the question, as to why there is 

a specific provision for the transfer of real property — which is 

buildings and land, Mr. Speaker, not furniture and equipment 

— why that provision is in the Bill. If that’s all that’s intended 

here is to pick up used office equipment from SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] instead of going down 

to Staples and buying the desks and chairs, Mr. Speaker, it 

doesn’t seem reasonable to me. 

 

But in any case, I don’t think that this government intends to 

rush its privatization agenda, and I don’t think it probably needs 

those provisions in place, even on its own agenda. Not that this 

government has shown that it understands its own agenda or the 

necessities of its own agenda, but I don’t think that the 

government needs those provisions now. 

 

So again it’s a matter of pride. It’s a matter of saving face — 

hardly reasons to run roughshod over the rights of the minority, 

certainly given the consequences and the costs of so doing, Mr. 

Speaker, and I guess in sort of the tradition of me quoting 

conservative thinkers and conservative statesmen this evening 

to attempt to persuade the members of the government that 

what they are doing is contrary to their own traditions and their 

own, if I dare say, intellectual heritage. 

 

I have a few words from James Madison in the Federalist 

Papers when they were constructing the constitution of the 

United States, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 

the Government House Leader is comparing this discussion to 

an argument in court. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and the 

House Leader through you, that this is an entirely a different 

process, Mr. Speaker. In a civil trial, Mr. Speaker, it’s assumed 

that the advocates come before the court as equals and that the 

people that they represent come to court as equals before the 

law. That’s clearly not the assumption that the government 

brings into this House, Mr. Speaker. It’s clearly not the 

assumption that the government brings into this House. 

 

James Madison said — and he was very concerned about 

popular democracy and very concerned about factions and how 

that when you lose a powerful executive, Mr. Speaker, you lose 

cohesion within a society — James Madison said in Federalist 

Paper No. 10: 

 

When a majority is included in a faction, the form of 

popular government, on the other hand, enables it to 

sacrifice to its ruling passion or interest both the public 

good and the rights of other citizens [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, speaks to the danger of reducing 

democracy to the will of the majority, Mr. Speaker. And James 

Madison sets out on that danger, foreseen danger against which 

he wants to protect the young republic of which he was a 

member that: 

 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

When a majority is included in a faction, the form of 

popular government, on the other hand, enables it to 

sacrifice to its ruling passion or interest both the public 

good and the rights of other citizens. 

 

And that’s what we’re seeing today, Mr. Speaker, yesterday and 

today with this motion. A government that has . . . It’s a 

majority government. It’s a popular government, popular in 

both in the senses. Well maybe not as popular as it was when it 

was elected, Mr. Speaker, but popular in the sense that it 

represents the people and popular in the sense that it did well in 

the last election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it has, because it’s a majority, felt that it can sacrifice to its 

passions its symbols in this legislation, in its priority legislation 

in particular, its interests, the rights of other citizens, and 

particularly other citizens in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

[21:00] 

 

On the issue of democracy and preference perhaps for maybe 

less popular democratic system, James Madison said in 

Federalist Paper No. 10 as well: 

 

. . . a pure democracy . . . can admit no cure for the 

mischiefs of faction. A common passion or interest will 

. . . be felt by a majority . . . and there is nothing to check 

the inducements to sacrifice the weaker party . . . Hence it 

is that democracies . . . have ever been found incompatible 

with personal security or the rights of property; and have 

in general been as short in their lives as they have been 

violent in their deaths. 

 

And James Madison, Mr. Speaker, was referring at the end to 

some of the examples from history that I have referred to earlier 

of democracies that came to an end, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 

not secure that your society will always be a democracy because 

your society has been a democracy. And the lessons of history 

were there and the founders of the American republic wish to 

learn from them. 

 

But I think the words that we must pay attention to, Mr. 

Speaker, are these: “A common passion or interest will . . . be 

felt by a majority . . . and there is nothing to check the 

inducements to sacrifice the weaker party . . .” And that’s what 

we would see in a democracy in a Legislative Assembly 

without rules, without rules protecting the rights of minority, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s why we have the rules. That’s why it’s not 

easy to change the rules, although I think we’re learning it’s 

easier than we might like. And the reason for that, and I have 

referred to it earlier, that if you believe that democracy can be 

reduced to the will of the majority, as it seems that the members 

of the government do, that in the words of James Madison: “. . . 

a common passion or interest will . . . be felt by a majority . . . 

and there is nothing to check the inducements to sacrifice the 

weaker party . . .” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in here the weaker party of course is the 

opposition. And if there’s nothing to stop a majority, even if it’s 

just simply acting out of pride, Mr. Speaker, which I think this 

majority is — you know, a little bit of embarrassment about its 

laziness and complacency, but a little bit of pride and arrogance 

as well — well why not sacrifice the interests of the weaker 

party? Heaven forbid that the opposition use the rules that those 

members negotiated when they were in opposition. That seems 

to be the principle across the way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In Federalist Paper No. 51, James Madison said this: 

 

But the great security against a gradual concentration of 

the several powers in the same department, consists in 

giving to those who administer each department the 

necessary constitutional means and personal motives to 

resist encroachments of the others. The provision for 

defense must in this, as in all other cases, be made 

commensurate to the danger of attack. Ambition must be 

made to counteract ambition. The interest of the man must 

be connected with the constitutional rights of the place. It 

may be a reflection on human nature, that such devices 

should be necessary to control the abuses of government. 

But what is government itself, but the greatest of all 

reflections on human nature? If men were angels, no 

government would be necessary. If angels were to govern 

men, neither external nor internal controls on government 

would be necessary. In framing a government which is to 

be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies 

in this: you must first enable the government to control the 

governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself. 

A dependence on the people is, no doubt, the primary 

control on the government; but experience has taught 

mankind the necessity of auxiliary precautions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a dependence on the people — that is, the will of 

the majority — is no doubt the primary control on the 

government, the primary control, Mr. Speaker, not the only 

control, not in a true democracy that respects minorities, 

expects freedoms, expects the rule of law. “. . . [E]xperience has 

taught mankind,” says James Madison, “the necessity of 

auxiliary precautions.” And those auxiliary precautions are our 

rights. Those rights, those freedoms, the security of the rule of 

law I have more to say. I have more to say or more to quote 

from James Madison from the Federalist Paper No. 51 and to 

comment on, and I will get to those momentarily, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests in 

the legislature. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for . . . Oh is leave given? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure to welcome to the legislature this evening a guest who 

has recently joined us. He’s sitting in the gallery, a long-time 

friend and someone I worked very closely with for a number of 

years who, since having had his experience in public life, has 

gone on to do some business work of his own, and I think in the 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

future will be doing some public service work. 

 

So I would ask all members who are in the Chamber tonight to 

give a very warm welcome to Mr. Benn Greer, who has joined 

us. Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The moment I referred to earlier I think is 

now. “It is of great importance in a republic . . .” Sorry, for the 

benefit of Hansard, Mr. Madison, quote: 

 

It is of great importance in a republic not only to guard the 

society against the oppression of its rulers, but to guard 

one part of the society against the injustice of the other 

part. Different interests necessarily exist in different 

classes of citizens. If a majority be united by a common 

interest, the rights of the minority will be insecure. 

 

And of course, again, Mr. Speaker, the rights of the minority in 

a legislature are the central question of this debate, of this 

discussion, Mr. Speaker, and how those rights are to be 

amended and changed and whether those rights should be 

amended and changed by the action of the majority alone, 

particularly a majority that . . . well, Mr. Speaker, it had other 

choices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a matter of fact, it was set out on a calendar, a fairly easy 

planning document as the member has said, exactly how to 

avoid inflicting the will of the majority to oppress the minority 

in this legislature. The government in a combination of laziness, 

complacency, and arrogance chose not to take the steps that 

would have prevented the necessity in the government’s mind 

of oppressing the minority in this legislature. It chose not to 

take those steps, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are clear to them, those were obvious to them. Matter of 

fact, they were as simple as sitting a week earlier, Mr. Speaker, 

as we know. They chose not to take those steps. They chose 

instead to use their majority to inflict their will on the minority. 

 

A concern about tyranny of the majority raised by de 

Tocqueville in Democracy in America, it is the central, it’s the 

central concern of democracy and how to make a democracy 

work. I think the Government House Leader is thanking me for 

some enlightenment that I have cast over in his direction, but I 

can’t tell without ceasing to speak, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 

want to do that. 

 

James Madison, again in Federalist Papers No. 51 says this. 

And both the Minister of Justice and other members of 

Executive Council may want to listen carefully, or they may 

not, Mr. Speaker. That’s more likely to be their practice; it’s 

certainly been the practice than their history. Quote: 

 

Justice is the end of government. It is the end of civil 

society. It ever has been and ever will be pursued until it 

be obtained, or until liberty be lost in the pursuit. In a 

society under the forms of which the stronger faction can 

readily unite and oppress the weaker, anarchy may as truly 

be said to reign as in a state of nature, where the weaker 

individual is not secured against the violence of the 

stronger; and as, in the latter state, even the stronger 

individuals are prompted, by the uncertainty of their 

condition, to submit to a government which may protect 

the weak as well as themselves; so, in the former state, 

will the more powerful factions or parties be gradually 

induced, by a like motive, to wish for a government which 

will protect all parties, the weaker as well as the more 

powerful. 

 

We see that there is reason why even a majority will want a 

democracy even though they may not always be a majority. As 

a matter of fact the reason they may want a democracy is 

because they will not always be in the majority. The reason why 

the majority across the way, Mr. Speaker, should have more 

respect for the opposition and more respect for the rules that 

they negotiated when they were in opposition is of course 

majorities are not always majorities. 

 

And I know to the members opposite the next election or the 

election that they could possibly foresee being defeated in even 

are both very distant in the future. But, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that they are there. We know that they are there. And even if 

that occurrence is after every member of this House is gone . . . 

and of course that won’t be the case. Mr. Speaker. I’m sure 

you’ll be here when there’s a change of government or you’re 

likely to be. But even if that was the case, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

what we owe to ourselves as individuals. It’s not what we owe 

to ourselves, our future selves. It’s what we owe, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s what we owe to this institution. It’s what we owe to the 

values that this institution is here to protect and to advance, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That’s why, that’s why every member of this legislature, 

government and opposition, should be concerned about the 

rules that protect the opposition and the opposition’s role in this 

legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know some members have been impatient and perhaps 

have found difficult understanding the discussion of the 

principles of democracy using other jurisdictions, other 

societies, other governments, other democratic systems, Mr. 

Speaker. So I come to the principles of Canadian parliamentary 

law, but these are built on the same foundations as the 

discussions about protection from the tyranny of the majority, 

James Madison, under token Federalist Papers. These are built 

on the same history, the same concern about the events of 

history, that other drafters of constitutions address themselves 

to. 

 

Principles of Canadian parliamentary law have much in 

common, much in common with other democratic thought as it 

has developed over the centuries. The number one principle set 

out in Beauchesne’s, Mr. Speaker . . . The first part of 

Beauchesne’s is “Content and Sources of Parliamentary 

Procedure.” The first part of that part is “Principles of 

Parliamentary Law” and the first paragraph of that part, Mr. 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Speaker . . . So the opening words of the treatise on 

parliamentary law are these, Mr. Speaker, that I’m going to 

read. Quote: 

 

The principles of Canadian parliamentary law are: 

To protect a minority and restrain the improvidence or 

tyranny of a majority; to secure the transaction of public 

business in an orderly manner; to enable every Member to 

express opinions within limits necessary to preserve 

decorum and prevent an unnecessary waste of time; to 

give abundant opportunity for the consideration of every 

measure, and to prevent any legislative action being taken 

upon sudden impulse. 

 

Every now . . . I think it’s the member from Moose Jaw North 

goes, what is he talking about? Well, Mr. Speaker, that is what 

I’m talking about. That is what I’m talking about, the principles 

of parliamentary law. They are not unique to Canada, as I think 

my discussion has shown; we make them up. And they are set 

out as such: “To protect a minority and restrain the 

improvidence or tyranny of a majority,” to allow “every 

Member to express opinions,” “to give abundant opportunity for 

the consideration of every measure,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is these principles set out here that are being violated by the 

action of the government, that are being challenged by the 

motion the government made, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker. That is the circumstance. That is the 

result. That is the intent of what the government has done: to 

impose the tyranny of the majority on this legislature, to impose 

it on the opposition. 

 

[21:15] 

 

I want to quote a few words from a paper prepared by John 

Wilson, “In Defence of Parliamentary Opposition.” This article 

was written by John Wilson when he was a professor of the 

political science department at the University of Waterloo. And 

I think at the beginning of his paper he sets out well the position 

and the attitude of the government. Unfortunately, he says this, 

quote: 

 

Experience has taught me that most people regard 

parliamentary opposition as an enormous waste of time, a 

wholly improper use of public money, and something 

there ought to be less of. The government has a job . . . 

[they] do, they say. Let it get on with it. 

 

I stop there, Mr. Speaker, because last night the member from 

Wood River yelled out at the member from Regina Dewdney, 

we’re here to govern. I think he was expressing the attitude of 

some people who don’t believe there should be a parliamentary 

opposition, who say the government has a job to do. They say, 

let’s get on with it. The member from Wood River said, we’re 

here to govern. And I guess he would think that we’re just here 

to talk, Mr. Speaker, and talking isn’t very important and 

governing is very important. 

 

The member from Wood River actually, I think, is wrong. He 

wasn’t elected to govern. He may have thought he was elected 

to govern. But you don’t really know, even after you’ve been 

elected to the majority, to the government side of the House, as 

a member of the party that has the most seats in the House, and 

that the government will have confidence of that majority, Mr. 

Speaker, you really don’t know if you’re elected to govern until 

the Premier puts you in the government. 

 

And in the case of the member from Wood River, he didn’t do 

that, Mr. Speaker. He put his seatmate in the government, but 

he didn’t put the member from Wood River in the government. 

The member from Wood River in some ways is no more here to 

govern than I am, Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact. We’re both 

here as members of the Legislative Assembly, and we both have 

another purpose to be here. But I guess in my case, an 

additional purpose over the member from Wood River in that 

I’m here to provide a part of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

I go on to quote Mr. Wilson further, quote: 

 

For such people, parliamentary opposition is, in a word, a 

nuisance. But anyone who has the slightest familiarity 

with the evolution of the British system of government 

knows that Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition is just as 

essential to its success as Her Majesty’s Government. The 

connection is obvious. If there is a case for opposition 

there must also be a case for nuisances and it may 

therefore be useful to discover more precisely what that 

case may be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if any of the government members 

have actually called us a nuisance in this debate or discussion, 

so I won’t suggest that they have. Mr. Wilson goes on to say, 

quote: 

 

Nuisances are people who vigorously and persistently 

pester and challenge those in authority. They are the 

people who deliberately try to embarrass the leadership at 

a trade union or shareholders meeting — or who heckle 

and who are removed from political meetings — or, 

perhaps, they are academics who quibble over what are 

said to be small points. Nuisances are people who get in 

everybody’s way, and they can be found in every walk of 

life. 

 

The member from Kindersley is being quite helpful. He has 

agreed that for the benefit of my remarks in this discussion he 

will hold out that the members of the opposition are a nuisance. 

Quote: 

 

Some people think being a nuisance is simply freedom of 

expression gone mad. But it is not just people doing and 

saying what they like; it’s freedom of expression directed 

at particular individuals. What the nuisance does is 

challenge the quaint notion — so often held not just by 

prime ministers and presidents, but also . . . by university 

professors and teachers of all kinds — the notion that such 

people have a corner on knowledge, and that simple folk 

are expected to shut up and listen to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, well that’s the attitude of the government in a 

nutshell. That’s the attitude of the government in respect to 

whatever the opposition might have to say about the 

government’s legislation, about its legislative agenda. In the 

words of the House Leader, debate it for an hour, 20 minutes, 

whatever, and sit down, Mr. Speaker — essentially shut up and 

listen to the government. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

But Mr. Wilson goes on to say: 

 

But when we talk of responsible democratic government, 

as opposed to dictatorship, we are really talking about a 

political system where the government is made 

accountable not just to the people every four or five years, 

but also to a continuing assembly of individuals elected to 

represent the people. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, at least in the view of John 

Wilson, which I share, the last consultation of the Government 

of Saskatchewan was not held, as they might argue, on 

November 7, 2007. That consultation has to continue with the 

public, and that consultation has to continue, according to Mr. 

Wilson, with representatives of the public who are elected to 

hold the government accountable, and that, Mr. Speaker, 

whether the government likes it or not, is Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Wilson goes on to say, quote: 

 

It is not at all difficult to move from that perception to the 

idea that opposition is really more important than 

government — especially in a parliamentary system . . . 

 

Well I doubt if you’ll get that recognition from the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Wilson goes on to say, quote: 

 

The characteristic political activity of a democratic society 

is the regular calling to account of its leaders. That is what 

allows us to claim we are a developed country in political 

terms. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I share with the members the wish that I was 

better able to call them into account. But I am what I am, and I 

am the man that Saskatoon Meewasin sent to represent them 

and to hold this government to account. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

my role to be a nuisance . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Ah, you 

see here, Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley would 

suggest that he has listened to me too long, far too long I think 

he would think. But he seems to have missed the point, Mr. 

Speaker, he seems to have missed the point entirely. The 

member from Kindersley, the Minister of Energy and 

Resources, says that I will have the opportunity to carry out my 

role in this legislature when I vote. That’s part of it, he 

concedes, that’s part of it. 

 

Okay, Mr. Speaker. I have been speaking, I have been speaking 

about the other part, and I will go on to speak about the other 

part, and that is to hold the government to account. And in this 

case, Mr. Speaker, hold it to account for its incompetence, its 

laziness, complacency, and arrogance, its failure to manage its 

own legislative agenda, and its response to its failure to manage 

its own legislative agenda, which is to run roughshod over the 

opposition and the rules of this House. 

 

Mr. Wilson goes on to say, quote: 

 

The key to understanding why opposition is so important 

in parliamentary systems lies in the very nature of the 

Westminster model . . . there very clearly is a written 

British constitution. It has two sentences: “There shall be a 

parliament. It can do anything it pleases.” 

Mr. Speaker, and the Westminster model is the model of 

cabinet responsibility, collective decision making by a cabinet. 

And while we’re on the subject of incompetence, which is 

central to this discussion because the incompetence of 

managing the legislative agenda is partly what brings us here, 

Mr. Speaker, and partly the response of the government to its 

errors . . . But while we’re on the Westminster models, it’s the 

Westminster model that provides for collective decisions by 

members of government, by the Executive Council of 

government, and collective responsibility for those decisions. 

 

Which makes the recent occurrence where a minister of the 

Crown, who would have you’d think under the Westminster 

model, Mr. Speaker, brought proposals to Treasury Board, of 

which she’s a member — this is the Minister of Social Services, 

Mr. Speaker — brought proposals to a Treasury Board, brought 

proposals to a cabinet, been involved in the discussion of the 

proposals, not only her proposals but the proposals of all 

ministers, and then been charged with communicating that 

policy to the government, communicating that policy to the 

public. 

 

We had the interesting situation which you would think could 

not take place under the Westminster model, not a competent 

example of the Westminster model of government. We had an 

example where a minister claimed to have read about policies 

that must have been approved at a table where she sits, that 

claims that she read about those policies in the newspaper after 

they had taken effect. I digress slightly, Mr. Speaker, I admit 

that. 

 

Mr. Wilson goes on to say, “It is this fact — that in theory the 

government can be removed from office at any time — that is 

the other side of the coin of parliamentary sovereignty [Mr. 

Speaker].” 

 

And that of course depends on the confidence of the House, and 

the confidence of the House as we’ve seen. Even in the case of 

majority governments, in the case of the Devine government — 

the very end of the Devine government — the confidence of the 

House, even in a majority government, is not necessarily 

guaranteed to that government, Mr. Speaker, if they lose the 

confidence of its private members, which this government 

wishes to take for granted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Wilson goes on to say, and I think this is a central thesis, 

Mr. Speaker, as it is mine. So it’s appropriate that I quote him, 

quote: 

 

. . . we simply must have a vigorous and determined 

opposition. Its job, almost by definition, will be not merely 

to watch what the government proposes to do, but to 

harass the government with all the strength it can muster. 

Why? Because only by harassment can you keep 

untrammelled authority respecting its limitations — by 

constantly forcing it to take a second, or even a third or 

fourth look at what it is doing. In that process the 

characteristic component is not simply debate — because 

governments with majorities do not lose debates — but a 

capacity to make the government fear for its political life 

over the longer term. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the role of the opposition is to make 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

government difficult. I think that’s what Mr. Wilson is saying. 

The role of the opposition is to make the life of government 

difficult. And the government needs to recognize that. It needs 

to recognize that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In another quotation from a conservative thinker — and again 

only partly for the enjoyment and appreciation of the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest — partly because or mostly because 

it’s an important point, Edmund Burke said, quote: 

 

He that wrestles with us strengthens our nerves and 

sharpens our skill. Our antagonist is our helper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition if it is allowed to do its work makes 

for better government. If the government would have taken the 

lesson that the opposition and its own mismanagement of its 

legislative agenda would have taught it, it would have made this 

government a better government, Mr. Speaker. Legislation may 

not have passed this spring; it may have very well have passed 

this spring, Mr. Speaker. As the member from Regina Dewdney 

pointed out the government has pushed a panic button. 

 

The government has made assumptions about what was going 

to happen to its legislation. If its legislation had not passed this 

spring, what would have been, what would have been the dire 

consequence? What would have been the evil? Well none — 

none. There is no concern about any of these pieces. Maybe Bill 

1, Mr. Speaker, maybe the provisions of Bill 1. But the 

provisions of Bill 1 certainly could have passed, Mr. Speaker. 

The opposition could not have held up all these Bills. 

 

If the government had taken the lesson about the necessity to 

respect the opposition, to respect the rules and learn from this 

that the government needs to do a better job of managing its 

own agenda, the government needs to do a better job of using a 

majority of two-thirds of this House — if the government had 

learned that lesson, Mr. Speaker, that would have been to the 

government’s benefit. That would not have been to the 

opposition’s benefit, Mr. Speaker. That would have been to the 

government’s benefit. 

 

But the government decided to learn another lesson. The 

government decided to learn that if the rules that you negotiated 

aren’t working for you exactly the way you want because, hey, 

it didn’t give you the week off you wanted and it doesn’t give 

you the legislation you wanted, if the rules aren’t working 

exactly the way you want, well you just change them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Now the member of Kindersley wants to go back, wants to go 

back to events that took place in the past, which I have no 

interest in defending, Mr. Speaker. These rules were negotiated 

by this party now in opposition, that party that was in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, were negotiated by these parties 

because those events were unsatisfactory. They were 

unsatisfactory to the government of the day. They were 

unsatisfactory to the government of today, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s why those rules are changed. That’s why those rules were 

put in place. 

 

And within weeks, within weeks of sitting in this legislature —

what? — four weeks of sitting in this legislature, Mr. Speaker? 

Five weeks of sitting in this legislature? Within that brief time, 

Mr. Speaker, this government has already abandoned the rules 

to which they were so strongly committed to as an opposition. 

 

It didn’t take them very long, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t take very 

long. And the justification? Well the things that happened 

before we had these rules, things that happened to cause us to 

negotiate these rules. 

 

Well that’s a strange justification, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 

break the rules, the laws that we brought in that were to protect 

us from the abuses we didn’t like. Well that doesn’t show a lot 

of respect for the rules that you brought in to protect yourself 

from the abuses you didn’t like. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I guess the only conclusion one can 

possibly come to, the only conclusion you can possibly come to 

is that — the only conclusion you can possibly come to, Mr. 

Speaker — is that the members opposite only liked the 

protection of these rules, only liked the protection of these rules 

while they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker. They’re five weeks 

in the government; they don’t care about the protection of the 

opposition any more, Mr. Speaker. A very, very, very cynical 

position. 

 

I see, I see, Mr. Speaker — I guess I probably shouldn’t be able 

see under the rules of the House — but I see, Mr. Speaker, that 

my speech has gone quite a bit down in the opinion of the 

member from Wood River from where it might have been 

earlier. And I regret that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I regret that because I’ve been speaking in large part not to the 

members of the government alone — attempting to persuade 

them, the members of government in the sense of members of 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker, and attempting to persuade them that they 

are abusing their power — but to private members who I think 

might be more sympathetic to the argument that not all power in 

this legislature should rest in Executive Council and that those 

members be mere voting machines. But I see that the member 

from Wood River takes a lot of pleasure in being a voting 

machine, Mr. Speaker, so maybe I shouldn’t be so concerned 

about him. 

 

Mr. Wilson goes on to say, “The role of the opposition has 

become so central to our way of doing things that we formally 

recognize it in a number of different ways.” And, you know, in 

any legislature, probably even the Westminster model, which is 

certainly ours, Mr. Speaker, that is the case — that the 

opposition is formally represented in a way that of course it 

isn’t in the American legislature, Mr. Speaker, where opposition 

and government are far more fluid and the separation from 

executive power is more closely defined. They don’t have 

members of the executive in the American model, in the 

legislature, answering to the opposition, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think the members of this government would like it that way, 

but they can’t go that far. They can go as far as they’re going, 

but they can’t go that far. 

 

My stepfather, Mr. Speaker, is an American, originally from 

Wisconsin, and lives with my mother in Florida now. And one 

day they were here in the legislature and I introduced them. Of 

course that was before the last election, so I introduced them 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

from the government side of the House, and I think I took 

questions that day as minister of Justice. And afterwards, my 

stepfather was shocked — he was an American in his 80s — he 

was shocked. He was shocked that members of the legislature, 

state legislature as he would have seen it, would be able to treat 

a cabinet minister the way that members of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition on a daily basis treat members of the 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That I think, Mr. Speaker, is the glory, the glory of the 

Westminster model. That is the glory of the British system. And 

with the greatest respect to our great neighbour to the south and 

to all the work that James Madison and the other architects of 

the American Constitution, with the greatest respect to them, I 

think our system of democracy is the crown. It’s the crown of 

democracies. 

 

And it’s still a very limited form of government in the world. 

Many, many people do not have the benefit of living under the 

rule of law in societies that respect minorities, that protect 

personal freedoms, and that are governed with those checks and 

balances by the rule of the majority. But of the happy people 

that do, I believe that those of us governed by the Westminster 

model are indeed the most fortunate, Mr. Speaker, because there 

isn’t a separation. There isn’t the separation there is in the 

American model between executive power and legislative 

power. 

 

But in our model, there is that daily accountability, when we are 

sitting in this legislature, of the executive to Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. That’s the glory of our system. That’s what 

we should celebrate. That is not, unfortunately, what a majority 

of the members of this Legislative Assembly are celebrating 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are celebrating, they’re revelling in the fact 

that they are in the majority. That’s what they’re celebrating, 

and that’s not what they should be celebrating, Mr. Speaker. 

They should be celebrating the traditions, the rights, the 

protections of our heritage. Our heritage — this system of 

government, this system that appreciates, Mr. Speaker, that the 

opposition and the confrontation between the opposition and the 

government in the legislature is key to the working of our 

government and our democracy. 

 

Mr. Wilson goes on to say, that is always — quote: 

 

That is always what those in authority say. “You’re 

holding us up. Let us get on with the job.” 

 

Yes, and a member of the government has co-operated quite 

nicely by echoing what Mr. Wilson says those always in 

authority say, “You’re holding us up. Let us get on with the 

job.” 

 

I’ll end the quote there, Mr. Speaker, because isn’t that, isn’t 

that the essence, isn’t that the essence of what the Government 

House Leader had to say when he moved the motion? Isn’t that 

the essence of this motion? 

 

Oh well it’s not really our fault because we failed to take advice 

that would allow us to get our work done in the time allowed. 

We weren’t really . . . [inaudible] . . . doing that work. It’s 

really your fault because, in the words of authority, you’re 

holding us up; let’s get on with the job. 

 

In the words of the Government House Leader -- and I should 

perhaps be careful and make sure that I quote him precisely — 

it translates from, you’re holding us up; get on with the job to, 

quote, “. . . just start the debate and sit down and let it come to a 

vote after an hour or 20 minutes or whatever . . .” 

 

Well maybe it’s the member from Moose Jaw North says, well 

that makes sense. Well you know, making the trains run on 

time, Mr. Speaker, always makes sense. And it’s a good thing, 

Mr. Speaker. But there are other values. There are other 

interests. And in the end, people are not necessarily benefitted 

by the simplest, Mr. Speaker. They’re not necessarily benefitted 

by what can be most easily understood by the member from 

Moose Jaw North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I digress a little because of the interruption, Mr. Speaker, 

but I will give the full quote. 

 

That is always what those in authority say. “You’re 

holding us up. Let us get on with the job.” But it is 

precisely the opposition’s role to stop the government in 

its tracks, and to delay the passage of government 

measures just long enough to allow the expression of 

informed public opinion. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, very succinctly puts the argument that the 

member from Regina Dewdney and I have been trying to make 

— perhaps not quite as concisely, perhaps not quite as 

succinctly as that — that it is precisely, it is precisely the 

opposition’s role to not allow the government to rush its 

legislative agenda through the House. It is precisely the 

opposition’s role to stop the government from doing that. It’s 

precisely the government’s role to delay the passage of 

government measures just long enough to allow the expression 

of informed public opinion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the expression of informed public opinion is 

exactly, exactly what this government wants to avoid. It’s 

exactly what this government wants to avoid . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, no, the member is wrong. The 

member is wrong. The government is not giving the opposition 

more opportunity to debate the motion. The member has not 

been paying attention to his own government’s motion. 

 

The rules, Mr. Speaker, the rules give the opposition the 

opportunity to debate each Bill for 20 hours. The rules give that 

opportunity. What, what, what the measure of the government 

does, Mr. Speaker, what the measure of the government does is, 

having realized that they do not have time for measured debate 

and discussion in the hours when people are awake or that they 

might have to delay some legislation, Mr. Speaker, delay some 

legislation to the fall to allow for the full expression of an 

informed public opinion — having realized that — the 

government measure is not to give something to the opposition. 

The House Leader would have the opposition cut its debate 

time from 20 hours to 20 minutes, Mr. Speaker. That was quite 

clear. That’s the government’s approach. 

 

What the government is forced to do, given the opposition’s 

right to debate and discuss this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is to 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

cram the discussion on this legislation —to cram this discussion 

on this legislation into the remaining days of this sitting, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what the government measure is. And a 

member of the government who doesn’t know what the motion 

says, Mr. Speaker, perhaps should keep his remarks to himself, 

Mr. Speaker, in my humble opinion. 

 

Mr. Wilson goes on to say, quote: 

 

Constructive obstruction is needed in a parliamentary 

system, just as it is needed in society as a whole. Those in 

authority must constantly be forced to face the music. 

 

I will apologize for not being a better musician, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate that there’s been a lot of dissonance tonight in my 

remarks, that they have rambled, Mr. Speaker, that they have 

digressed on occasion, Mr. Speaker, that they have not been as 

learned and eloquent as I might have hoped. I will admit all of 

that, Mr. Speaker. But government has to be formed out of 

human beings, and the opposition has to be formed from human 

beings. 

 

And the members of Saskatoon Meewasin had excellent 

choices, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party put forward an 

excellent candidate who came very close to winning the seat, 

Mr. Speaker. And the Liberals of course ran the leader in 

Saskatoon Meewasin, Mr. Speaker. And despite that, despite 

the quality of the opposition I faced from two political parties in 

Saskatoon Meewasin, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon 

Meewasin in their wisdom — perhaps their poor judgement, 

Mr. Speaker, but I would never say so — in their wisdom sent 

me. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government has this opposition, and I’m a 

member of it. And it is my responsibility — I think Mr. Wilson 

is correct — it is my responsibility to ensure that this 

government faces the music. Again I apologize to all members 

of the House. I wish I was a better musician but I will do the 

best that I can. 

 

And I will do the best that I can within the rules and what I 

would ask of the government is that they respect the opposition. 

What I would ask of the government is that they would respect 

the rules, Mr. Speaker. How soon they forget, Mr. Speaker. And 

again the member from Kindersley — I think I’ve lulled him to 

sleep now — the member from Kindersley spoke about events 

that he witnessed when he was here. And I don’t wish to 

question that those took place. And it was those very events, I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that caused changes in the rules. Members 

of this Legislative Assembly did not want to see a repetition of 

those events. 

 

[21:45] 

 

So there’s something you don’t like. There’s an evil in society. 

Mr. Speaker, this is fundamental to us as legislators. This is at 

the very core of what we do. We see an evil in society that we 

don’t want, that our people don’t want. We debate and discuss 

how to address it. The government in all likelihood makes the 

proposal —there are private members’ Bills from this side of 

the House — the government in all likelihood makes the 

proposal about how to address it. It’s debated in this legislature. 

We pass a law to address the evil. That’s what we do to make 

things better. To promote a good or to address an evil that we 

see in our society, we bring in laws against those. 

 

So this group of people, in the laws that govern it in its rules, 

saw evils. The member from Kindersley, if he was to rise in this 

debate, could speak of them first-hand, I think, because he 

mentions them from his seat. These were unacceptable to my 

predecessors here, Mr. Speaker. And they worked together, 

opposition and government. The parties were reversed at the 

time, but still worked together, the same parties that are here 

now, Mr. Speaker, playing in different roles. They worked 

together to develop rules, laws for this Chamber, for this 

Assembly, to correct those evils which I will not defend, Mr. 

Speaker, for two reasons. 

 

First of all, I am not familiar enough with the history to do that. 

And secondly I suspect in some cases I might agree they’re 

indefensible. I certainly am not bound by any caucus solidarity 

now to defend the actions of a previous caucus, even an NDP 

caucus, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think I am. 

 

But it’s a very strange view of the law that we see an evil, we 

pass a law, and then when the law is inconvenient to us, and 

particularly when it’s inconvenient to the very people that 

passed it to a legislature, when the law is inconvenient to us we 

say, well we’ll change the law. We’ll ignore it because we 

found that living under it as a government for five weeks is 

intolerable — five weeks, Mr. Speaker, five weeks. They live 

under a set of rules for five weeks as a government, and they 

find them intolerable and they need to be changed. 

 

And what is the defence? It’s not the defence of the entire 

government, I accept that. I have made some sweeping 

statements and some sweeping generalizations tonight — I am 

sometimes subject to those, Mr. Speaker — but it is certainly in 

the defence of the Minister of Energy and Resources. His 

defence is, well these abuses took place. But those are the 

abuses that caused the laws to come into existence. 

 

I’ve never heard . . . The Government House Leader asked if I’d 

ever won a case as a lawyer, and I have to admit I didn’t win as 

many as I would have liked to have won, but I think most 

lawyers can say that. But I’ve never heard a defence to breaking 

the law that the law was brought in to protect against abuses 

that I suffered in the past. Surely, surely that’s the law that you 

want to protect. That’s the law you want to stand up for — the 

one that was brought in to end the abuses that you suffered in 

the past. 

 

What law could you have more commitment to than that, Mr. 

Speaker? Really to what rules could the members opposite have 

more commitment to than the rules that they negotiated, 

brought in to correct the injustices of which the member from 

Kindersley complains? I guess none, Mr. Speaker. I guess none. 

And yet they have insufficient commitment to these rules, Mr. 

Speaker. So I guess my argument ends up in a very 

disheartening, very disheartening place. 

 

I go on with Mr. Wilson’s argument, which is well-made. And 

again, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wilson here speaks to an ideal that I 

will not pretend that I’ve always been able to live up to over the 

last four years and that as a group I don’t think we’ve always 

been able to live up to. But it is the ideal of the British way of 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

doing things. And Professor Wilson says this, quote, “One of 

the great accomplishments of the evolution of the British way 

of doing things is that it has taught us how to disagree without 

being disagreeable.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to write these words 

down someplace where I can see them every day, particularly 

when I come into the House. And I think I might have them 

engraved on a card and given to the member from Moose Jaw 

North who keeps yelling out, what are you talking about? And I 

think maybe both of us could learn a great deal from trying to 

address, to the extent that we can, that ideal that Professor 

Wilson calls an accomplishment, quote, “One of the great 

accomplishments of the British way of doing things is that it has 

taught us how to disagree without being disagreeable.” 

 

I wish I could say . . . I wish I could agree with Professor 

Wilson on that point with the same confidence that I’ve agreed 

with him on so many of the other points that I have cited from 

his paper. However it is the ideal, and I do think that it points 

to, it points to how the system is meant to work and largely 

works, Mr. Speaker, where the opposition, by playing its role, is 

as important to the governance of a country as the government 

is itself. I think there’s many members opposite who a few brief 

months ago would have had no difficulty with that proposition 

that have now unfortunately reversed themselves. 

 

Eventually Professor Wilson returns to the subject matter of 

being a nuisance, Mr. Speaker. And I quote again: 

 

The virtue of being a nuisance lies in something much less 

dramatic. In our society — in any society — we are 

surrounded by people who are much more powerful than 

we are. They are wealthier than us, or stronger, or faster, 

or smarter, or slicker — or whatever. They all threaten the 

development of a genuinely egalitarian society by the 

undue exercise of their powers to gain their own way. And 

just as there is a built-in mechanism in a parliamentary 

system to deny government an easy passage — a 

mechanism which thrives on nuisancehood — so in 

society at large we have the capacity, if we but learn . . . it, 

to deny those more powerful than ourselves an easy 

passage. 

 

By doing this, by being a nuisance who gets in the way of 

an easy passage; by constantly badgering those in 

authority; by forcing them to answer for their stewardship 

— not at every general election, but every day — we will 

be teaching them that they must accept the necessity of 

their accountability. We will be showing them, as Eugene 

Forsey so nicely put it some years ago, that “it is our 

Parliament, not theirs. They are our servants, not our 

masters.” What calling could possibly be more virtuous? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the role of an opposition. That is the reason 

why we have rules protecting their role, Mr. Speaker, because 

the member from Kindersley was wrong. And he admits he was 

wrong. He’s stopped saying it. He’s stopped saying it. I don’t 

think he said it this spring. But he’s wrong when he said in 

December, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, I’ll return to that 

point. I don’t want to digress but the members opposite are 

quite fond of calling out to members who have been on their 

feet for, you know, some small amount of time, Mr. Speaker, 

calling out to them about the speed at which they should speak, 

Mr. Speaker, the speed at which they should speak, the cadence, 

the volume, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s not enough, it’s not enough for some members of the 

government to want to cut off debate. It’s not enough of 

members of the government to impose their will on the 

minority, on the opposition with respect the rules. It’s not 

enough for the government to oppress the opposition to correct 

their own incompetence around managing the Legislative 

Assembly. When we have some limited time to protest, Mr. 

Speaker, some members of the government are so arrogant that 

they want to tell us how loudly to speak, how quietly to speak, 

how quickly to speak, now when to move on to another point, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well if they could, Mr. Speaker, they could, they would do 

what the Government House Leader wanted to do, wanted to 

do. This was a solution, Mr. Speaker. If they could, they would 

have us just, in the words of the Government House Leader: 

just start the debate and sit down and let it come to a vote after 

an hour or 20 minutes or whatever. That’s what they would do 

if they could do. There’s no limit to what they would do if they 

could do, Mr. Speaker. The attitude is quite apparent. But again 

the member from Kindersley has called upon me to digress a 

little bit and to waiver from my argument. 

 

I’ll return to one last quotation from Professor Wilson’s paper. 

 

. . . an understanding of the principle of the necessity of 

opposition — which lies at the heart of the successful 

practice of parliamentary government — shows that in 

society generally we should encourage every nuisance we 

can find. Indeed, we should pay homage to them, for theirs 

is every bit as noble a calling as is Caesar’s. 

 

End quote. I just end quote, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t know 

if you were necessarily paying close attention to my dissertation 

on the fall of the Roman republic. So this sort of reminded me 

of that and if members wanted me to return to that, I think I 

might have a little bit of time, but unless I hear a call for it, I 

won’t do it. 

 

I will go on with . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . the member 

from Moose Jaw North is a bit of a broken record, Mr. Speaker. 

I note that in the rules on this debate that the speakers in the 

debate are not allowed to be repetitious in their quotations. 

Otherwise I think the member would be violating the rules of 

. . . well he would be violating the rules of the debate if he was 

on his feet. The member from Moose Jaw North keeps quoting 

himself. It’s a sort of a receding echo, echo, echo, echo, 

Doppler effect of, what are you talking about, what are you 

talking about, what are you talking about? Mr. Speaker, maybe 

if that’s his contribution to this debate entirely, he should be 

asking you, Mr. Speaker, what the member is talking about and 

at least address himself through the Chair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyways I will continue with Professor Wilson. I don’t think 

the member from Moose Jaw North understands what he’s 

talking about either, Mr. Speaker. But I don’t think the member 

from Moose Jaw North cares to understand what he’s talking 

about either, to be quite honest. I don’t think that the member 

from Moose Jaw North is that incapable of understanding, Mr. 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

Speaker, I really don’t believe that. I have a much higher 

opinion of him. 

 

Professor Wilson says, quote: 

 

They are the people in our midst who draw attention to 

abuses of authority, wherever they occur. They are the 

little boy who insists that the emperor has no clothes on. 

They are Socrates, Antigone, Gallileo, Milton, Bonnie 

Prince Charlie, Thomas Jefferson . . . 

 

I regret, Mr. Speaker, that I didn’t get the chance to discuss the 

thought of Thomas Jefferson, except in passing remarks about 

the Declaration of Independence. I will carry on with the quote, 

“William Lyon Mackenzie, John Stuart Mill, John Diefenbaker, 

Eugene Forsey and so on. It is a long and distinguished 

tradition.” And there are intellectual ancestors to the members 

opposite listed here, certainly John Diefenbaker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a little bit of a discussion about the role of 

opposition, a little bit of discussion about protecting the rights 

of the opposition, a little bit of discussion not just about respect 

for the opposition, Mr. Speaker. I think Professor Wilson goes 

further. I think Professor Wilson suggests that the government 

should treat the opposition with a little bit of honour. I think 

homage is one of the words that are used in the . . . I don’t 

expect that, Mr. Speaker. I really don’t. I don’t ask for that. I 

would settle for respect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one other paper that I do want to address . . . And I know 

that the member from Moose Jaw North in particular and other 

members were confused about my discussions about the history 

of democracy. And I think they must be far more comfortable 

— the member for Moose Jaw North doesn’t actually seem any 

more comfortable — far more comfortable now that the 

discussion is entirely about Canadian parliamentary democracy. 

 

But I wish to cite some quotations for the record from a paper 

called “The Opposition in a Parliamentary System” which I 

recommend to the members opposite and to all members of the 

House, prepared by Gerald Schmitz, political and social affairs 

division, December 1988. And he says . . . Just a news flash 

from the far front, the far government benches, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Moose Jaw North apparently doesn’t know what 

I’m talking about. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Now to return to the paper, and I quote: 

 

Parliament, after all, is fundamentally about debate — 

“rhetoric” in the classical Greek sense — and the 

transacting of the people’s business in public . . . Genuine 

political opposition is a necessary attribute of democracy, 

tolerance, and trust in the ability of citizens to resolve 

differences by peaceful means. The existence of an 

opposition, without which politics ceases and 

administration takes over, is indispensable to the 

functioning of parliamentary political systems. If these 

systems are perceived as not working well — as being 

“seriously overloaded,” to quote a distinguished Canadian 

Opposition Leader, the Hon. Robert Stanfield — it may be 

the rights of political oppositions which are immediately 

and most visibly at stake, but ultimately the threat is to 

democratic rights and freedoms generally. 

 

Now the paper goes on to say: 

 

The division between government and opposition is as old 

as political democracy itself. In Aristotle’s Athenian polity 

the essence of self-government was that citizens were, in 

turn, both the rulers and the ruled. Government could 

alternate among different groups of citizens, and the 

minority could seek to persuade a majority of its point of 

view by peaceful (i.e., political) means. In an age of mass 

politics, direct citizen democracy has been replaced, with 

rare exceptions, by representative systems providing for 

periodic elections. In turn, these electoral contests are 

usually dominated by a small number of political parties 

which select their own candidates and leaders. What has 

not changed, however, in our modern liberal-democratic 

society is the hallowed principle that government must rest 

on the consent of the governed — which means, inter alia, 

that the minority accepts the right of the majority to make 

decisions, provided that there is reciprocal respect for the 

minority’s right to dissent from these decisions and to 

promote alternative policies. 

 

So when the members opposite say, we have satisfied our role 

as the losers and minorities in this House to vote, they are 

mistaken, Mr. Speaker. They are mistaken because the right that 

we have, the reciprocal right that we have to the majority’s right 

to make decisions is the right to dissent and the right to promote 

alternative policies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the members who suggest that nothing has changed, well 

actually that the government — I mean this is what one of the 

members said from across the way — the government has 

magnanimously in this measure made provision for us to fully 

debate the government’s legislative agenda, well that’s not what 

the government has done, Mr. Speaker. What the government 

has done is taken its legislative agenda, which should have been 

discussed last fall when the Bills were introduced. But the Bills 

were introduced and the government ran away, Mr. Speaker. 

And there was no discussion over the winter, no consultations. 

 

And then what the government should have done — what they 

were advised to do actually, Mr. Speaker — what they should 

have done is had a measured debate which would have began 

before the budget speech, had all the second reading speeches in 

the first week, in the week that never was, Mr. Speaker, the 

week of March 3. And the public now would be hearing the 

discussion about these Bills, these government priorities. They 

would have been discussed. They would have been under 

discussion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t really want to be interrupted, but I do see a member on 

his feet. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Introduction of guests, please, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have two 

very valuable members of our government staff, Ms. Brooklyn 

Elhard and Mr. Jared Dunitz. I’d ask all members to welcome 

them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The Speaker heard my pause in my remarks 

and just took it as welcome relief, and wasn’t too concerned yet 

as to how long that pause was going to be. But thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, for again recognizing me. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if the government had, well, first of all had 

some competence in managing its legislative agenda and 

coupled that with some respect for the right of the minority in 

this legislature to promote alternative policies and the right of 

the public to form a fully informed opinion, Mr. Speaker, we 

would have had, we would have had debate about all of the 

government legislation, certainly all the party Bills in that week 

of March 3, the week that never was, Mr. Speaker, we would 

have had debate then. And no, Mr. Speaker, more than that, we 

would have had debate on government Bills yesterday, and we 

would have had debate on government Bills today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason we’re not debating government Bills 

now is not because the opposition doesn’t want to work. Well 

the opposition does want to work, Mr. Speaker; you’ll be aware 

of the amendment. The opposition is willing, if necessary, to sit 

longer than the government proposes. That’s not the problem. 

The opposition wants to work. It’s that the government doesn’t 

want a discussion of its legislative agenda in the public. It wants 

to crowd it into the shortest period of time and literally, 

literally, even with the lengthening days, Mr. Speaker, wants to 

crowd this debate into the dark hours of the night, Mr. Speaker, 

on every one of its Bills. Literally that’s what it wants to do. 

 

So you think you’re taking poetic licence with the dark hours of 

the night, Mr. Speaker, but that’s literally what the 

government’s proposal is to do. Either the opposition doesn’t 

exercise its right to debate Bills or you can debate Bills at 

midnight. Well we’re willing to go to 1 a.m. in the morning, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you’re going to, if you’re going to hide your legislative 

agenda to midnight, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has no 

problem with you hiding it at 1 o’clock in the morning. It hardly 

makes any difference, Mr. Speaker — so anything to assist the 

government in recovering from actually its own mistakes. 

Except what the House Leader proposed, Mr. Speaker, which is 

to surrender as an opposition; which the government may want 

to admit its incompetence, admit its lack of loyalty to rules it 

negotiated within five weeks of sitting in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. But this opposition is not going to surrender its role as 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. That is not going to happen. 

 

The paper that I’m citing, Mr. Speaker, goes on to say, quote: 

 

The emergence of a set pattern of government and 

opposition is of comparatively recent origin. There was a 

time when the subjects thought fit for parliamentary 

debate were severely limited, when opposition to the 

government’s handling of affairs of state could be 

considered to smack of treason, and hence to be 

dangerous. 

 

At least that’s not a word we’ve heard shouted across yet — 

treason — Mr. Speaker. Nuisance I guess we’ve heard shouted 

across, but maybe perhaps at my invitation, Mr. Speaker, so I 

can forgive that. The quote goes on to say: 

 

In the 16th and 17th centuries, the Member of Parliament 

who went beyond presenting private, local and special 

grievances or bills, to oppose the Crown, or even to debate 

such national issues as the right of succession, foreign 

policy and religion, risked imprisonment or worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will recall, and this was the case with the 

election of the previous Speaker, Myron Kowalski. When the 

Speaker is elected, you are dragged reluctantly to your chair. 

And I have to say that Mr. Kowalski seemed more reluctant 

than the current Speaker, but you know, it’s four years. Who 

can remember? The reason for that, Mr. Speaker, the reason for 

that is that members of parliament, particularly Speakers who 

spoke for parliament, were martyrs to free speech. They were 

martyrs to the right to assembly. They were martyrs to the right 

to dissent, Mr. Speaker. It was a dangerous job, Mr. Speaker. 

Executive government produces many things. It doesn’t 

produce martyrs, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t do that. 

 

The people who have died in the defence of our British 

parliamentary system didn’t die defending the power of 

government, Mr. Speaker. They died because they were 

defending the rights of the people to be represented and the 

rights of the people to be represented and to hold their 

government accountable, not at elections alone but every day 

that that parliament sits, Mr. Speaker — every day. That is what 

people died for, to build what I have called the crown of the 

democratic systems in our world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The paper goes on to say, “It was not until the 18th century that 

it came to be constitutionally accepted that an opposition could 

be “loyal” across the whole spectrum of public policy.” 

 

So what we now take for granted but should not take for 

granted, need to protect, need to protect every day, that is our 

role as opposition: to protect the rights of the minority in the 

legislature in which we sit as opposition, Mr. Speaker. But what 

we do protect now is not that ancient, and, Mr. Speaker, as I 

have said in my earlier remarks, not necessarily all that secure if 

we are to be as complacent as the government was complacent 

about its legislative agenda. 

 

The paper goes on to say, “The actual term “His Majesty’s 

Opposition” was coined during a British debate in 1826 and has 

been in use ever since.” Since 1826. The paper goes on to say, 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

and I quote again: 

 

A vigorous opposition in Parliament can be the chief 

bulwark against the temptation to force majeure and 

bureaucratic empire. “The people” speak through the 

“loyal opposition” as well as the government, through 

back-benchers as well as Cabinet ministers. There is 

simply no substitute for the “checks and balances” which 

are brought into play in the representative and watchdog 

functions performed by ordinary Members of Parliament. 

 

Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Moose Jaw 

North can’t understand that clear — these aren’t my words — 

this clear . . . because if they were my words, Mr. Speaker, 

maybe they wouldn’t be so clear. But if you can’t understand 

this clear pronouncement on how the people speak through a 

loyal opposition as well as government and that there is no 

substitute for the checks and balances represented by the rules 

of this legislature which are brought into play by the 

representative and watchdog functions performed by ordinary 

members of parliament, can’t understand that, then I’m not sure 

I can explain to the member from Moose Jaw North what he’s 

talking about, to use his words. 

 

The paper goes on to say, quote: 

 

. . . members of the opposition in the lower house are 

called upon to act as a brake on government haste, to 

ensure that all legislation receives the “due process” of 

parliamentary deliberation, and to see that diverse and 

opposing points of view have a chance to be aired and 

defended. 

 

Well there is the clearest statement as to why members of this 

opposition would want to use the rules, their rights, and their 

power to do what this government feared, which is to require 

this government to delay its legislation — which it was not so 

committed to that it would take the advice of its officials on 

how to pass it to delay this legislation, some parts of it, maybe 

one, maybe two of these Bills for discussion — to see that 

diverse and opposing points of view have a chance to be aired 

and defended. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, diverse and opposing points of view — they 

will be stated at midnight in this Legislative Assembly. But I 

don’t think the members of the government really believe that 

that is a fair and just way to see that those diverse and opposing 

points of view are aired, are aired and defended, Mr. Speaker. 

Again in the dark hours of the night, Mr. Speaker, dark hours of 

the night to pass their legislation, and that’s the response of the 

government. That’s the response of the government to their own 

failure to manage their own legislative agenda. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I promised the members opposite, and 

particularly the member from Saskatoon Northwest, that among 

the conservative thinkers on which I would primarily rely . . . 

And I’ve relied almost entirely on conservative thinkers, Mr. 

Speaker, in making the argument to the conservatives across the 

way — small “c” conservatives across the way, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ve relied on Burke. I’ve relied on Madison. I’ve relied on 

Churchill, Mr. Speaker, and Stanfield in passing, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, in one last attempt to make the member 

from Moose Jaw North even understand what the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin is talking about, from the Hon. John G. 

Diefenbaker speaking to the Empire Club of Canada, Toronto, 

October 27, 1949 . . . and I assume that in fact probably now 

called the Canada Club. I don’t think Mr. Diefenbaker would 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh good, I’m glad to hear that. 

Mr. Diefenbaker doesn’t have to turn over in his grave. A 

member advises me that it’s still called the Empire Club. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Anyways, Mr. Diefenbaker says on the role of the opposition 

. . . Now I want to wait just a second here. I think if there’s not 

a political principle against disagreeing with John Diefenbaker 

on the government benches, there might be almost a religious 

principle against disagreeing with him on the government 

benches, so I . . . Or, Mr. Speaker, maybe I was going too far. 

Maybe that smacked a little too much of the pulpit, and I 

withdraw that actually. 

 

I think there might be a political principle that would make the 

members opposite wary of disagreeing about Mr. Diefenbaker 

on, certainly, on the role of opposition, where he probably 

performed his most productive work. I personally, Mr. Speaker 

— and I’m of more left persuasion than Mr. Diefenbaker — I 

personally believe that Mr. Diefenbaker’s major if not almost 

sole contributions to parliamentary democracy and to public life 

and to public service were made in opposition and not in 

government. But I know conservatives would disagree. 

 

Now to quote Mr. Diefenbaker and to stop anticipating what he 

would say, quote: 

 

If Parliament is to be preserved as a living institution His 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition must fearlessly perform its 

functions. When it properly discharges them the 

preservation of our freedom is assured. The reading of 

history proves that freedom always dies when criticism 

ends. It upholds and maintains the rights of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Request leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me privilege to stand 

here and introduce someone very special in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. My son, Brent, is sitting here waiting for a ride home. 

So I’d ask everybody to welcome him to the gallery for the next 

few minutes. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

Meewasin. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it was family, so you 

know, even the prime minister, the former Prime Minister Right 

Hon. John Diefenbaker might have to take second seat. 

 

But I know that the members opposite would not want to have 

the Diefenbaker quotation broken up, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll begin 

again from the beginning. I wouldn’t ordinarily do this, Mr. 

Speaker. I have been trying not to be repetitious tonight, and I 

think I’ve been mostly successful but, quote: 

 

If Parliament is to be preserved as a living institution His 

Majesty’s Loyal Opposition must fearlessly perform its 

functions. When it properly discharges them the 

preservation of our freedom is assured. The reading of 

history proves that freedom always dies when criticism 

ends. It upholds and maintains the rights of minorities 

against majorities. It must be vigilant against oppression 

and unjust invasions by the Cabinet of the rights of the 

people. It should supervise all expenditures and prevent 

over expenditure by exposing to the light of public opinion 

wasteful expenditures or worse. It finds fault; it suggests 

amendments; it asks questions and elicits information; it 

arouses, educates and molds public opinion by voice and 

vote. It must scrutinize every action by the government 

and in doing so prevents the short-cuts through democratic 

procedure that governments like to make. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that a rich mine of comment on the role 

of opposition? What would John Diefenbaker, in the context of 

these remarks, say about the action of this government, Mr. 

Speaker? What would he say? What would he say about a 

government that does not uphold and maintain the rights of 

minorities against majorities? What would it say? It would say 

that this opposition must vigorously stand up for its rights, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what he would say. It must be vigilant against 

oppression and unjust invasions, by the cabinet, of the rights of 

the people. 

 

And it falls to this opposition, Mr. Speaker, it falls to this 

opposition to defend the rights of the private members opposite, 

the members who are not members of cabinet, who have no 

voice really, no voice. I mean they have a voice, Mr. Speaker, 

but we know where their voice comes from, Mr. Speaker. 

Sometimes we can see the lips move, Mr. Speaker. It’s not that 

subtle, Mr. Speaker. They don’t appreciate it now. They don’t 

appreciate it now, but if history does repeat itself, the first time 

is tragedy and the second time is farce. 

 

When the farce comes around . . . and it’s happening much 

quicker this time, Mr. Speaker. It’s happening much quicker. 

We have noted, we have noted, Mr. Speaker — and I’m not the 

only one; the member from Regina Dewdney noted the same — 

that it took four years or more to get a demonstration of over 

2,000 people against the Devine government. It took that long. 

It took that long. And it took this government four months — 

four months, maybe five if you want to be generous, Mr. 

Speaker — to get a demonstration of that size. 

 

So if history repeats itself, Mr. Speaker, and if it repeats itself, 

first time is tragedy. Second time is farce. It also seems to go a 

lot quicker the second time, Mr. Speaker. It seems to be going a 

lot quicker. 

 

So the abandonment, the abandonment of this government by 

its own private members that took place at the end of nine years 

of Devine government may take place within four years, three 

years of this government, Mr. Speaker, because of the rapid 

pace at which history is repeating itself. 

 

Speaking of time, Mr. Speaker, I’ve watched the clock. And at 

moments I know others listening to me have had the same 

experience that I’ve had speaking, and that is, it seems that the 

clock is frozen, Mr. Speaker. Now I know that’s not right, but it 

seems that the clock is frozen to me. 

 

One of my favourite novels, certainly my favourite novel when 

I was a teenager, Mr. Speaker, was Catch-22 by Joseph Heller. 

And in Catch-22 there’s a character named Orr. And Orr has a 

theory. His theory is that if life seems longer, it is longer, Mr. 

Speaker. So Orr decides that he’s going to do only the most 

boring things. It’s going to seem . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

The member from Kindersley anticipates my point. He will do 

only the most boring things and his life will seem longer. It will 

seem longer. 

 

And I’ll come back to this point, Mr. Speaker. But it does 

remind me of what the now Premier said in ads leading up to 

the election — that he thought that the New Democratic Party 

would next accuse or assert that if a Sask Party government was 

elected, that winters would be longer. And of course we never 

made such an assertion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I personally may have made the assertion that if a Sask Party 

government was elected, winters would seem longer, Mr. 

Speaker, but I never said that they would be longer. And this 

winter has seemed longer, Mr. Speaker. But perhaps that’s 

coincidence. 

 

In any case, Orr believed that if life seemed longer, it would be 

longer, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate that some of the members 

in the room — members on this side of the House are too kind 

to admit it, but certainly the members on the other side of the 

House are not so kind — may be having the same experience 

that I have, which is that I have seemed to have found the 

fountain of youth here, Mr. Speaker, because my life seems to 

have been quite a bit longer since I rose to speak than it might 

otherwise have been if I had been listening to somebody else 

speak. 

 

But I just want the members opposite to know that, you know, 

in the words of President Clinton — maybe not the most 

conservative person I’ve quoted this evening —in the words of 

President Clinton, that I do feel their pain. And I do want to 

disagree with them without being disagreeable. 

 

Anyways, in the paper in which I was citing, it goes on to say, 

and I quote: 

 

In particular, when major decisions take place without 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2008 

passing through parliamentary channels, the opposition is 

placed at a distinct disadvantage in terms of its ability to 

scrutinize and influence government actions. 

 

Well the very goal, Mr. Speaker, the very goal of this 

government and the action it’s taken is to avoid going through 

parliamentary channels . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now you 

know, some members over there say, magnanimously, giving 

you time, the 20 hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the 20 hours. We have the 20 hours. 

That’s not what they’re doing. They’re cramming up, cramming 

up the debate. Well actually this is their . . . These are their 

alternatives, Mr. Speaker, really one alternative. 

 

Either you can agree to have this full public discussion of any 

public hearings whatsoever crammed into a narrow period of 

time between . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they obviously didn’t want 

to debate government business now or they wouldn’t have 

brought in this motion. If they wanted to debate government 

business this week, they wouldn’t have brought in this motion. 

If they wanted to debate government business before this week, 

they would have started when the officials advised them to start. 

 

They don’t want to debate government business till next week. 

They want to crowd the debate of all their priority Bills between 

mid-April and mid-May and hold as much of that debate in the 

dead of night, in the dead of night, Mr. Speaker, as possible. 

That’s what the government wants to do. 

 

Their alternative, their alternative to doing that, Mr. Speaker, 

their alternative — it’s like a government that’s giving you a 

choice of how you’re going to be executed, Mr. Speaker — but 

their alternative, Mr. Speaker, is this. In the words of the 

Government House Leader, and I admit this might be the third 

time, but it’s on the motion, Mr. Speaker. It’s germane. It’s on 

the motion, Mr. Speaker. It’s to the motion. It’s moving the 

motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The House Leader says, to the opposition . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Four minutes. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know actually the 

House Leader gave us more than four minutes. It gave the entire 

opposition as much as, and I quote, “. . . just start the debate and 

sit down and let it come to a vote after an hour or 20 minutes or 

whatever . . .” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Four minutes until 10:30. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, well I think because 20 minutes 

is less than an hour, whatever is less than 20 minutes. And 

that’s the position that the member from Moose Jaw North 

supports. 

 

I thank the member from Kindersley for clarifying his remarks 

about what he meant about the four minutes because otherwise, 

otherwise I might have been confused. I don’t know. There 

might be some other points I want to make. 

 

On the role of government, the paper that I was quoting, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to return to that. And the author of that paper, 

to whom I previously referred, refers to two authors, Van Loon 

and Whittington, and I quote their observation: 

 

“In a majority government situation, the basic strengths 

and weaknesses of the opposition parties in parliament are 

determined primarily by the procedures of the House of 

Commons. Since they are never going to be able to 

outvote the government on any policy proposal, the 

opposition parties must content themselves with using 

subtler techniques to attempt to influence policy.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, yes, the end of the quote, that’s exactly 

right, Mr. Speaker. This opposition can never outvote that 

government. Mr. Speaker, they have it. They have the majority. 

They have the hammer. They have the power. But they’re not 

satisfied with that, Mr. Speaker. They’re not satisfied with that. 

That’s not good enough. They want to do it on their time 

schedule. They want to work as hard as they want to work. 

They don’t want . . . They want to come back to the legislature 

when they want to come back to the legislature. They want to 

cut off a week of legislative debate. They don’t want to, they 

don’t want to allow the opposition to use any of its powers, 

limited power, not to defeat Bills but to delay Bills so they can 

be discussed by the public. They don’t want that. 

 

They don’t even want the discussion, to the extent possible, to 

take place during business hours, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want 

discussion, to the extent that they can, to take place during the 

supper hour, Mr. Speaker. They want the debate, to the extent 

that they can, to take place in the dead of night, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what they want. They’re not satisfied with having the 

tyranny of the majority, Mr. Speaker. They want to, to the 

extent that they can, Mr. Speaker, deprive the opposition of the 

subtler techniques that are available to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Prime Minister Diefenbaker, leader of the opposition 

Diefenbaker, to make it more relevant, Mr. Speaker, he would 

be outraged. He would be outraged by his intellectual 

descendants sitting over in that government and their lack of 

respect for the minority within this legislature, within this 

parliament, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I may have time, Mr. Speaker, to cite another quote from the 

paper. I will try anyways, Mr. Speaker, quote: 

 

This has directed attention to the factors impinging on the 

effective operation of “checks and balances” in democratic 

political systems, and, in turn, to numerous proposals for 

legislative reform. In parliamentary systems there is a 

fundamental constitutional principle of responsible 

government at stake. And in the Canadian case, the 

tradition of one-party government, combined with the 

frequent weakness of legislative oppositions, poses added 

dangers. 

 

Under these circumstances, preserving and enhancing the 

role of the opposition becomes critical to the democratic 

legitimacy of the system as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member from Moose Jaw North wants to 

know what I’m talking about, that is . . . 

 

[22:30] 



April 8, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

The Speaker: — Being the time of adjournment, this Assembly 

will stand adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 695 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 697 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 702 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 706 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 710 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 719 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 720 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


