




















































Hansard: April 07, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 21A  MONDAY, APRIL 7, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 591 

 April 7, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to request leave of my 

colleagues to make a statement of a personal nature. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Premier. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

my colleagues here in the Assembly for leave. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Thursday an old videotape came to light. I 

hadn‟t seen the video before but there I was, saying 

unacceptable things about a former premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Romanow, speaking in a bad Ukrainian 

accent. That afternoon I spoke to reporters here at the 

Legislative Assembly and I apologized for those words and for 

that conduct. 

 

I have since spoken with Mr. Romanow and offered him 

directly an apology. That afternoon, I drafted a letter — it was 

sent the next day — of an apology to the Canadian Ukrainian 

Congress, to their Saskatchewan division. 

 

Kathy Young, who now works in Executive Council of our new 

government, has also apologized for comments she made about 

some labour leaders at the time, 1991. She has apologized to 

them directly as well as to current SFL [Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour] leadership. 

 

As well last Thursday, my office spoke with Dr. Lynda 

Haverstock, who is also referred to by someone on the tape — 

though not working currently with the government — in a 

disparaging way. An apology was offered as well. 

 

I have today instructed legal counsel to end any challenge of 

what I believe sincerely was a mistake made on behalf of one 

particular media. Such an ongoing action, Mr. Speaker, I think 

would simply detract from whatever small things I hope to 

achieve with my remarks and what big things that we will be 

able to achieve together as a province in the wake of last week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, though, because I have a great deal of respect for 

this institution, I repeat all of those apologies to members of 

this House. I repeat all of those apologies to people here today 

in the Assembly, and through this House to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that younger version of me that was seen on the 

video has since become a dad. I have worked hard to be a good 

husband, to be a good citizen. In my public life or in my 

business endeavours, I have tried to conduct myself with 

honesty and with integrity, without discrimination or malice or 

guile. When I look back at things that I have said and things 

that I have done, I know that I have certainly not always met 

those standards. 

 

And more to the point, like the younger version of myself, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to those standards, I fall short still today 

and make mistakes still today. So I spent a lot of time thinking 

over the weekend about the standards for serving in public 

office, the standard for the office that I have the great privilege 

of holding today. 

 

While all of us in Saskatchewan should obviously try not to do 

things or say things that are hurtful or offensive, I do believe 

there is a higher standard; that there is an added duty for elected 

officials, especially for the Premier, to lead by example. I can 

only give the people of this province that I love my solemn 

commitment, Mr. Speaker, that I am going to strive, that I am 

going to work very hard to not let them down, to not let my 

family down. That is my motivation. 

 

I did a lot of thinking over the weekend as to whether any good 

can come from the events of last week in Saskatchewan. The 

answer of course is yes, but that will depend on us all. As for 

our government I know now, today, that every single ministry 

can and will carefully reconsider all of its service and all of its 

function in the light of the question, are we doing everything we 

can to not only prevent discrimination, Mr. Speaker, but to 

foster more understanding and to better Saskatchewan? 

 

This is especially true for the Ministry of Education. Our best 

hope to find our better selves and to build a better province is 

not in this room today. It is with our kids. It is with future 

generations. Our curriculum, the tools, and the encouragement 

we give our teachers to be at the vanguard of that effort, as they 

have been in the past I would point out, Mr. Speaker, must be 

reinforced and must be properly resourced by this government. 

 

What about each of us as individuals? Can we join in this 

effort? For who among us have not either told a joke or perhaps 

uttered some intolerance or perhaps simply just stood by quietly 

while someone else did, without stopping them, without 

interjecting? So we know that we can each make a change for 

the better. We can ourselves stop engaging in any sort of a joke 

or comment or intolerance. And though in ways it may even be 

more difficult, we can also gently and without condemnation 

stop others who we hear that are doing it. 

 

Imagine the force and the effect on our Saskatchewan for good, 

of such a stand by us as individuals, combined with the waves 

of goodwill and understanding and, ironically, maturity that are 

coming from our kids, from our schools, from future 

generations. 

 

As for Tami and I, I know that we‟re going to do this. We are 

going to accept this challenge personally. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. I do not seek, and I don‟t 

believe the people of the province seek some humourless, 

colourless Saskatchewan that is dimmed by some great, grey, 

crushing Orwellian political correctness. I also want the kind of 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Saskatchewan where it‟s okay to laugh at ourselves, and yes, 

sometimes with each other. I think anyone who knows me, Mr. 

Speaker, will know that I‟m probably the first one to poke fun 

at myself, even my own heritage, Low German or Mennonite 

heritage. There are some stereotypes of that heritage that I seem 

to exhibit from time to time and am reminded of it from time to 

time and joke about myself. 

 

I hope that within good taste, at the expense of no one, that we 

can always do that. I hope that we could understand the 

distinction today, Mr. Speaker, between what is intolerant and 

what might be good-natured humour that comes at the expense 

of no one. Because our resolve to deal with the former, Mr. 

Speaker, need not take away our ability to enjoy the latter. And 

I admit, Mr. Speaker, sometimes — and I thought about it this 

weekend — sometimes it‟s hard to know, well where do you 

draw the line, where is the line between what would be 

intolerant and what might be good-natured humour? 

 

Well I have some suggestions. If you‟re not prepared to see 

your remarks on the 6 o‟clock news, they are probably wrong. 

If you‟re not prepared to say it to the individual, to their face, 

they shouldn‟t be said. I wouldn‟t have said these things to Mr. 

Romanow directly, obviously, so they should not have been 

said. They were wrong. They should not have been thought. 

And maybe, Mr. Speaker, shining down through the centuries, 

there‟s even a clearer line for us who wonder, where is this 

line? It‟s the golden rule. What are you willing to accept said of 

yourself or done to yourself in terms of what you should say or 

do to others? There is a line, and we can know it. 

 

Some people have noticed that views have changed a lot in the 

past 17 years. That‟s not an excuse for any of the comments that 

were on that tape. They were wrong in 1991 and they are wrong 

today. But this fact should give us great hope, Mr. Speaker, 

because if our Saskatchewan, if our society is more enlightened 

today about race, about gender, about sexual orientation than it 

was 17 years ago, then we have every right to expect and 

resolve that it will be that much better 17 years from now. We 

are moving in the right direction, maybe too slowly, but we‟re 

moving in the right direction. 

 

And while we are still less than perfect, it is also still worth 

remembering the reason that so many people came to our 

country and our province. The reason that so many people are 

still coming to our country and our province today is because 

for many they are fleeing intolerance. They are fleeing 

oppression and hatred in their part of the world. And when they 

turn their gaze to Canada, they see a radiant beacon of hope 

shining a simple but profound message — you are welcome 

here; you are equal here. 

 

Maybe some will say that if we seek some utopia, some level of 

perfection, that we will fail. No we will not, because we will 

find an even better Saskatchewan in the attempt. Success will 

come in the endeavour. Success will come from mistakes if 

lessons then are learned and practised. 

 

No, it‟s not perfect here, Mr. Speaker. The events of last week 

have proven that. But you know what? It‟s pretty good. I 

believe that beacon of hope shines brighter today than it has, 

and I believe with our resolve it will shine even brighter in the 

years ahead. So to those who will ask, will Saskatchewan live 

up to her creed, her potential, and her motto which is, “from 

many peoples, strength,” the answer is yes. And in 17 years 

from now, the answer will still be yes. 

 

I don‟t remember the last time I thought as much about all of 

these things as I have this weekend and maybe, Mr. Speaker, 

therein lies some of the problem. I don‟t remember what 

personal inventory I might have done or what my state of mind 

might have been on these things prior to last Thursday. But 

today I know that I boast in nothing, neither wisdom nor 

character. I claim nothing, neither grace nor forgiveness. Today 

I seek these things, and I hope that we will all seek these things 

— forgiveness and wisdom and character and compassion. 

 

And I hope that we will receive these things, that we will find 

them, in a measure, in a proportion that our pasts may not 

warrant but that our future demands. And as for grace, thank 

God it‟s amazing. Any other kind wouldn‟t be enough. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is 

my honour today to introduce to you a group of teachers who 

are here in the legislature to attend the 10th annual 

Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. 

 

The institute started on Saturday and will continue through to 

Wednesday. Although this group has met with the Chief 

Electoral Officer, members of the judiciary, and observed an 

educational outreach mock parliament in the Legislative 

Chamber earlier today, they are scheduled to meet with House 

leaders, caucus Chairs, caucus Whips, private members from 

both sides of the House, and cabinet ministers, as well as 

government, caucus, and legislative staff. 

 

I would ask as I introduce these teachers that they might give a 

wave as I mention their names. We have here today: Theresa 

Eppich, Gull Lake School, Gull Lake; Karen Fehr, Hepburn 

School, Hepburn; Cyril Flokes, Lakeview School, Cole Bay; 

Geoff Glasspell, Regina Christian School in Regina; Kurtis 

Hamel, Spiritwood High School in Spiritwood; Carmen 

Kingsbury, Hepburn School in Hepburn; Bryce Krawetz, 

William Derby School in Strasbourg; Tracy Laverty, Royal 

West Campus in Saskatoon; Robert LeBlanc, Humboldt 

Collegiate in Humboldt; Brent Loehr, Humboldt Public School 

in Humboldt; Liana McKinley, Lashburn High School in 

Lashburn; Dennis Ogrodnick, St. Mary High School in Prince 

Albert; Douglas Panko, Vanier Collegiate in Moose Jaw; 

Tammy Patterson, F.W. Johnson Collegiate in Regina; Cindy 

Ramier, Wynyard Elementary in Wynyard; Laurel Reimche, 

Estevan Comprehensive School in Estevan; James Sifert, 

Leader Composite School in Leader; Erin Signarowski, Regina 

Christian School in Regina; Delores Syrota, Wynyard 

Elementary in Wynyard; Kendra Syrota, Jonas Samson School 

in Meadow Lake; Edie Tarasoff, Wynyard Elementary in 

Wynyard; Craig Tilstone, École Vickers School in Prince 

Albert; Courtney Waugh, University of Regina; Wendy Willis, 

University of Regina; and Ted Zurakowski, St. John 

Community School in Prince Albert. 

 

[13:45] 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 593 

I would like to make special mention of our steering committee, 

composed of two officials from the ministry of Learning and 

three teachers who attended past institutes. From the Ministry 

of Education, Gerry Craswell and Anna Schmidt; and our 

teachers, Ryan Hughes, École Vickers School in Prince Albert; 

Larry Mikulcik, William Derby School in Strasbourg; and 

Delise Fathers, Riverview Collegiate in Moose Jaw. 

 

Members, this group will be observing the afternoon 

proceedings with great interest. I ask all members to welcome 

our teachers to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly join with you in 

welcoming the teachers in the institute to the Assembly today, 

but it‟s not why I‟m on my feet. It‟s a great pleasure for me to 

be able to introduce very special guests who are seated in your 

gallery, with whom I had a brief chance to visit before the 

proceedings began. 

 

We have with us today a group of outstanding young university 

students from the newly renamed Paul J. Hill school of business 

at the University of Regina. Attending with these students are a 

number of their professors, including the acting dean, Anne 

Lavack, and the associate dean, Sylvain Charlebois, who‟s here 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will know that the university was 

recently renamed and received a significant and generous 

donation from the Hill family as well as forged a partnership 

with the Ivey business school. And I think that partnership is 

already serving the province and the students at the University 

of Regina very, very well. 

 

But I want to say that they‟re here today because 44 students 

from the Hill business school participated this semester at the 

2008 Jeux du Commerce West Competition at the University of 

Lethbridge. The competition attracted 500 students from around 

13 universities across the West. 

 

JDC [Jeux du Commerce] West is the largest, most prestigious 

business competition that is held, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

say that the University of Regina, the Hill School of Business 

students finished second, only behind the University of British 

Columbia. They outpaced 11 other universities. And they 

insisted when we met earlier that I point out that yes, one of 

those schools they outpaced was the University of 

Saskatchewan, the Murray Edwards school of business although 

— here‟s a great Saskatchewan success story — they actually 

finished third in the competition. 

 

So we want to just welcome them to their Assembly, thank 

them for all the hard work they‟ve done for representing our 

province so very well in this competition. We know exams are 

coming up; it‟s the last week of classes. We wish them well in 

that. And maybe more importantly on behalf of all of us we say, 

there is a lot of work to do in Saskatchewan, so we want all of 

you to stay after you‟ve graduated and help build our province. 

Welcome to your Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

welcome the students from the Hill school of business from the 

U of R [University of Regina], congratulate them on their 

accomplishment, and wish them all the best as they spend time 

here in the legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce a couple of sets of people. First of all, seated in the 

eastern gallery are two good friends, Mr. Wayne Wilson and 

Dr. James Parker, both of them educators, both of them 

tremendously active volunteers within the broader community. 

And it‟s good to see them here today in their legislature. So 

please join with me in welcoming these individuals, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McCall: — I would like to also draw attention in the 

Speaker‟s gallery, two individuals seated right beside the clock. 

I‟m sure they‟re keeping time of things, Mr. Speaker. That is 

the president of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, president 

Robert Doucette, and executive director Geordy McCaffrey 

from the Gabriel Dumont Institute. Please join me in 

welcoming these individuals to their legislature. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Parks, Culture, and Tourism. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to introduce to you and through you and to the rest of the 

Assembly a well-known Saskatchewan artist and 

businesswoman who is seated in the Speaker‟s gallery. It is my 

pleasure to introduce Ruth Smillie, the artistic director and CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the Globe Theatre, Saskatchewan‟s 

largest arts organization. With Ms. Smillie is Mr. Andrew 

North, the general manager of the theatre. 

 

Ms. Smillie is celebrating a milestone in her career, Mr. 

Speaker, at the Globe Theatre. It is her 10th year as artistic 

director of the Globe Theatre. The member from Biggar will be 

reading a member‟s statement to the Assembly regarding Ms. 

Smillie‟s achievement during her tenure at Globe Theatre. I ask 

the House to join me in welcoming her and congratulating her 

on her 10th anniversary at the Globe Theatre. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly I‟d like to introduce some people, trade 

unionists who have joined us in the Assembly today. 

 

In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, President Larry Hubich, Gary 

Schoenfeldt, Marlene Brown, and David Winters. In the east 

gallery we have Greg Mosiuk, Debbie Hubich, Judy Henley, 

Carrie McCosham, Carol McKnight, Tom Graham, Ann St. 

Denis, Will Bauer, Erin Morrison, and Frank Mentes. 

 

I‟d like to welcome all these trade unionists to their Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to the members of the House, I‟d like to introduce a 

gentleman that‟s sitting . . . your gallery today, a gentleman 

that‟s well known to the House here, that‟s spent many years 

here, Mr. Gerald Muirhead. I represented his old constituency 

which he represented very well for many, many years. So I 

would like all members to welcome Mr. Muirhead to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟d like to join you in re-introducing an individual that you 

already introduced. It‟s not often that we as the elected 

members in this Legislative Assembly have the opportunity to 

introduce family. 

 

And I want to ask all members to join me in welcoming my son 

Bryce who has already been introduced as a teacher at 

Strasbourg school. Bryce is in his seventh year teaching in 

Strasbourg, and with his mom leaving after 35 years of 

education, he still has 28 years to go. So I‟d ask all members to 

welcome Bryce to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for First Nations and 

Métis affairs. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I‟d like to introduce two respected 

individuals who have Métis descent sitting in your gallery. 

 

We have Geordy McCaffrey, executive director of the Gabriel 

Dumont Institute at Saskatoon. And we have Mr. Robert 

Doucette, president of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

We‟re honoured that you‟re in your gallery today. We, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, appreciate your friendship and 

equally your commitment to the Métis Nation of this province; 

welcome to your legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I‟d just like to make a comment in regards to 

what may transpire in this Assembly for sake of the members, 

and I know it doesn‟t affect members, but it impacts each and 

every one. I‟ve been informed that there has been someone 

taking photos since we‟ve started proceedings today. And 

according to the rules, photographs are not to be taken in the 

Assembly by anyone without the authority of the Speaker. So 

just for the sake of down the road, people will be mindful of 

that. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to present a petition on behalf of Moose Jaw and 

area residents that, if followed by the government, would help 

support improved health care in our area. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present several pages 

of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on behalf of 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning the 

withdrawal of proposed essential services legislation and the 

withdrawal of the proposed amendments to The Trade Union 

Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Saskatoon, Prince 

Albert, and Regina. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition that has been signed by residents of the city of 

Saskatoon, from every neighbourhood in Saskatoon calling 

upon the government to reinstate funding for Station 20. Mr. 

Speaker, I will read the petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan. These petitioners have concerns about the 

current task force. I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability hold open public consultations for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, somewhat distressed, but I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of the employees at the South Hill liquor store because of 

their shabby treatment . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I believe that under the new rules a member 

can only present one petition on any given day. Order, order. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Paragon Awards 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there was a full house at 

Regina‟s Turvey Centre last Thursday evening to honour the 

nominees and recipients of the Regina & District Chamber of 

Commerce ninth annual Paragon Awards, celebrating business 

excellence. There were 24 businesses and organizations 

nominated in nine different categories including young 

entrepreneur, where the winner was Rachel Mielke of Hillberg 

& Berk; community involvement, won by Sun Life Financial. 

The Jack FM bike-a-day-in-May campaign won the Community 

Alliance Award. 

 

The Marketing and Promotional Achievement Award was won 

by the Saskatchewan Roughriders Football Club. Partners in 

Motion won the Export Achievement Award. And MicroAge 

won for community service excellence. The Diversity Award 

went to Employment Network Canada Inc., and Trino‟s Men‟s 

Wear is the New Business Venture of the year. The Business of 

the Year Award went to Dutch Growers Garden Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evening also included the presentation of the 

University of Regina Award of Innovation to a team from the 

university‟s engineering department, including Dean Paitoon, 

for work on CO2 environmental technologies. 

Please join me in congratulating Tim and Karen Duyvendyk of 

Dutch Growers Garden Centre and all of the winners of the 

Paragon Awards. And join me also in recognizing the excellent 

work of the chamber of commerce in organizing this event. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Saskatchewan Tartan Day 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

inform the Assembly about Saskatchewan Tartan Day, which 

actually took place yesterday on Sunday, April 6 on the 

anniversary of the Declaration of Arbroath in 1320, when Scots 

asserted their independence. Tartan Day was declared a day of 

recognition for Scottish clans in Saskatchewan by an Act of this 

Assembly in 1992 and is celebrated across Canada. My friend, 

the learned member from Kindersley, was responsible for the 

initiation of this legislation, and I and all Scots thank him for 

that. 

 

The impact of the Scottish clans on Canada has been 

considerable — from fur trading and establishing trade routes to 

the West, to helping found Montreal and becoming involved in 

all aspects of Canadian life. 

 

[14:00] 

 

One such Scot was my own grandfather. Alfred Barclay 

Chisholm immigrated to Canada at the age of 17 years. After a 

few years of working in the mines of Nova Scotia he moved to 

what became Chisholm Farms, our fourth-generation family 

farm. From 1920 to the mid-‟50s, Chisholm Farms was the 

dairy that served the town of Maidstone. 

 

The stories of my grandfather are an integral part of our 

family‟s and our community‟s history. During the depression, it 

has been relayed to me on a number of occasions, that if 

children resided in a house they would receive their daily 

delivery of milk, regardless of their ability to pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a Scot with our rich history both 

locally and around the world. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Spring Fling Fundraising Event 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, Saturday the Regina and District 

Association for Community Living held their annual spring 

fling. This annual fundraiser brought together more than 500 

supporters. Mr. Speaker, this annual gala raised tens of 

thousands of dollars to fund projects to assist individuals with 

intellectual disabilities in and around Regina. 

 

The organizers have held this event for more than 20 years and 

have dedicated many years to improving the lives of those who 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

live every day with an intellectual disability. These organizers 

and volunteers have made a difference in our community. Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of all of us I would like to thank the 

organizers for the commitment on this very important issue. 

 

Special thanks to Voula Danakas, who has spent more than 20 

years making the spring fling a reality. Mr. Speaker, our 

province is a better place because of the many volunteers who 

make this event a success each year. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Artistic Director Celebrates 10 Years with Globe Theatre 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased today to rise to recognize Ms. Ruth Smillie, the artistic 

director of Regina‟s Globe Theatre, on the occasion of her 10th 

anniversary at the theatre. Under Ms. Smillie‟s leadership, 

starting in 1998, Globe Theatre has achieved a prominent place 

among the top-regarded theatres across Canada, earning a 

national reputation for the excellence of its productions and 

programs. Among the programs initiated during Ms. Smillie‟s 

tenure at Globe are the Shumiatcher Sandbox Series and the 

Globe Theatre school. 

 

Globe has seen tremendous growth during the past 10 years. 

When Ms. Smillie arrived at the Globe, the total attendance was 

30,000. It now has approximately 60,000 people attending the 

performances in a year. To accommodate this growth, the 

theatre, with the support of government, business, and 

individual donators, has undergone two renovations and an 

expansion in the facilities at the Prince Edward Building. 

 

We are truly fortunate to have a professional theatre of this 

calibre in Regina. Its presence in downtown Regina adds 

immeasurably to the vitality and attractiveness of our 

downtown area, and it plays an important role in generating 

tourism revenue. 

 

We congratulate Ms. Smillie on her 10th anniversary with the 

Globe Theatre and on the growing success of this great theatre 

in our community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

World Health Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

World Health Day. This year‟s focus is on the need to protect 

global public health from the adverse effects of climate change. 

The World Health Organization selected this theme in 

recognition that climate change is posing ever-growing threats 

to global public health security. 

 

Without mitigating factors the world can expect more injury, 

disease, and death related to natural disasters; heat waves; 

higher rates of food-borne, water-borne, and vector-borne 

illness; and more premature deaths related to air pollution. 

Large populations will be displaced by drought and famine. As 

well the productivity of arable land will change. A small 

example of the effects of climate change on our local population 

might be the extension of the West Nile virus season due to 

higher temperatures in Saskatchewan. 

 

Many of these impacts can be avoided or controlled by reducing 

pollution, more efficient land use, and better water 

management. Clean water and sanitation, safe and adequate 

food, intervention of sound health practices at a young age, 

immunization, and disaster preparedness are all critical 

components of public health practices and need to be 

strengthened. 

 

The impacts will be disproportionately greater in vulnerable 

populations which include the very young, elderly, medically 

infirm, poor and isolated populations. We have the power to 

control to some degree this threat at home with partnerships 

across the various sectors of society. We need to prepare 

ourselves now if we wish to moderate the severity of these 

effects. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Saskatoon Junior Achievement Awards 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday night the Junior 

Achievement of Saskatoon held its awards ceremony. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to take this time to announce to the Assembly 

the names of the winners: the Salesperson of the Year, Nicole 

Hoffos, sponsored by the Saskatchewan Research Council; the 

human resource management, Stacey Leek, sponsored by 

SaskTel Pioneers; the IT [information technology] initiative, 

Bryan Tkachuk, sponsored by Freedom 55 Financial; 

achievement in production imitation, Sheena Quan, sponsored 

by Saskatchewan Research Council; VP [vice-president] 

finance, Vaike Lepnurm, sponsored by KPMG; President of the 

Year, Nishi Jerath, sponsored by RBC Royal Bank. 

 

Katie Bleakney won the first year achiever‟s award by 

Saskatchewan Research Council. Spirit of JA [Junior 

Achievement], Aaron Simpkins and Tanis Cheston, sponsored 

by SaskTel Pioneers and Saskatchewan Research Council. 

Volunteer Appreciation Award was by Jarome Chomos; 

production excellence, Bryan Wan, sponsored by SaskTel 

Pioneers; the individual inductee was Barry Remai from the 

Remai Group; Nimi Jerath from professional leadership 

awarded by Cameco Corporation; and the Achiever of the Year 

was Colin Mark, sponsored by Canpotex Limited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ought to be proud of these young people. They 

are our future. I look forward to the day when they will become 

our leaders. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

Community Walk to Support Station 20 West 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 

morning in Saskatoon over 2,000 citizens stood up for what 

they believed is the right thing — Station 20 West. Called the 

Community Walk for Station 20, citizens were asked to show 

their support — and they sure did. 

 

In fact The StarPhoenix had this to say. The sidewalks around 

the block designated for Station 20 West were filled with a 

throng of people taking part in the largest demonstration in 

recent Saskatoon history. It goes on to say: 

 

Between 2,000 and 2,500 people gathered on the lot at the 

corner of 20th Street West and Avenue L on Saturday 

morning to protest the provincial government‟s recent 

decision to take back $8 million in funding for the 

development. 

 

Which was to feature dental, medical clinics, public health, 

nutrition programs, and a co-op grocery store. 

 

“It‟s not about politics. It‟s about the community,” said 

Sheila Pocha, co-chair of the project‟s board of directors. 

 

“„We are worth it,‟ „Build communities, not walls,‟ and „Say 

yes to Station 20 West,‟” were the messages bobbing down the 

street as the crowd stretched from the lot and around three 

corners of the city block in a seamless line of supporters. Cars 

honked and pedestrians heading in the other direction often 

joined the tide of people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join 

me in congratulating the 2,000-plus citizens of Saskatoon for 

standing up for what‟s right and attending the community walk 

in support of Station 20 West. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Station 20 West 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My first question 

follows up on the member‟s statement that has just been made. 

As the member pointed out, on Saturday this past week over 

2,000 — 2,000 to 2,500 — people gathered to protest the 

Minister of Health‟s recent axing of an $8 million commitment 

to the Station 20 West project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks came from across Saskatoon. They 

came from across the province of Saskatchewan to call upon the 

Minister of Health to reverse this ill-advised cut. And the fact 

is, Mr. Speaker, while thousands were present there at the 

protest in Saskatoon, they are joined with letters of support, 

emails, cards that are coming from all corners of the province. 

And so today, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Health. Will he listen to the public voice? Will he hear the 

outcry that his decision has cost? Will he reverse this ill-advised 

decision? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the Leader of the Opposition for the question. And certainly on 

behalf of the government, we understand very much the 

sentiments that were expressed and respect them that were 

expressed with respect to the rally that has been referred to in a 

member‟s statement and now in the preamble to the Leader of 

the Opposition‟s question. 

 

I think what those people want — although they have certainly 

expressed it very specifically with respect to Station 20 — is 

they want to make sure that core neighbourhood issues in the 

province of Saskatchewan are the highest priority for its 

government. And I can assure them through you, Mr. Speaker, 

and through the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

for the area, the Leader of the Opposition, that that is precisely 

the case. 

 

That‟s why, Mr. Speaker, our budget increased funding for 

school-based lunch, anti child-poverty and hunger programs by 

$500,000. That‟s why, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve added $5 million in 

new funding for organizations like the Saskatoon Food Bank, so 

they can better engage in delivering life skills and employment 

skills training. We will continue to move on the affordable 

housing issue, Mr. Speaker. We have heard that message, and 

we will continue to make progress. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier claims to know what 

the people of the inner city of Saskatoon want, but they tell him. 

They want Station 20. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — They want their dream, their vision to become 

reality, Mr. Speaker. We‟re not talking about money from this 

year‟s budget; we‟re talking about money from last year‟s 

budget. 

 

All along the march route, citizens of the inner city of 

Saskatoon, some of whom could not join the group, were saying 

to the group, thank you for standing up for us. Thank you for 

taking up our cause. We see the comments in today‟s Star 

Phoenix from those citizens. 

 

My question now then is to the Premier: will he listen to the 

people? Will he listen to the people who were there in the rally? 

Will he listen to the letters and the emails that he‟s getting? But 

more importantly will he listen to the voices of people who live 

in the inner city of Saskatoon and reverse this decision that he 

and his cabinet have made? Will he reverse the decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to say first of all — and I think this 

is a very important point — that the largest portion, and many 

would argue, I think, that one of the most significant portions of 

the Station 20 project has been the housing issue. That work 

will be done. That work is going to be completed and . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . well the work is nearing completion. 

It will continue. So too will be the library project. 

 

What we are talking about here is housing for a grocery store 

and a clinic, not an additional clinic, Mr. Speaker. Let‟s be very 

clear. I‟ve heard members opposite say, well this means more 

access to additional health care. It does not. It means the 

relocation of the Westside Clinic to another facility. 

 

We have made the decision that when it comes to investing, Mr. 

Speaker — and we are investing as I‟ve already highlighted in 

the previous question — we will work with groups like the 

Westside Clinic. We will work with groups like the food bank. 

We will focus our attention on St. Mary School. We will deal 

with those issues in the core neighbourhood not in exactly the 

way that the hon. member would like, but in an effective way 

on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I‟m extremely pleased to hear the Premier say 

they‟ve reversed their other ill-advised decision, and it appears 

now we are going to build St. Mary School from what the 

Premier just said. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Speaker — again, Mr. Speaker — 

it would appear that the Premier and the Government of 

Saskatchewan today are making this decision based on 

ill-informed information, Mr. Speaker. The Premier now stands 

in his place and indicates that there will not be an expansion of 

health services when in fact there will be an expansion of health 

services in the Station 20 concept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now just last week, Mr. Speaker, just last week the Premier 

said, and I quote, “I‟ve seen a lot of decisions change by 

governments and even by opposition, even after a press 

conference where emphatic statements have been made, 

because people get on the phone and contact their 

representatives.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, people have been on the phone to offices, to 

MLAs. They‟ve been on the streets. They‟re sending letters. 

Will the Premier authorize the Minister of Health to do exactly 

what the Minister of Social Services did a week ago and reverse 

the decision and put the money back for Station 20 West? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting, it‟s interesting 

that the Leader of the Opposition would ask these questions 

only days after he voted against a half a million dollars more for 

school-based hunger programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And he voted against $5 million investment 

for food banks, significantly the Saskatoon Food Bank as well, 

Mr. Speaker, that will certainly benefit from that and provide 

programs. 

 

It‟s also more than passing strange to hear from that member 

who, while he was premier of the province and represented that 

constituency, immediately after another premier represented 

that constituency, after that record, Mr. Speaker, which featured 

the highest child poverty rates in Canada under his government, 

which featured, Mr. Speaker, the fastest growing rate of food 

bank usage, which featured the neglect of St. Mary School, not 

just while he was the MLA, but while he was the premier, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

[14:14] 

 

Intolerant Comments 

 

Mr. Calvert: — A question, new question on a different 

subject, but to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Leader of the Opposition has the 

floor. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, new question, to the Premier, on 

a new subject. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the Premier chose to send a very strong 

message to FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] 

leaders that he does not accept intolerance and that he would 

take steps against intolerance, and for this position, he has been 

applauded. 

 

Today the public of Canada is focused on intolerant comments 

that have been made by the Member of Parliament from 

Regina-Lumsden-Lake Centre. Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are watching closely to see the Premier‟s 

response. 

 

On Thursday of last week, we called upon the Prime Minister to 

strip Mr. Lukiwski of his caucus duties. Over the weekend, 

more voices have joined for that call. Today I understand 

opposition parties in the House of Commons are joining in that 

call. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he join the opposition parties 

in Ottawa? Will he join our caucus? Will he join citizens of 

Saskatchewan and call on the Prime Minister to take action on 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

these intolerant comments? What exactly will the Premier 

advise the Prime Minister to do, and will he put that advice in 

writing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I note, Mr. Speaker, that 

the party of the individual in question, the leadership of the 

party of the individual in question seem to have . . . well more 

than seem to have, certainly have stated that they accept the 

apology that‟s been offered by that individual and further that 

they obviously truly believe that the views expressed in the 

videotape 17 years ago by that individual have changed. 

 

As views . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well one of the 

members is laughing at this, the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. As views have changed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members are not to draw other 

members into the debate. Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — As views have mercifully and gratefully 

changed right across the country and here in our province, I 

accept the statement of the individual that he made last Friday. I 

take it as its face value. I accept it on its merit. His colleagues in 

the House of Commons have done the same thing, his leader 

has done the same thing, and, Mr. Speaker, we won‟t be taking 

any further action in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Apology 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this week, this past weekend 

has been an occasion for reflection. Members of my 

constituency and my community have contacted me and 

expressed their hurt about the comments made by the Premier. 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents are saying this has dredged up old 

pain. 

 

I understand that the Premier has sent an apology to the 

Ukrainian Canadian Congress and today apologized to the 

Assembly. But, Mr. Speaker, this apology may not reach all 

members of the Ukrainian community, and it may not reach all 

people outside of our community and this legislature. Mr. 

Speaker, people need to hear that such attitudes and behaviour 

are not acceptable. 

 

To the Premier: will he commit to sending his apology as an 

open letter to all newspapers in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly wouldn‟t have a 

problem with that. I‟ve also stood in the Assembly today before 

routine proceedings and offered exactly those same comments, 

that apology. I‟ve also said on Thursday that this was never 

meant. This was an impersonation of a specific individual — 

not acceptable, but that‟s what it was. It was never made then or 

when it‟s been done since or before that as any kind of 

aspersion to any group, to Saskatchewan Ukrainian people or to 

people of Ukrainian descent from wherever they come from. 

 

For what it‟s worth, I have done other poor impersonations, 

including my own heritage, and used accents of that. Mr. 

Speaker, again it is never meant in disrespect. And as I have 

said to the extent that anybody, anyone would take offence to 

that, especially Ukrainian Canadians — including my 

colleague, the Deputy Premier — then I state the apology again. 

And I certainly wouldn‟t have any problem with it being 

published in any newspaper in any part of the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Liquor Store Closure 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, late 

Friday afternoon without warning, the government issued a 

news release stating that the South Hill liquor store in Moose 

Jaw would be closed effective immediately. The news came as 

surprise to many in the community, including to the store‟s staff 

and many patrons. With so little notice, I can only assume that 

the decision was made on rather short notice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister Responsible for 

SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority]. When 

was the decision made to close the South Hill liquor store, and 

what was the motivation for this hasty decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 

Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to rise to answer my first question 

in the House as a minister of the Crown. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, we take the role of 

Minister Responsible for SLGA very seriously and the 

operation of the corporation and its employees equally 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this decision was not taken lightly, and it certainly 

wasn‟t taken on the spur of the moment. And fact is the original 

recommendation for the closure of the South Hill store occurred 

in 1994-95 under the previous administration. Mr. Speaker, the 

reasons for this decision taking place were financial. There is a 

significant savings to be made in changing the operation of 

SLGA within Moose Jaw. There are two stores in Moose Jaw, 

Mr. Speaker, and the store that remains is more than adequate to 

handle the operations within Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure the members 

opposite with their alleged new-found commitment to the 

Crowns wouldn‟t take this decision lightly. What I don‟t 

understand is what evidence the decision was based on. The 

store has been profitable for many years. The building is owned 

by SLGA, and it has some of the lowest overhead costs right 

across the province. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a very proud 

location . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

store has been profitable for many years. The building is owned 

by SLGA and overhead costs are among the lowest in the 

province. And it‟s also a very proud location and home to a 

mural celebrating Moose Jaw‟s Ukrainian heritage. Add to this 

the fact, Mr. Speaker, add to this the fact that on March 30 they 

finished painting the interior of the store. Mr. Speaker. It‟s not 

giving the impression that this store was on the brink of closure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did he decide to close the 

South Hill liquor store when all the facts point to a store that 

was viable and profitable? Was the decision political retaliation 

against an NDP riding? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this decision was made strictly based on the financial 

position of that particular store. There was a new store built in 

Moose Jaw in 1999 that has almost 13,000 square feet. The 

previous store which the government closed was just over 6,000 

square feet. This store is just over 4,000, for a total of just over 

10,000 square feet. There is now 20 per cent more capacity in 

Moose Jaw than there was with the two previous stores, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The employees in question, there‟s 1.5 FTEs [full-time 

equivalent] being impacted here. They will not lose their 

positions. They will simply be moving over to the other store. 

As per their options under the agreement which will take place 

over 90 days, they have a choice of whether they wish to retire, 

move to a different location, Mr. Speaker. The expectation is 

they will move over to the Moose Jaw store. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if this is an example of the 

business acumen of the Sask Party, I would be appalled. They 

own the building. That store has been profitable and made 

money for SLGA. It‟s in a very good location, has some of the 

lowest overhead costs in the province and, Mr. Speaker, they 

just painted the interior. If they had made a decision a month or 

two ago during budget, why would you repaint the inside of the 

store with the job being finished four days before they 

announced the closure? No notice to staff. No notice or 

consultations with the citizens of Moose Jaw. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister making this political decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite mentions good location. It‟s right next door to 

a daycare, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the social responsibility of the 

members opposite. 

 

The members opposite spent 14 years keeping this store open 

while they were closing schools and hospitals around the 

province because it was in the former premier‟s constituency 

and in the minister of SLGA‟s constituency thereafter, Mr. 

Speaker. They were the ones that kept this store open for 

political reasons — not in the best interest of SLGA, not in the 

best interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are taking a responsible fiscal decision for the people of 

Saskatchewan and not simply playing politics like those 

members have been for the last 14 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this just speaks to the 

incompetence of this government. You shut down a profitable 

store that is owned by SLGA, that has low overhead costs, and 

then you paint it right before you close it down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ran on a promise that they 

would not privatize . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ran on a 

promise that they would not privatize Crown corporations or 

SLGA, but here we see a store being closed with little rationale. 

To the minister: is the closure of the South Hill liquor store in 

Moose Jaw part of his privatization plan, and what other stores 

are on the list? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It 

amazes me that the member opposite is concerned about 

painting the store. If you‟re looking to rent the building out 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

afterwards, you need to have it in good shape. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — The members opposite opened the 

hospital in Oxbow on April 1, Mr. Speaker, and then went in 

there and closed a brand new hospital 14 days later, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s how they operated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is an important decision for SLGA for financial 

responsibility. There is no consideration being given to 

privatizing Sask Liquor. And the last time a store closed in this 

province was in 2006, and closed by that member when she was 

the minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

The Legislative Sessional Agenda 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today as 

we look at the blues in front of us, we see that the government 

is claiming that they do not have enough time in this session to 

get all of their legislation passed. Mr. Speaker. It begs the 

question: whose fault is that? 

 

I have seen, Mr. Speaker, the legislative calendar, Mr. Speaker, 

a legislative calendar set out by the Legislative Assembly back 

in May of this year. It has the session indeed starting earlier 

than the session actually started this year, Mr. Speaker. The 

sessional calendar would have given members of the legislature 

more time to debate legislation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, all MLAs 

were informed that we would be starting the spring session 

earlier than we actually did. 

 

So to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: who made the decision to start 

the spring session of this Assembly as late as we did, and who 

in government failed to realize that this could create the 

problem that they‟re claiming exists today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. I welcome the question from the Opposition 

House Leader in regard to the work of this Assembly. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite says, whose fault is it that we 

have to work harder? Well it‟s quite simply no one‟s fault, but 

let me point out some of the realities of a new government after 

an election. 

 

We called this Assembly together in a shorter period of time 

between the election and the meeting of this Assembly than any 

other government in the history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we did that in 

cognizance of the rules of this Assembly that said in order to 

have the critical agenda items for the government placed to a 

vote in the spring session, we had to bring them and introduce 

them so that the public would have ample time to scrutinize 

them over the period of the intersessional period coming up to 

this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we now want to ensure is that that opposition 

has sufficient time to do their job. I don‟t know why they‟re 

hesitating to do their work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

government knew back in the fall that getting all of their 

legislation passed this session was going to be difficult. In fact, 

the Minister of Labour went so far as to even ask his own 

department for help and advice. 

 

Now I know seeking advice doesn‟t come very easily to the 

Minister of Labour, but don‟t worry, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister of Education will 

come to order. Member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 

of Labour, true to form that we‟ve seen in this Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker, did not take the advice of his own department. I have a 

document, Mr. Speaker, prepared by the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour in response to the 

minister‟s request for how do we get Bill 5 passed in 20 hours. 

When confronted with this question, Mr. Speaker, about how do 

we get it passed, what was the ministry‟s solution to the 

problem, Mr. Speaker? They said, start the session earlier. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Labour: why did he ignore 

the advice of his own department in this regard and — come to 

think of it — why did he even bother asking them in the first 

place if he was going to ignore them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there is an agenda that a new government has to bring 

in front of the legislature of the province of Saskatchewan, and 

that quite simply is what we‟re ensuring happens in this session. 

Mr. Speaker, as a new government we have a responsibility to 

ensure that we do everything we can to deliver on the promises 

and on the budget that we tabled in this House. 

 

We are ensuring that the opposition has 75 hours of time to 

scrutinize the budget. We will ensure that the opposition has up 

to 20 hours per specified Bill. We will ensure that the 

opposition has up to five hours to deal with budget-related Bills. 

And we are hopeful that we will provide sufficient time so that 

Bills introduced into this session also will receive the scrutiny 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

that the opposition is entitled to perform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re ready to do the work. What‟s the problem 

with the opposition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve said 

before, I understand one of the basic functions of any 

government is to arrange to have legislation written, presented 

to the Assembly, and then passed. And whether it‟s passed in 

May or in October, Mr. Speaker, we understand that the 

government has the ability to do that, and the opposition will do 

their job. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the only major 

function of government certainly is the legislation that they 

bring forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has dropped the ball 

on this matter. I don‟t understand what the Government House 

Leader is thinking when he proposes a rule change halfway 

through the legislative session. Why did he not arrange to have 

the necessary time to debate the government Bills to begin 

with? How has he managed to mismanage this basic function of 

government? 

 

So I ask, Mr. Minister, to the Government House Leader: given 

that all he needs is 20 hours of debate on any piece of 

legislation, why does the Minister of Finance, the Government 

House Leader, have trouble counting to 20? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the 

Government House Leader clearly understands, the 20 hours 

isn‟t for the total of the legislative agenda; it is for each of the 

specified Bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, in addition to that there 

is a requirement under the rules to have five . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — In addition we have the requirement 

to provide five hours for each of the budget-related Bills. We 

have the requirement for 75 hours as scrutiny of the estimates. 

All of those things take time, and so far this opposition has not 

indicated any willingness to be reasonable and be proactive and 

to move some of this along in a more timely fashion. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, given the record of the opposition, 

we had no choice but to ensure their democratic rights, to make 

sure they had enough time to do their job, and we certainly on 

this side of the House are willing to do the necessary work and 

effort so that we can have completion date on May 15. This 

session will end on time, and the opposition will have the time 

they need to do their job if they choose to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, fortunately the Opposition House Leader chose to ask 

some questions that actually pertained to the rationale for the 

motion that we are introducing today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a competing balance in this Chamber in 

terms of the roles and responsibilities of the government and the 

roles and responsibilities of Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition. 

We each have our role to play in this whole process. And 

certainly we are mindful, as a new government, that we have a 

responsibility to set an agenda and to match that agenda with 

specific legislative pieces and, as well, with items that are 

tabled with the budget. We also understand that as a transition 

to a new government, it is extremely difficult to have all of 

these things happen in a very timely way. 

 

As one of the individuals that was involved with the negotiation 

of the rules that we‟ve established for the House, it was 

recognized in the fashioning of the rules that this was an issue, 

potentially, going forward. And so there was a flexibility in the 

initial session of a legislature after an election to provide some 

flexibility. 

 

We attempted very seriously to meet those challenges. And 

certainly, as a government, we came together as a legislature in 

the shortest period of time in the history of this province, from 

when the election was held to the first sitting of the session. 

And we recognized we should do that in as timely a way as 

possible because the people of this province deserved to hear 

our response to the promises and the commitments that were 

made in the campaign. And that was a prime responsibility. 

 

We also recognized that there needed to be adequate time for 

discussion and debate and consultation for the opposition on the 

critical Bills to our agenda. And so we tabled a number of Bills 

that have become specified Bills because of the fact we tabled 

them in the fall session, and that there would be the period of 

time between the fall session and the spring session for the 

opposition to contact stakeholders, to contact citizens in order 

to have those discussions and so that they may indeed exercise 

their responsibility as an opposition to hold us account for the 

items we are bringing forward. 

 

Part of those rules also state that if a Bill is specified, before it 

is guaranteed to come to a vote in a subsequent session, there 

has to be provided at least 20 hours of time, if the opposition 

chooses to use that much time, but it has to presented and made 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

available — per piece of legislation. Those are the rules that we 

agreed to. 

 

And so we recognize that in this first session, that may prove 

somewhat difficult because if the opposition chooses to take all 

of the time that‟s specified under the rules, quite simply there 

will not be enough time to consider all of the agenda items that 

we have on the order paper. 

 

We also recognize, in the rules, that the opposition has the right 

to scrutinize and hold to account the budget for a minimum for 

up to 75 hours and that the opposition has a right to say to us, 

we would like more hours for one ministry than the other. And 

we as a government have the obligation to try and 

accommodate the opposition in that regard as well. 

 

We also recognize that there is legislation that‟s been brought 

forward in this session. And while we acknowledge that there is 

no necessity that that legislation will come to a vote, we‟re 

hopeful that if we provide sufficient time for the opposition to 

get the drafting of this legislation out to stakeholders so they 

may receive their comments and criticism, that as well could be 

considered in this session. 

 

And I have to say that in the 12 years that I sat on the other 

opposite side of the House, we were very co-operative to ensure 

that the rights of the government were going to be properly 

recognized and that we were doing our job of holding people to 

account. And that when we had done that to the best of our 

ability, we certainly were going to be mindful of the fact we had 

a responsibility to the citizens of Saskatchewan as well to 

ensure we were not holding up the work of government because 

the people of this province had chosen a government and as 

such they had a mandate in order to exercise on that agenda. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we believe that what we‟re doing is a very 

appropriate and responsible response to the dilemma that we 

face. I have discussed this with the Opposition House Leader 

last week, and I said, this is a dilemma. This is a problem I 

have. Can you help me with this by making some assurances 

that this could be addressed within the current sitting hours? 

And the solution that was suggested by the Opposition House 

Leader was just unrealistic and impossible to accommodate and 

so that we really had no choice but to say, okay you have the 

right. You have the right. You have indeed perhaps even the 

responsibility to make sure that there is twenty of hours of 

debate on each piece of legislation if you choose to. 

 

My responsibility and this government‟s responsibility is to 

ensure that there‟s enough working hours in the time that‟s 

remaining for this session in order for you to exercise the 

democratic responsibilities you have as an official opposition. 

 

And I‟ll tell you quite frankly, if you want to ensure that we 

don‟t sit any longer hours, if you want to ensure that we‟re done 

with the session on May 15, just start the debate and sit down 

and let it come to a vote after an hour or 20 minutes or whatever 

you think is fair. It‟s up to you. It‟s your choice. We certainly 

will be happy to accept that. But I mean if you‟re going to not 

be able to do that and if you‟re going to insist on using the time 

that‟s available to you, it‟s our responsibility to make sure that 

time is adequately provided for you. And that‟s the nature of the 

motion. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, without taking any further time on the 

topic I would like to move the following motion: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures for the sitting times of the 

Assembly and the sitting times for standing committees 

shall be varied on an interim basis for the remainder of the 

first session of the twenty-sixth legislature as follows: 

 

1. Notwithstanding Rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournments of the sitting of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays 

shall be 10 a.m. to 12 midnight, with a recess from 5 

p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

2. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn at the 

following times when convened: 

a.  on Thursday: 2 p.m. to 12 midnight, with a recess 

from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

b. on Fridays from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; 

3. By order, the Assembly and standing committees may 

adjourn earlier than the adjournment times specified by 

this sessional order; and further, 

 

That the provisions of this sessional order shall come into 

effect the sitting day after its adoption and shall expire 

upon the adjournment of the Assembly on the sitting day 

preceding the completion day for first session of the 

twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased today to rise to speak on this very important issue 

before all of us in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, this is an issue 

about parliamentary democracy. It‟s an issue about the rights of 

the members of this Assembly, and most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s an issue about incompetence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have today before us a motion, a motion that‟s 

brought forward by a government that cannot arrange the time 

within their agenda to pass their own — to pass their own — 

budget and legislation, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

government has put forward a motion that clearly shows that 

they can‟t manage their own time. 

 

They can‟t manage their own affairs, and they can‟t pass their 

political agenda, their legislation, and budget without changing 

the rules. And, Mr. Speaker, changing the rules unilaterally. 

Changing rules that they had agreed to. Changing rules that they 

were part of putting in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They fully, fully understood what these rules meant and they 

fully understand what these rules mean to this legislature. But 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

what they don‟t understand is what the abuse of power that 

they‟re putting forward is about or how it reflects upon the 

democratic principles of our institution or how it reflects upon 

the rights of the citizens of this province to have the opportunity 

to have a voice in this legislation. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to start my remarks by quoting from a book 

called “The Role of the Legislature” in Saskatchewan. And I‟m 

going to go right to its conclusion, and in the conclusion it says: 

 

The danger of royal absolutism is indeed past, and there is 

no doubt that the danger of cabinet absolutism is growing. 

Regardless of the party in power, the Premier‟s office 

endeavours as much as possible to control the legislature. 

The danger is that this desire for control fuels public 

cynicism and perhaps worse, cynicism among party 

members. This in turn contributes to the perception that all 

politicians are alike, and if they are, why should anyone 

bother to vote or get involved in electoral politics. 

 

It goes on to say, “The erosion of the legislature continues, 

albeit perhaps somewhat more slowly than at times in the past.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, listen to this part very carefully, “The 

Devine Conservatives believed that they had a majority of the 

seats in the legislature so they could do whatever they wanted.” 

Mr. Speaker, “The Devine Conservatives believed that they had 

a majority of the seats in the legislature so they could do 

whatever they wanted.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this book, talking about the role of the legislature 

in Saskatchewan, points to a former Conservative government 

with a majority of seats doing whatever they wanted, regardless 

of the interest of the legislature and regardless of the interest of 

the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, history repeats itself. 

This is history repeating itself. 

 

We had a government through the 1980s who ruined this 

province, who ran this province like they had absolute control, 

who cared little or nothing for the views of the opposition or the 

people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing that 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to use the comments from a colleague of 

mine today who pointed out that it took the Grant Devine 

Conservative government of the 1980s four years to get a large 

demonstration against their government. It took them four years 

to have a large demonstration against their government — more 

than 2,000 people. Well, Mr. Speaker, what Grant Devine took 

four years to do, the Brad Wall government has done in four 

months. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members know they‟re supposed to 

refer to the members by their position or their constituency. 

 

Before I recognize the member, I would ask leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Members of the Assembly, it‟s 

my pleasure to introduce to you today my youngest brother, 

Jack. He‟s in from Calgary. He‟s looking forward to speaking 

to the Social Sciences Teachers‟ Institute tonight. 

 

For the members who are going to be there, I think you will 

really appreciate his involvement in reaching out to youth in 

Calgary, and in fact it‟s expanding across Canada. And so I‟d 

ask members to extend a warm welcome to my brother, Jack 

Toth. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I apologize 

for using the name of a member. I should have known better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to get back to the fundamental principle 

that that quote talked about. And that quote talked about the fact 

that when a government believes they can do anything because 

they have the majority in the House, when that government 

believes it can supersede the interests of in fact the other 

members of the legislature and supersede the interests of the 

public, then we have no respect for the institution. We have no 

respect for democracy, and we have no respect for both the 

members of the legislature and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we face today. We face a government 

that because of their mismanagement and their inability to plan, 

to not pass their legislative agenda, and perhaps they‟re 

concerned that they can‟t even pass their budget, Mr. Speaker. 

But they set the timetable, Mr. Speaker. They have the majority. 

They get to set the timetable. They get to set the agenda. And, 

Mr. Speaker, within the rules that exist, without having to 

change the rules, they could have significantly increased the 

number of hours the members of this Assembly would have to 

speak to issues. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out some of the obvious 

things that occurred here, Mr. Speaker. We didn‟t start the 

Legislative Assembly until early in December, Mr. Speaker, 

and we sat for a mere eight days. Mr. Speaker, we could have 

sat longer in December or we could have started earlier because 

the fall session is supposed to be 25 days in length, Mr. 

Speaker. But we sat a mere eight days. And in those eight days, 

Mr. Speaker, they brought forward supplementary estimates. 

They brought forward six Bills that they specified. They‟re 

specified Bills, Mr. Speaker. But they didn‟t, they didn‟t give 

any additional time to speak to those Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They didn‟t sit nights during the fall session. They shortened 

each day to the shortest possible time. And in many days we in 

fact shut the House down prior, prior to the hour that closure 

would have to occur, Mr. Speaker. In fact every Monday, 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

Tuesday we did. So four of the eight days we sat, we shut the 

House down hours before we had to. Why? Because the 

government wanted to. Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t want to work. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we lost three and a half hours debate time 

every Monday. We lost three and a half hours debate time every 

Tuesday. Mr. Speaker, that is seven hours a week. That‟s not to 

mention the days we shut down at 4:30 because they didn‟t 

have enough work on the agenda to do.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we shut down and we didn‟t use — even the 

eight days we held session in the fall — we didn‟t use a total of 

14 hours of debate time. Mr. Speaker, that 14 hours becomes 

very, very significant because for each specified Bill, you need 

20 hours of debate. Well, Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t schedule 14 

hours of debate time in the fall session — 14 hours of debate 

time which they control. Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t utilize that 

time. 

 

Not to mention, Mr. Speaker, not to mention at all, Mr. Speaker, 

that we sat only eight days when we‟re supposed to sit 25 days, 

Mr. Speaker. Now, in all fairness — and I will be fair about this 

issue — we had an election last fall. But, Mr. Speaker, that 

doesn‟t mean, that does not mean that we couldn‟t have sat an 

additional four days prior to Christmas or started an additional 

four days earlier, adding an additional eight days to last fall. 

They set the agenda. They decide that, Mr. Speaker, but they 

didn‟t choose to sit. And, Mr. Speaker, that would‟ve given 

enough time to pass Bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s go to this spring. We had a calendar sent out 

to us, and we were all told we were going to start on March 3. 

So we were all ready to start the Assembly on March 3. But lo 

and behold, Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t start till March 10. And 

why didn‟t we sit the week of March 3, Mr. Speaker? Well we 

don‟t know, in opposition, because we don‟t control the agenda. 

We weren‟t told. We simply got told, we‟re not starting till the 

10th. Now why is that, Mr. Speaker? That denied us, that 

denied us, as members of the opposition, four days of this 

legislative sitting. And, Mr. Speaker, that denied us, that denied 

the members of this legislature, it denied us more than 25 hours 

of debate time, Mr. Speaker. Their failure to start the legislature 

when they should have and when we had agreed to and what the 

calendar said should be denied members of this legislature more 

than 25 hours of debate time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were willing, we were willing to work. Mr. 

Speaker, the members of the government weren‟t. We were 

willing to work but we were denied that. And now we have a 

government who cannot get their agenda through because they 

didn‟t follow the rules — the rules that were there. They now 

want to change the rules unilaterally to push through an agenda. 

An agenda, Mr. Speaker, that, if it wasn‟t passed this spring, 

would only carry on to the fall and give the opposition — give 

the members on this side of the House — more time to consult 

with the public, more time to deal with the issues that are before 

us. Mr. Speaker, let‟s not kid anybody. These Bills would in 

fact pass next fall, and, Mr. Speaker, the world would not 

change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to for just a minute review the six Bills, 

the six specified Bills, and talk about what they are. And, Mr. 

Speaker, what is the panic? Why are the members opposite so 

shocked that they need to push a panic button, change the rules 

to get this legislation through? Well I‟m going to tell the people 

of Saskatchewan what this legislation is so that they know and 

understand what these six Bills are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 1 is An Act respecting Saskatchewan‟s 

Growth and Financial Security and repealing certain Acts. Mr. 

Speaker, this piece of legislation does exactly, exactly what the 

previous piece of legislation did, Mr. Speaker; it puts in place a 

fund that is identical to the fund that was in place before. But, 

Mr. Speaker, they campaigned on that they were going to do 

things differently, so they gave it a different name, Mr. Speaker. 

They gave the Bill a different name, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They could do exactly what they want to do with the old Act, 

Mr. Speaker. They could call it the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 

and they could continue the Fiscal Stabilization Fund in place. 

And if they didn‟t change this till next year, the whole world 

isn‟t going to fall upside down. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they don‟t want to do that. Mr. Speaker, they 

decide they were going to pass a Bill with a new name. And 

they‟re going to pass a Bill with a new name because, Mr. 

Speaker, they decide to do something that wasn‟t allowed to be 

done previously. They took the financial benefit from the sale 

of an asset and put it in their General Revenue Fund. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if they had to, they could find a 

way around this for one session and, Mr. Speaker, these Bills 

could pass in October of this year. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? All they‟d have to do is make it retroactive. So if this 

Bill didn‟t pass until October of this year, Mr. Speaker, it would 

make no difference because it would still be passed in this 

budgetary year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Bill No. 1, An Act respecting Saskatchewan‟s Growth and 

Financial Security and repealing certain Acts, Mr. Speaker, if 

this didn‟t pass till the fall, it isn‟t a panic. The world doesn‟t 

fall apart. Saskatchewan‟s finances don‟t come apart. The 

government can continue to act and undertake their budgetary 

promises. Mr. Speaker, it wouldn‟t make any difference at all. It 

wouldn‟t make any difference at all to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It wouldn‟t make any difference at all in the 

members‟ ability to carry out their function and role of 

government. It would not make a difference. So that‟s Bill No. 

1 that they‟re making a big panic about. 

 

I want to now go to Bill No. 2, An Act respecting Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, putting in place their new entity, 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, again if this Bill didn‟t 

pass this spring, the world isn‟t going to fall apart. The walls 

aren‟t going to crumble on the Assembly. The government‟s not 

going to fall, Mr. Speaker. They could pass this legislation in 

the fall and make it retroactive if they chose, if they didn‟t have 

enough time to do it, and the world would continue on. 

 

The only thing that this Act might do, that this Act might have 

some concern for members opposite, is this Act gives the ability 

for members sitting on Enterprise Saskatchewan, the board, to 

get remunerated whether or not, whether or not they‟re getting 

remuneration from the Legislative Assembly. For the first time 

it allows double-dipping. Double-dipping — one of my 

favourite terms, Mr. Speaker — one of the things that should 

never happen. But if that‟s their biggest concern, Mr. Speaker, 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

sad. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s nothing in Bill No. 2, An Act 

respecting Enterprise Saskatchewan, that has to be passed this 

spring in order for this government to operate or in fact for this 

government to operate Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

So why the panic? Why is there such a great panic, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And Bill No. 3 is my favourite, Mr. Speaker. It‟s An Act to 

repeal The Potash Development Act, a piece of legislation 

that‟s never been used, a piece of legislation that‟s been on the 

Bills for more than 30 years. Mr. Speaker, a piece of legislation 

that‟s been there for 30 years — never been used — so what is 

the rush to repeal this Bill? Mr. Speaker, it‟s meaningless. It 

means nothing. It‟s never been used. If it sat there for another 

six or eight months, is this a panic to the people of 

Saskatchewan? Is it problematic to the operations of 

government? Does it mean anything to the average citizen in 

Saskatchewan? The answer is no. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why the panic? Why are the members 

opposite, why are the members opposite in such a panic, in such 

a panic to pass legislation? If it didn‟t pass, it would make little 

— and in this case — absolutely no, no impact on the people of 

Saskatchewan, the province, its operation, or its future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to go to Bill No. 4. Bill No. 4 puts in fixed 

election dates. It‟s The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill sets November 7, 2011 as the next provincial 

election date. Mr. Speaker, that‟s only three and a half years 

away. So why does this Bill have to be passed now? Why does 

this Bill have to be passed this session, Mr. Speaker, when in 

fact the impact of this Bill is three and a half years away? Mr. 

Speaker, I want to repeat — this Bill has its implications three 

and a half years from now. It has no impact today, this year. It 

has zero impact for three and one half years, but this is the 

panic? Mr. Speaker, this very much looks like a government 

that wants to use its majority to bully, to bully, Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition and the people of the province. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I want to go back to, Mr. Speaker, to make reference again to 

what is contained in the book “The Role of the Legislature” in 

Saskatchewan. It talks about when we previously had a 

government who did that. We had that type of government in 

the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. They used its majority to abuse its 

rights and abuse the rights of members of this legislature and 

abuse the rights of the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 4 has its impact on November 7, 2011 — 

three and a half or more years from now. And this is their panic. 

This is what the Opposition House Leader‟s worried about — 

not being able to get through this year. Mr. Speaker, not only is 

that shameful; it‟s abusive. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s taking away 

the democratic rights of all members of this Assembly by 

unilaterally changing the rules, by unilaterally changing the 

rules in a shameful manner for a piece of legislation that has its 

impact three and a half years from now. The members opposite, 

the members opposite need to shake their heads, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are not going to see the impact of 

this Bill for three and a half years. So if this Bill didn‟t get 

passed this year, it didn‟t get passed in the fall, it didn‟t pass in 

the spring session, there‟s zero impact on the people of 

Saskatchewan — zero impact, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 

let‟s not kid ourselves. These Bills would carry on to the fall 

and they would pass. So why the abusive move forward with a 

unilateral change of the rules? 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I want to deal with Bill No. 5. Bill No. 5 is 

An Act respecting Essential Public Services. Mr. Speaker, 

again, this piece of legislation, prior to the election, members 

opposite said it wasn‟t required, wasn‟t needed. They said it 

wasn‟t needed, Mr. Speaker. So why the panic now? We had 

the Health minister prior to the election, the hon. member from 

Indian Head-Milestone, saying we didn‟t need this, when he 

was in opposition. We had the now Premier, the member from 

Swift Current, saying we didn‟t need this. It wasn‟t in the works 

prior to an election. 

 

And what do we see immediately after the election? We see 

poof, Mr. Speaker — poof we have a Bill all of a sudden that 

they‟ve been working on, they say, for months, but they said 

they didn‟t need it when they were in opposition and before the 

election, because they didn‟t want to mention it to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve operated in this province without this piece 

of legislation for 100-plus years now. Mr. Speaker, if this piece 

of legislation didn‟t get passed till the fall, is the sky going to 

fall? Are the walls in this building going to crumble? Is the 

province going to fall apart? Is business and commerce going to 

stop? No. No, none of those things would occur, and the Bill 

would pass in the fall after adequate debate as it normally 

would. So what‟s the panic? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the biggest problem is these members want to 

abuse their power. They want to show the world, including the 

opposition, they‟re the boss and we‟ll do it our way regardless 

how you like it. Mr. Speaker, that‟s a bully mentality. That‟s a 

schoolyard bully mentality — things that we should all strive 

against. We shouldn‟t want to abuse our power or take 

advantage, Mr. Speaker, of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all committed to the rules that are in place 

today. We all agreed to the rules. We jointly committed to these 

rules. We jointly understood what the impacts of these rules 

would be. Mr. Speaker, what we‟re seeing today is, quite 

frankly, totally and completely unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government in power wants the opposition and 

the people of Saskatchewan to pay for their incompetence, their 

inability to manage the time, their inability to pass through 

legislation and budget within the time frames. Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

bad management on their part. And, Mr. Speaker, if these Bills 

didn‟t pass this session and they‟re carried on to the fall, there‟d 

be absolutely nothing, nothing that would fall apart. The wheels 

wouldn‟t fall off the train. The Assembly would continue. The 

province would continue on. The economy would continue to 

flourish. The world would be the same. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final Bill, a specified Bill, is An Act to amend 

The Trade Union Act. Again, Mr. Speaker, the current 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

legislation‟s been in place for many years. The world won‟t 

crumble. The sky won‟t fall. This legislation will continue to be 

if this didn‟t pass till the fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the panic? This isn‟t about the legislation 

at all, Mr. Speaker. This is about the abuse of power that a 

majority government has, and they‟re going to teach the 

opposition, we‟re the boss. And when you have that type of 

mentality, Mr. Speaker, that goes right back to what was said 

about the then Grant Devine Conservative government in the 

1980s in the book “The Role of the Legislature,” in its 

conclusion, that we had a government in the 1980s that abused 

their majority power. They abused that majority power against 

the interest of both the opposition and the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the next 12 or 14 hours I‟m going to have the 

opportunity to talk about this legislation in detail but also, Mr. 

Speaker, about the process. 

 

The government‟s attempt to unilaterally change the rules of the 

legislature is simply an attempt to cover up their own 

ineptitude, their own inability, and quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 

their own incompetence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all knew the rules. We all understood what 

would happen. We all understand that legislation can be carried 

on to the next session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve outlined already, the Bills that are the 

priority Bills of the government, if they weren‟t passed this 

spring, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn‟t be the end of the world. But, 

Mr. Speaker, with the time remaining they can pass over half of 

these Bills easily. They just simply have to manage the House. 

They have to bring these Bills forward so if there are one or two 

of these Bills that they want to actually pass, they can pass 

them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they have to know how to manage the House. 

They have to know how to control their own destiny. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if they can‟t manage that, that isn‟t the opposition‟s 

fault. It isn‟t the people of Saskatchewan‟s fault. It‟s their own 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they should 

learn that they have to manage the House to the benefit of the 

people of Saskatchewan, not to their own benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is allowing the people of Saskatchewan the 

opportunity to be heard as well. We‟ve asked for some of these 

Bills to go to public hearings and they won‟t do that. We‟ve 

asked for greater consultation of the public on some Bills. The 

government doesn‟t want to do that. 

 

These are Bills they said before the election they didn‟t need 

and after the election, they just produced the Bills. Mr. Speaker, 

they owe that to the people of Saskatchewan — to have those 

public hearings. They owe it to the opposition to have those 

public hearings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not the role of the opposition to allow the 

government to ram through something that hasn‟t been properly 

debated, hasn‟t had time for public consultations, hasn‟t been 

vetted in the population of Saskatchewan appropriately. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s our job to see that those things are done. 

And those rules that are there, Mr. Speaker, the rules that are in 

place are there to protect the rights of both the minority and the 

majority interest. In this case we have a majority interest who 

wants to pass their agenda. Mr. Speaker, the laws of our 

country, our very constitution, and the rules of our Assembly 

are there to balance both the rules of majority and the rules of 

the minority. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite were in 

opposition, they wanted these rules. They understood that there 

were implications to putting those rules in place and so did we 

when we were the government, Mr. Speaker. We understood 

that we had to be able to manage within those rules to pass an 

agenda and we knew that we had to — and we did — make 

deals with the now government when they were in opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they won‟t make any deals. It‟s their way or the 

highway. Mr. Speaker, that reflects an attitude of a little 

schoolyard bully. Mr. Speaker, if you‟re not willing to 

compromise, not willing to work with the opposition, we‟re 

going to do it our way. 

 

And if we can‟t do it our way within the rules, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re going to do it our way by changing the rules unilaterally. 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s shameful. Mr. Speaker, to unilaterally 

change the rules is shameful, particularly when you agreed to 

the rules, particularly when you understood the rules, and 

particularly, Mr. Speaker, when if these rules were not put in 

place, the change didn‟t occur and in fact this legislation carried 

over into the fall, there‟d be absolutely no impact, no impact 

from what the status is today and, Mr. Speaker, it would still 

pass in the fall. 

 

The sky wouldn‟t fall; the walls of this Assembly wouldn‟t 

crumble, Mr. Speaker; the economy wouldn‟t fail; things would 

continue on. There would be no, no dramatic impact on the 

public of Saskatchewan. There‟d be no dramatic impact on the 

government, Mr. Speaker. They could continue on with their 

budget. They could continue on with their operations and, Mr. 

Speaker, it wouldn‟t make no difference. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, they have brought forward 

six priority Bills. With very little or no work, they could pass 

three of these Bills if they just understood how to manage the 

House properly. And, Mr. Speaker, of these Bills, one doesn‟t 

take effect for three and a half years — fixed election dates. The 

next election, based on their own legislation, is November 7, 

2011, more than three and a half years from now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the potash repeal Act put in place in the 1970s, 

never, never utilized. If that piece of legislation stayed in place 

to the fall . . . Nobody even knows it exists any more except for 

a couple of members opposite that want to make a point. Mr. 

Speaker, it has zero impact on the industry, zero impact on the 

province, and even less impact on the average person in this 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why, why do they have to jam this Bill 

through, change the rules of the House to do so, and show that 

they‟re just . . . They‟re showing a bullying mentality, Mr. 

Speaker. To what end? To what end, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there isn‟t a single piece of legislation here 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

in these six priority Bills of theirs that if it didn‟t get passed to 

the fall it would make significant difference in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s if they didn‟t get passed. But, Mr. Speaker, 

they haven‟t even made an attempt to pass these pieces of 

legislation yet. Some of them have not been called for the first 

time to be spoke on by members of this House. Some of them 

have not yet been called for the members of this House to speak 

for the very first time. 

 

And it is shameful when the government hasn‟t even brought 

forward this legislation to allow members of government to 

speak for the first time on some of it, for the very first time on 

some of it, Mr. Speaker. Had to go in to change the rules. 

They‟re going to change the rules unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, to 

try to ram legislation through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is that contrary to the principles of 

democracy, not only is it contrary to the way this House has 

operated for many, many years, Mr. Speaker, it‟s contrary for 

the principles of good leadership. Mr. Speaker, they haven‟t 

even given us the chance to speak to some of these Bills yet for 

the first time. They have to go in to change the rules. 

 

They don‟t know whether or not we‟re going to speak to these 

Bills for 20 hours or not. They don‟t know any of that, Mr. 

Speaker. When the opposition asked them for a few minor 

things in order to guarantee that their whole agenda would pass, 

they said, forget it; we‟re not going to deal with you. We got the 

majority. We‟re in power. We‟ll ram it through even if we have 

to change the rules. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been elected in this 

Assembly now for just about nine years and I know, as a 

member of the government for all the majority of that time, Mr. 

Speaker, that every year we had to make a deal with the 

opposition. Every year we had to compromise with the 

opposition in order to get our agenda through. We had to 

compromise with the opposition to get our agenda through 

because we weren‟t going to bully and use our majority 

mandate to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we co-operated with the opposition. When we 

asked the government for some co-operation to get their agenda 

through, what did they say? No. We have the majority. It‟ll be 

our way or the highway. So as a result they‟re unilaterally 

changing the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We could‟ve made an arrangement that would‟ve got their 

entire agenda through, Mr. Speaker. But no, they‟re not 

interested in making any type of deal. They‟re using bully 

tactics as they did during the 1980s as demonstrated in the book 

“The Role of the Legislature” and its conclusion to unilaterally 

pass their legislation through. Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have to 

deal with the opposition. You lost the election, we keep hearing. 

They say, you lost the election and you don‟t know you lost the 

election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know, we know we lost the election. Mr. 

Speaker, we know we lost the election. We know we‟re Her 

Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition. But we also know very, very 

solidly, Mr. Speaker, what the role of the legislature is, what 

our role of members in opposition are, and what the role of the 

government is. And, Mr. Speaker, when you have a 

government, when you have a government that will not 

compromise, will not deal with the opposition to pass its 

agenda, then you know, Mr. Speaker, you‟ve got what we‟re 

seeing today . . . [inaudible] . . . unilaterally change the rules to 

push through their agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I‟ll going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, when we were in 

government, every year made a deal with the opposition. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it meant sometimes that some of the legislation we 

wanted passed in a certain year didn‟t pass until the next year, 

Mr. Speaker, to allow them to have further consultations, to 

have Bills taken out for public consultations, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s because we were a government that believes in the 

democratic principles and what this Legislative Assembly is 

about. 

 

[15:15] 

 

We understood that the opposition had a role to play, and we 

understood that the opposition had a right to encourage and 

demand that certain pieces of legislation had greater scrutiny. 

Mr. Speaker, not only did we know and understand that, Mr. 

Speaker, we adhered to it. We allowed the opposition its right to 

speak to Bills. We allowed the opposition to force Bills to go 

out to public consultations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we understood, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly works 

when all members of this House want to work in the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan, when all members of 

the House want to work in the best interests of this Assembly 

and not simply in the best interests of the majority. Mr. 

Speaker, we understood the need to balance the minority and 

majority rights. We understood the need to ensure that the 

minority had the opportunity to ensure that the consultations 

were done prior to the majority exercising their right to in fact 

pass legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point something out, and I think it‟s 

something very important to the people of Saskatchewan and 

something very important to the members opposite as well. We 

exercised that discretion and that ability to manage the House 

and to pass our agenda with a one-person majority, Mr. Speaker 

— a one-person majority, a very slim majority. And we 

operated, Mr. Speaker, the Assembly with a one-seat majority 

the majority of eight years. In fact at some points we had equal 

numbers because we had a member off experiencing health 

difficulties and seeking treatment for a very serious illness. 

 

But in those very difficult situations, Mr. Speaker, with a 

one-vote majority, we managed this House, and we never once 

tried to abuse our majority interests. We worked with the 

opposition to ensure that they had a right to have public 

consultations when they needed them, that they had a right to 

take the Bills to the public, to the people of Saskatchewan so 

that they could be heard. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

fundamentally important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with a one-vote majority, with a one-vote majority 

we worked with the opposition. We never, never attempted to 

abuse our power, and, Mr. Speaker, we worked with them to 

ensure that they exercised the democratic principles that they 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

needed to exercise. And we didn‟t force through an agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current government has a 19-vote majority. 

When a government with a 19-vote majority cannot pass their 

agenda without unilaterally changing the rules, that‟s abuse of 

power, Mr. Speaker. That‟s an abuse of our democratic rights as 

members of this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, the government 

should be ashamed of themselves for using their majority to 

change the rules unilaterally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members on this side have a right and a 

responsibility to work within the rules, to work within the rules 

as we‟ve all accepted and that we‟ve all agreed to, Mr. Speaker. 

I want to repeat again, these rules that we all accepted, we all 

agreed to and, Mr. Speaker, they helped design. In fact when 

these rules were passed, they were in opposition, and they very 

much wanted the limitations that are in the rules today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we, we — when we were in government — lived 

with those rules. We accepted those rules, and we compromised 

with the opposition in order to pass our agenda. Mr. Speaker, 

today we have a government who not only will not compromise 

with the opposition; they‟ve decided that they will unilaterally 

change the rules to pass their agenda. And, Mr. Speaker, that is 

simply, simply an abuse of power. Mr. Speaker, that type of 

abuse of power does not bode well for the province of 

Saskatchewan and does not bode well for the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it certainly doesn‟t bode well 

for the future of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a government will abuse its majority to 

unilaterally change the rules, Mr. Speaker, then democracy as 

it‟s envisioned in this province and living within the rules as is 

envisioned, Mr. Speaker, is gone. So there is no minority rights 

any more. The majority has abused those rights by changing 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will acknowledge that the rules have changed 

over the last number of years to extend the hours from time to 

time, but it was done by agreement. It was done through 

negotiations. It was done by agreement to move the agenda of 

the government forward. And yes, Mr. Speaker, it included 

compromise by the government each time. Mr. Speaker, it 

included Bills not going through that the government would 

have liked to pass in that session and required those Bills to be 

moved to the next session. For, Mr. Speaker, a government that 

believes in the rules, and believes in the rule of law, believes in 

democratic principles, Mr. Speaker, will in fact do that. If you 

believe in the principles of democracy and you believe in 

working with all members of the Assembly in the best interest 

of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, then you will not 

abuse your majority interest, Mr. Speaker. You will simply, you 

will simply, Mr. Speaker, find a mechanism to work with the 

opposition to pass your agenda. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to again just comment on . . . that if 

these six Bills, these priority Bills that the government‟s 

brought forward, if they didn‟t pass this session — all of them 

— what would the harm be to the people of Saskatchewan? And 

that‟s who we are all here, Mr. Speaker, to represent. Both on 

government and in opposition, we are here to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to go through these Bills one more time 

so that any of the people who have just turned to the legislative 

channel, who may not understand, Mr. Speaker, who may not 

understand what we‟re talking about, have the opportunity to 

understand the importance of what we‟re talking about because 

what is happening today with this proposed unilateral change of 

the rules, Mr. Speaker, is shameful. It‟s shameful for the 

government to propose it. And, Mr. Speaker, it takes away the 

rights of the minority opposition, Mr. Speaker, and it takes 

away the rights of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it takes away our rights because, Mr. Speaker, the 

principles of democracy and the agreement of the rules that are 

in place, Mr. Speaker, is being broken without agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s not being changed by agreement so that things can 

move forward as we did many times when we were in 

government. It‟s being done unilaterally, so the government can 

ram through its agenda of passing some Bills that, Mr. Speaker, 

if they didn‟t pass until the fall would make no difference, no 

difference to the province of Saskatchewan or to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let me indicate why. Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 1 is An Act 

respecting Saskatchewan‟s Growth and Financial Security and 

repealing certain Acts. Well, Mr. Speaker, today, today in 

Saskatchewan there is a piece of legislation that creates what‟s 

called a fiscal stability fund. Mr. Speaker, that fiscal stability 

fund, fiscal stabilization Act, as it was called, does the exact 

same thing this piece of legislation does, Mr. Speaker, with one 

exception — with one minor exception, Mr. Speaker. And if 

this piece of legislation did not pass till fall, Mr. Speaker, would 

the sky fall? Would commerce in the province of Saskatchewan 

crumble? Would businesses fall apart? Would investment be 

deterred? No, Mr. Speaker, none of those things would occur. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province could continue to operate as it‟s 

currently operating. Nothing would change, Mr. Speaker, if this 

passed in the fall. The world wouldn‟t fall apart, Mr. Speaker. 

The sky wouldn‟t fall, and things would continue on as they are. 

The economy would continue to hum along. We‟d continue to 

grow as a province. Nothing would change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 2, An Act respecting Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, if this piece of legislation, if this 

piece of legislation didn‟t pass, Mr. Speaker, until the fall, what 

would happen, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the members opposite, 

with just a little management, could pass at least three if not 

four of these Bills. And, Mr. Speaker, if they were prepared to 

work with the opposition, if they were prepared to work with us 

and negotiate with us and seek some compromise, Mr. Speaker, 

the majority of their — the majority — the majority of their 

agenda would pass, Mr. Speaker. And in the fall if we couldn‟t 

reach a compromise that met everybody‟s, they simply would 

then have the number of hours in and they would pass the one 

or two pieces of legislation that may not pass this spring if, in 

fact, they couldn‟t reach some arrangement with the opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And Bill No. 3 — this is my favourite. I want to talk to the 

people of Saskatchewan about Bill No. 3. Bill No. 3 is an Act to 

repeal the potash Act of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now that 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

piece of legislation went in place in the 1930s, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

never been used. 

 

An Hon. Member: — In the ‟70s. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Pardon me, in the 1970s. It‟s never been used, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s been in place for 40-some years, 48, or pardon 

me, 38 years, Mr. Speaker, 37 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what‟s it done? What is the problem with that piece of 

legislation sitting on the Bills until the fall, Mr. Speaker? 

Absolutely nothing. It has zero impact on the people of 

Saskatchewan, zero impact on the commerce of Saskatchewan, 

zero impact on the investment community in Saskatchewan, 

zero impact on the social policies, zero impact on anything, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So if that piece of legislation didn‟t pass this spring, if that 

piece of legislation didn‟t pass this spring and was carried on to 

the fall before it passed, what would happen, Mr. Speaker? 

Absolutely nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s shameful. It‟s shameful that we would have a 

government that would try to move and abuse a unilateral 

power of majority to pass legislation that has no impact on the 

people of Saskatchewan. Because we all as legislators and 

members of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, have a responsibility 

to act in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan — not to act 

in our own self-interest, not to use our majority power to abuse 

the interests of the opposition or the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. We have a responsibility to act in the interest of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how is, how is forcing a Bill that would have zero 

impact on anybody in this province, have zero impact on 

anybody in this province, by unilaterally changing the rules, in 

the interest of the people of Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

not in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not in the interest of the government either because 

when a government uses its unilateral power of majority to 

abuse the interest of minority, Mr. Speaker, that‟s simple abuse. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in any form, that‟s not acceptable in our 

society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about Bill No. 4 now. Bill No. 4 is 

the Bill that in fact would bring into place fixed election dates. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s an An Act to amend The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007. And, Mr. Speaker, 

to amend this Bill, which would have zero impact — and I want 

to stress that, Mr. Speaker — zero impact on the people of this 

province for over three and a half years, to insist that we have to 

change the rules in order to pass this piece of legislation this 

spring, to pass this this spring, Mr. Speaker, is about the ego of 

the new government. 

 

It‟s about their desire to show the opposition that we are in 

charge, that we will do anything to show you we are in charge. 

We‟ll tromp on your democratic rights, and we will in fact 

abuse those rights. And we will change if necessary, 

unilaterally, the rules of this Assembly to pass a piece of 

legislation this spring that has no impact for three and one-half 

years. Mr. Speaker, did the people of Saskatchewan elect a 

government to do that? Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. They 

didn‟t elect a government to abuse the minority interests. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this goes to speak to the incompetence of this 

government. This government cannot pass their own agenda 

because they failed, Mr. Speaker, they failed to plan properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bills 5 and 6 — I‟m going to deal with them each 

individually. But Bill 5 is An Act respecting Essential Public 

Services in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, what in essence this 

Bill does is restricts the ability of a trade union to carry out 

strike action without providing essential services, Mr. Speaker. 

But we have been able to survive in this province without this 

legislation for decades. Mr. Speaker, I‟m not going to talk about 

the merits of the legislation because, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not 

what‟s at issue here. If this Bill did not pass until the fall, if this 

Bill went out for further public consultations which we‟ve been 

asking for, Mr. Speaker, the government‟s still going to be able 

to pass this Bill. We‟re not going to be able to . . . 

 

The government clearly has the majority. They have the ability 

to pass this legislation. Mr. Speaker, all the opposition has 

asked for is this Bill to go out to public consultations, public 

hearings, to use our committee process as we envisioned it, to 

send pieces of legislation to public hearings. Mr. Speaker, we 

— when we were in government — allowed the opposition to 

send Bills to public hearings several times. We worked with the 

opposition when we were in government, and we compromised. 

We compromised in the interest of the public. We compromised 

in the interest of minority rights. We compromised in the 

interest of having a legislature that worked; a legislature that 

was working for the people of Saskatchewan, not a legislature 

that used or abused its majority. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we simply would like the minister and the 

government to allow these two Bills to go out to public 

consultations, public hearings by the committee; a committee 

that they arguably still have by far the majority, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we want them to sit with us and hear the 

concerns of both business and labour in the province and other 

interest groups, Mr. Speaker, and then look at this legislation 

and see if there are things that could be done better after we‟ve 

had public consultations. Because, Mr. Speaker, we have not 

ever, ever passed a piece of legislation the same as prior to it 

went out to public consultations because we all learned many 

things during the public consultation process. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we amended legislation to reflect what we learned 

during those public consultations. 

 

And that‟s a good process, Mr. Speaker. That‟s about using our 

democratic processes to bring forward the best possible 

legislation we can that reflects the interests of the population of 

the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the gunshot and stab wound Bill that we passed 

just a year ago was a good example of that, Mr. Speaker. We 

went out with a particular piece of legislation to public 

hearings, an all-party committee — both members of the 

government and members of the opposition .We heard 

representations from police departments, from the police unions 

across the province, Mr. Speaker, and we made changes. We 

made changes to reflect what we heard, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

And, Mr. Speaker, not everybody got everything they wanted 

out of those public hearings. And, Mr. Speaker, you hear 

opposing, you hear opposing opinions. You hear opposing 

views when you‟re going out for public hearings. Then we as 

members of the legislature have to sit down and debate those 

internally in the committee and then determine what changes 

may be necessary to be made to make the legislation even 

better. And it‟s in our interest, Mr. Speaker. It‟s in our interest 

to bring forward the absolute best possible legislation we can at 

any time. 

 

So when the opposition asks for a couple of Bills out of 25 Bills 

to go to public hearings, Mr. Speaker, which may actually delay 

the implementation by just a few months, what is wrong with 

having those public hearings to get the best possible piece of 

legislation we can in the interests of all the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we‟re asking for. Mr. Speaker, if the 

members opposite would agree to send Bills 5 and 6 out to 

public hearings, Mr. Speaker, that goes a long way, that goes a 

very, very long way to reinstalling the principles and the faith 

that we had, as a legislature, in our processes, Mr. Speaker. 

Rather than take the opportunity to work with the opposition 

and put these Bills out to public consultation, which will only 

delay it a matter of a few months, Mr. Speaker, would delay it 

just a matter of a few months . . . Over the summer we could 

have public hearings on these Bills, public consultations, and 

bring the legislation forward in the fall in its final form. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no co-operation from the government. 

They‟ve decided they‟re unilaterally going to push this 

legislation through right now, right now without any public 

consultation, without public hearings, Mr. Speaker, without 

what is a very simple process that is contemplated in our 

legislative process, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not that it‟s not 

contemplated to happen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we were in government, we agreed 

with the opposition and allowed this to happen many times. But 

this particular government, Mr. Speaker, they want to show that 

they‟re in charge, Mr. Speaker. They want to show that they 

have the unilateral ability to do whatever they want to do, Mr. 

Speaker, and they‟re just going to ram this legislation through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all we ask, on Bills 5 and then again on Bill 6, Mr. 

Speaker, that they send these Bills out for public consultations. 

In the interests of the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, we‟d 

like to have public hearings on these two Bills. Mr. Speaker, 

they would then would return to the Assembly in the fall, Mr. 

Speaker. There may be or may not be, may or may not be 

changes made to the Bills based on what we hear. And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, no changes have to be made unless they 

agreed. And I‟ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker, because they have 

the majority in the committee too. So the minister doesn‟t have 

to worry about the opposition being able to change his Bill 

unless he agrees to change it as well because, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister and the government members on the committee still 

hold the majority. So it isn‟t like we can take these Bills out to 

public consultations and change the intent or change the context 

of the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to work, the opposition needs to work, 

the opposition needs to work with the government, Mr. 

Speaker. And the government is at no risk; the government has 

absolutely no risk of any changes being made that they don‟t 

agree to. So the minister still has to agree to the changes, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s not like the committee can unilaterally make the 

changes. 

 

But we believe, Mr. Speaker, very strongly, that we put the 

processes we put in place for a reason. So we as the opposition 

are asking the minister to send Bill No. 5 out for public 

consultation, for public hearings through the committee process, 

and then listen to what we hear, and to read the submissions that 

would come from that public hearing process. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, he‟s at no — in case he doesn‟t understand 

the rules; he‟s new to the Assembly — he‟s at no risk 

whatsoever of a change being made unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, at 

zero risk of a change being made unilaterally because, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister‟s own members control the majority on 

the committee. Mr. Speaker, they control the majority on the 

committee so the minister‟s legislation isn‟t at risk. 

 

Changes would only be made if the members from the 

government and the members from the opposition agreed that 

there is a better way to move forward with a particular clause in 

the legislation, Mr. Speaker. So the minister would have to 

agree as well, because of course it‟s his legislation. It cannot be 

changed, Mr. Speaker, without his agreement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a simple request. Would the world fall 

apart if we had public hearings on Bill No. 5? Would it? The 

answer is no. No, Mr. Speaker, the world wouldn‟t fall apart. 

This legislation amends a process that‟s been in place for 

decades, Mr. Speaker, but an extra few months is not going to 

make a significant difference. 

 

I go back to point out to the members of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that prior to the election the Health minister — who 

was then the member from Indian Head-Milestone; still is the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone — but before the election 

when he was the Health critic, he said they didn‟t need this 

legislation. He didn‟t need this legislation and they weren‟t 

contemplating this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I think to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, arguably the 

provisions of the health care of our loved ones, our citizens, it‟s 

the most important issue a government has. And I agree with 

that fully, Mr. Speaker, but the critic for the Department of 

Health in opposition said they didn‟t need this legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this legislation did not pass for an extra 

three or four months, did not pass for an extra three or four 

months while we held public hearings, is the world going to fall 

apart? The answer is no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to point out that one of the things they 

say regularly is they have to implement their platform. They 

have to keep their commitments to the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. Well I want to point out to both members of the 

government who are trying to ram this piece of legislation 

through without public hearings, and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, this was not in their platform. This was not a 

promise to the people of Saskatchewan. This isn‟t something 

they have, should feel an obligation to have to do before this 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

fall, something that they have to ram through without public 

hearings. And, Mr. Speaker, all we‟re asking the minister is to 

work with us, to take Bill No. 5 out for public hearings, through 

a process in which he still controls the majority but a process 

where we all get the opportunity to listen to representations 

from both government and from the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s like the status of the artist, a piece of 

legislation that we very much wanted to pass which was very, 

very important to us when we were in government; very, very 

important to the artist community in Saskatchewan. But because 

the opposition then — members who are now in government — 

wanted public hearings on that piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, we allowed public hearings because we believe in the 

democratic process. We agree and we support the right, the 

right of the minority to be heard in public hearings as well, Mr. 

Speaker. And as a result that piece of legislation didn‟t pass and 

there are many out there in the arts community today that are 

unhappy with that, that that legislation didn‟t pass. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the democratic process was upheld. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that Bill went out for public hearings and the people of 

Saskatchewan had an opportunity, an opportunity to have their 

say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s all that the opposition is asking for in Bill 

No. 5. Bill No. 5 is not even an electoral commitment by the 

government. It wasn‟t even in their platform, Mr. Speaker. In 

fact prior to them forming government, they never even spoke 

of this being a reality. They said in fact, both the now Premier 

when he was leader of the opposition and the Minister of 

Health, the minister arguably most responsible for the 

protection and safety of the Saskatchewan people, said it wasn‟t 

necessary. And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are saying it‟s 

in their platform. If they could show me where essential service 

legislation is in their platform, Mr. Speaker, I would very much 

like to hear it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and finally I‟m going to talk again about Bill No. 

6. Bill No. 6 is An Act to amend The Trade Union Act. And I‟m 

going to tell you that the members opposite in their time in 

opposition made it very clear that they would in fact amend this 

piece of legislation. They made it clear that in fact when they 

formed government, The Trade Union Act would in fact be a 

high priority for them to amend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of my colleagues is pointing out that in fact in 

our traditions going back hundreds of years, speakers were in 

fact, speakers were in fact beheaded for not living up to the 

interests of parliament, for not living up to the interests of the 

monarch. Well, Mr. Speaker, that goes back hundreds of years 

when we were in a very, very different period of time, when the 

rules of debate and the rules of parliamentarians were much, 

much different, when in fact many of them may have actually 

carried swords into the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So today we‟re much more peaceful. Our battles are with words 

and not with weapons and our battles are about the rights of 

citizens of the province, not about our own self-interest — or 

should be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in all honesty, the members from the then 

opposition, now the members of government, did indicate that if 

they formed the government they would amend The Trade 

Union Act, Bill No. 6. Now, Mr. Speaker, what if this piece of 

legislation went out to public hearings and didn‟t pass till the 

fall? Would the world fall apart? Would business crumble in 

Saskatchewan? Would the sky fall? Mr. Speaker, none of those 

things would occur. Mr. Speaker, none of those things would 

occur. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why will the government, why will the 

minister not, in order to come to a peaceful resolution without 

having to unilaterally change the rules, simply agree to send 

Bills 5 and 6 out to public hearings? Well I‟ll tell you why, Mr. 

Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

No, Mr. Speaker, they say they already held public hearings. 

 

They didn‟t hear public hearings. They may have consulted a 

few people. They may have given the opportunity for some 

people to send in representation, Mr. Speaker. But they did not 

hold public hearings where both the government and the 

opposition would hear from people at the same time and hear 

the same thing. Mr. Speaker, they‟re afraid to hold public 

hearings. They‟re afraid to allow the members of the opposition 

and the government to hear from the people of Saskatchewan at 

the same time. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, as I indicated earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, if we had public hearings we would not be able to as 

an opposition unilaterally change the Bills, Mr. Speaker. If we 

all heard, if we all heard — both members of the government 

and the opposition — the need for a change to the Bills, then 

we‟d have to meet with the minister and try to persuade the 

minister to change the Bill, Mr. Speaker, try to get the 

minister‟s agreement that the Bill should be changed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we could do that, as did happen several 

times when we were in government after public hearings, Mr. 

Speaker, then it‟s good legislation. It‟s good public policy and 

it‟s in the best interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The opposition cannot unilaterally change Bills. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll acknowledge they have the majority, Mr. Speaker. We 

simply would like to have public hearings. Mr. Speaker, public 

hearings which may delay the implementation of these Bills by 

a few months, Mr. Speaker, by a few short months. But it would 

allow both members of the government and the opposition to 

hear, Mr. Speaker, to hear from both members of the labour 

community, from members of the business community together, 

so then we can hear the concerns that the people of 

Saskatchewan have together. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out once again that when we 

were in government we afforded this opportunity many times, 

many times to members of the opposition. We didn‟t 

unilaterally force legislation through. And, Mr. Speaker, there 

were times when we actually didn‟t pass legislation that we 

would have liked to pass. Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t pass 

legislation because we afforded members of the opposition the 

right to have public hearings. Mr. Speaker, so we have today 

before us a motion, a Bill, a motion pardon me, that the 

government has brought forward to unilaterally change the 

rules. 

 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

I would like for a minute to go back to where I started this 

debate about a little over an hour ago to mention, Mr. Speaker, 

a quotation from a book that was written about the legislature in 

Saskatchewan. It was called “The Role of the Legislature,” Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to go to its conclusion because its 

conclusion is most profound, Mr. Speaker. Its conclusion very 

much speaks to what we are dealing with today. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to deal with the particular paragraph in its 

conclusion — paragraph number two — and it talks about the 

erosion of the legislature in Saskatchewan in the 1980s. This 

book was written about the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, and the period 

in Saskatchewan between 1982 and 1991. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — To request leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to the members of this legislature, I would like to introduce 

to you four very special people, Mr. Speaker. These individuals 

from left to right — perhaps they could give us a wave as I call 

their name — Arthur Abend, Eric Tufton, Mike Trevarthen, and 

Paul Stone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these guests are with us today from their home 

city of St. Paul in Minnesota. They are Americans, and they‟ve 

come up to our province for a bit of work and a little bit of 

pleasure too with their visit to the legislature today, Mr. 

Speaker. The individuals in your gallery, they work with the 

John Deere corporation, Mr. Speaker, and they are with John 

Deere in Minnesota. And they have come up here for what‟s 

called an AMS course, and that‟s ag management solutions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the topics that are covered in this course . . . it‟s actually a 

fairly extensive day of training with a lot of time involved. And 

there‟s people involved from all across the province and from 

the States attending this program. And with the ag management 

solutions, one area that they look at is the use of GPS [Global 

Positioning System] technology — global positioning satellites, 

Mr. Speaker. And this facilitates precision farming. It allows 

agricultural producers to do their farming in the most efficient 

manner possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had a chance to speak briefly with them in the hallway, and 

they thoroughly enjoyed the tour of the legislature. As always, 

the tour guides do a phenomenal job, Mr. Speaker, of 

introducing guests to the Legislative Building and giving them 

an idea and a snapshot of what it would entail with a regular 

day in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. And they enjoyed the 

history, they enjoyed the ambiance of this fine building, and 

they‟re very thankful they were able to come here today for a 

visit to our legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them to our legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

continue where I left off, and where I left off, Mr. Speaker, I 

was referring to and speaking about a book that has been 

written about the role of the legislature in Saskatchewan by 

Merrilee Rasmussen. She wrote the book talking about the 

years of our legislature during 1982 through 1991. Mr. Speaker, 

it says that: 

 

The erosion of the legislature continues, albeit perhaps 

somewhat more slowly than at times in the past. The 

Devine Conservatives believed that they had a majority of 

the seats in the legislature so they could do whatever they 

wanted [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is what the reflection is of this 

particular author, Mr. Speaker, reflects upon the years from 

1982 to 1991, Mr. Speaker, and all I have to say is history 

repeats itself. Mr. Speaker, we see today a government that has 

a majority in its first seating of the legislature, that rather than 

work with the opposition to pass its agenda, rather than show its 

competency and plan in order to put its agenda through, Mr. 

Speaker, has decided they will unilaterally change the rules. 

And, Mr. Speaker, all I can say about that is history does repeat 

itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to go on to just reference some remarks I 

made earlier today as well that talk about the fact, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Conservative government in the 1980s, it took them 

four years to get a demonstration against the government of 

more than 2,000 people. Mr. Speaker, they were the 

government for more than four years before they upset people 

enough to get a demonstration of more than 2,000 people 

against the government, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, what 

the Devine Conservative government of the 1980s took four 

years to do, the new Sask Party government was able to do in 

four months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past weekend there was a demonstration by 

the people of Saskatchewan in the city of Saskatoon of more 

than 2,000 people against the decisions and actions of this 

government, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, in that case 

they acted unilaterally without consultation of the community. 

They acted unilaterally without listening to the opposition, and 

they acted unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, in their own self-interests. 

And as a result, Mr. Speaker, the people of the community, the 

people of Saskatoon affected are upset, Mr. Speaker, and to 

show how upset they were, Mr. Speaker, they showed up in 

numbers. They showed up more than 2,000 people in the city of 

Saskatoon to tell this government that they need to listen to the 

people. They need to listen. They need to be part of the 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

community, that they cannot act unilaterally. They cannot act in 

their own interests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to point out that in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, it took 

the Devine Conservative government a four full years before 

they faced a demonstration of that size. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

government faced a demonstration of that size in its first four 

months. Mr. Speaker, history repeats itself again, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not a good history to see the citizens of 

the province out demonstrating in such mass numbers against a 

government that was elected just four months ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to why we are in this particular 

situation, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party‟s unilateral decision to 

change the rules really has to deal with their own inability to 

manage the House, to manage this Assembly, and their desire to 

push through an agenda on their own terms without any 

willingness to work with the opposition. Their way or no way, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s going to be their way or no way, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is undemocratic, Mr. Speaker. That is 

unprincipled, Mr. Speaker, and that is abusive, Mr. Speaker. 

Clearly it is abusive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it shows their own incompetence, their own inability to 

manage this Assembly, their own inability to play within the 

rules. Rules mind you, Mr. Speaker, rules that they agreed to. 

Rules that they not only agreed to, Mr. Speaker, but rules — 

rules, Mr. Speaker — rules that they asked for. Rules that they 

wanted, Mr. Speaker. Rules that they asked for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, when they were in 

opposition, wanted these rules, Mr. Speaker. And these rules 

balanced the rights of majority versus minority, Mr. Speaker. It 

put in place rules that in fact were in the best interest of the 

province of Saskatchewan, that we, when we were in 

government, agreed to. We agreed of the rights to certain 

amounts of deliberation on each piece of priority of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. And we agreed to time frames for deliberation on 

the budget, Mr. Speaker. We did that to protect the interest of 

the minority, Mr. Speaker, which is a very important principle 

in law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a good government wants to protect the interests 

of the minority to ensure that the legislation that they pass and 

that the budget they pass is in the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan because, Mr. Speaker, we‟re all elected by the 

people of Saskatchewan. And we have a responsibility to the 

people of this province to act in the best interest of those 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is shameful. It is shameful that today we face 

the situation that the rules of this Assembly are going to be 

unilaterally changed, unilaterally changed in the interest of the 

majority versus the interest of the minority. Mr. Speaker, rather 

than work with the opposition to ensure that their legislation 

gets passed, they are pulling what is no more than the 

schoolyard-bully tactic, Mr. Speaker, and using their majority to 

abuse the minority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s a well-known principle in law. It‟s a 

well-known principle in democratic institutions around the 

world, Mr. Speaker, that the majority have to balance the rights 

of the minority prior to using their majority. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

in this particular case, in this particular case they have no 

interest whatsoever. They have absolutely no interest, Mr. 

Speaker, in protecting the rights of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan or the minority rights of the members of this 

legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite can be yelling from their 

seats. Mr. Speaker, they can be talking across the aisle. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the issue is clear and simple: do they believe in 

minority rights or don‟t they? And, Mr. Speaker, when the 

majority is going to abuse their rights to unilaterally change the 

rules they agreed to, Mr. Speaker, they don‟t believe in minority 

rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so the members of the opposition and the public of 

Saskatchewan should pay for their incompetence, Mr. Speaker 

— their incompetence, their inability, Mr. Speaker, to balance 

their actions, Mr. Speaker, and the time required to pass their 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, with the hours available. 

 

And let me go back and just point out to the people of 

Saskatchewan who may not have been here earlier that, Mr. 

Speaker, in the fall we sat only eight days. Mr. Speaker, we are 

supposed to sit 25 days. Mr. Speaker, we sat eight days instead 

of 25 days, Mr. Speaker, in the fall. And I‟m going to 

acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to acknowledge, Mr. 

Speaker, that we had an election in the last fall and that would 

cause some difficulty in perhaps sitting an entire 25 days. I will 

acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, because I like to be fair and 

balanced in my approach, Mr. Speaker. And I like to be 

reasonable. I like to be reasonable in talking about the issues 

facing the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not afraid to defend what I say publicly. 

I‟m not afraid to defend the rights of the government perhaps to 

not sit a full 25 days. But, Mr. Speaker, we sat eight days. And, 

Mr. Speaker, those eight days, we didn‟t sit any Monday or 

Tuesday nights which denied members of the opposition, 

denied members of the opposition — because the government 

didn‟t have their agenda together — the opportunity of 14 hours 

of debate, Mr. Speaker, 14 hours of debate, which is two-thirds 

the time to pass one of their priority Bills, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, some of those days we didn‟t sit. We did not sit, 

Mr. Speaker. We did not sit, Mr. Speaker. We did not sit 

beyond the hours many nights. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the members of the government, the members 

of the government could have, Mr. Speaker, the members of the 

government, if they knew they were going to have problems, 

Mr. Speaker, with time, could have made a deal with the 

opposition in order to sit those evenings on legislation. They 

could have. But did they approach us with any deal to sit 

evenings on those pieces of priority legislation of theirs, Mr. 

Speaker? They didn‟t. We didn‟t sit those evenings, Mr. 

Speaker, because they didn‟t want to work. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we sat only two weeks when we could have sat four. We could 

have started earlier or we could have stayed a week later, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, even more vile than that, even more 

undemocratic than that, Mr. Speaker, is this spring, we were 

supposed to start on March 3. In fact the calendar, a calendar 

was set out saying we start March 3. We were all told we would 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

start on March 3. And then we start on March 10. Were we 

consulted about delaying it, Mr. Speaker? No, we weren‟t. We 

were not consulted, Mr. Speaker. Members of the opposition 

were not consulted. So we lost, we lost 25 hours of debate time, 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 25 hours of debate time which 

would have been the passage of one of their priority Bills, if 

those Bills are so important that they would have to pass. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even, even more irresponsible than that and 

incompetent than that, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that in the first 

two weeks that we sat this spring, Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t sit in 

the evenings, Mr. Speaker. We didn‟t use that time. We didn‟t 

sit Monday and Tuesday nights. So again we lost valuable time, 

valuable time that the government controls the agenda. They 

could‟ve put those Bills up each day, Mr. Speaker, and they 

could‟ve got 14 hours more of debate. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, so now we, the members of the 

opposition, and the people of Saskatchewan should accept a 

unilateral change to the rules, Mr. Speaker, a unilateral change 

of the rules so the government can ram through their agenda, 

Mr. Speaker — Mr. Speaker, so they can ram through their 

agenda, Mr. Speaker — whether or not it‟s in the best interest 

of the legislature, the members of the legislature, or the public, 

without, Mr. Speaker, us having the adequate time to consult 

with people. Because rather than going out and consulting with 

people, which is part of the role and responsibility of the 

opposition, we‟re going to have to be sitting here, Mr. Speaker, 

because they want to change the rules. 

 

So it takes away the time and our ability to consult with the 

public and the people of Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, that is 

. . . Mr. Speaker, when we were the government, when the 

opposition said that pieces of legislation had to be carried over 

to the next year because they didn‟t have adequate time for 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, we allowed them to carry over. 

Because not a single Bill, not a single Bill that‟s before the 

House today, if it didn‟t pass till the fall, would the sky fall, Mr. 

Speaker? Would the walls crumble? Would the economy 

crumble? Would investment decline? Would the world change, 

Mr. Speaker? No. No, Mr. Speaker, the people of the public 

wouldn‟t even know. They wouldn‟t care, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

simply a matter of the government using its majority to abuse 

the minority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of their growing and stunning 

incompetence and mismanagement of the House, the Sask Party 

need to unilaterally make a change to the rules or else 

jeopardize their own agenda in their own minds. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s only in their own minds because if this legislation, 

if this legislation carried on to the fall, Mr. Speaker, nothing 

would happen, nothing would fall and, Mr. Speaker, the world 

wouldn‟t change. We‟d continue on in the fall, and it would 

continue on as it is today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but to point to the issue of incompetence, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to deal with the fact that they didn‟t even 

recognize this in the first two or three weeks of this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, of this spring session. Mr. Speaker, they wait to 

now, midway through the session, to decide they have to 

change the rules; that they have to bully the opposition. They 

have to push through this agenda without consulting with us, 

without looking for a negotiated deal that would allow them to 

continue with their program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each and every year we negotiated a deal with the 

opposition when we were in government, and it meant at times 

that some legislation was held up. It meant at times that Bills 

went out for public consultations that we, when we were 

government, didn‟t necessarily want to send out for public 

consultation. Mr. Speaker, that‟s what co-operation‟s about; 

that‟s what co-operation is about. And the world goes round 

through co-operation, Mr. Speaker. Democratic principles are 

there to ensure minority and majority interests and rights, Mr. 

Speaker, but they‟re also there to ensure that there is 

co-operation and work between the parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out more than once — I pointed out 

several times — that this legislation, their priority Bills, one or 

two of them went out for public consultations, where if they 

didn‟t pass until the fall, Mr. Speaker, the world wouldn‟t 

crumble. Things wouldn‟t change. The sky wouldn‟t fall and, 

Mr. Speaker, we might actually get better legislation as a result. 

 

We might actually have amendments that all parties would 

agree should be made. We might actually have the ministers say 

that we end up with better legislation as a result. Mr. Speaker, 

when we were government, we sent out a number of Bills for 

public consultation and I will acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that 

some of those Bills were better and changes were made as a 

result of those public consultations. 

 

What‟s the government afraid of? What‟s the minister afraid of? 

Why can‟t they send out Bills 5 and 6 for public consultations, 

Mr. Speaker? One of those Bills was not even in their platform. 

One of those Bills members opposite said they didn‟t need until 

after the election. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health today — the former Health critic prior to the 

election — said it wasn‟t needed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member for the opposition that‟s ultimately responsible for 

health care, one of those fundamental principles that we all 

agree with in this Legislative Assembly, needs to be protected. 

The opposition critic said it wasn‟t necessary. The then leader 

of the opposition, now Premier, said it wasn‟t necessary prior to 

the election and after the election, wham, we have this piece of 

legislation. Well that‟s fine, Mr. Speaker, but to send that Bill 

out for public consultations, public hearings through our 

committee process is appropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need as citizens of this province the right to be publicly 

heard on certain pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. So to ask 

the government to send two pieces of legislation to public 

hearings is not unheard of. When they were in opposition they 

routinely asked for legislation to be sent out to public hearings, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these rules, these rules that we must all live by 

today, the rules that are in . . . The rules of this Legislative 

Assembly were agreed, were agreed upon by all parties. They 

were there to protect both the minority and majority interests, 

Mr. Speaker. And we had long discussions about balancing the 

issues of minority and majority interests. 

 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

Then today, today when they are government, the first time that 

they can‟t manage something and do exactly what they‟d like to 

do, without any consideration of the opposition — or for that 

matter some members of the public, Mr. Speaker — they‟re 

prepared to change the rules and unilaterally, unilaterally ram 

through those changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition has put forward more than 20 

pieces of legislation. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should 

have known they would have to negotiate and work with the 

opposition to move through their agenda with the rules that are 

in place, Mr. Speaker. But are they prepared to do that, Mr. 

Speaker? The answer‟s no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when they first became aware that we had some 

interest in some Bills going out for public consultation, did they 

come and talk to us? Did they offer to send those Bills out to 

public consultation? The answer‟s no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we were in government, when the current Government 

House Leader was the opposition House leader, he and 

members of his opposition wanted Bills to go out to public 

hearings. And did we as a government agree? Yes, we did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t use our majority power to 

change the rules. We didn‟t use our majority power to change 

the rules. Mr. Speaker, we ask the same consideration of the 

current government. We ask the government to give us the same 

consideration they demanded when they were in opposition. 

We‟re not asking for anything they did not expect of us when 

we were government. We are not asking anything that they 

would not expect of us today if they were opposition. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they know that‟s true. They know, if the shoe was on 

the other foot, Mr. Speaker, they would be asking for the same 

things we are asking for today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is one fundamental difference, Mr. 

Speaker. There‟s one very clear fundamental difference, Mr. 

Speaker, that when we were government, we listened. When we 

were government, Mr. Speaker, we cared. Mr. Speaker, when 

we were government, we cared. And, Mr. Speaker, the proof, 

the proof, Mr. Speaker, is there. Mr. Speaker, Bills went out to 

public hearings that they requested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are numerous examples of Bills going to 

public hearings when we were the government and they were 

the opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s even an example of 

the government losing a Bill, not being able to put forward a 

Bill because they sent it out for public hearings at the request of 

the opposition. And, Mr. Speaker, that is The Status of the 

Artist Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, this government when we were 

government, did not . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question, I just want to 

remind the member that in introducing guests, we don‟t get into 

debate. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to members of this Assembly, I‟d like to introduce to you a 

citizen of Saskatchewan sitting in your gallery. His name is Joe 

Schemenauer. And Joe Schemenauer, Mr. Schemenauer is a 

farmer from Lake Lenore area in the constituency of Batoche. 

Mr. Schemenauer was in town on other business today and was 

interested in what was happening in the legislature, so he 

thought he would come by and see for himself. 

 

Like many citizens of the province, Mr. Schemenauer 

contributes in many ways beyond his actual activity of farming 

and family. He is the past provincial president of the Sask 

Wildlife Federation and the current third vice-president of the 

Canadian Wildlife Federation. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

that all members join me in welcoming Mr. Schemenauer to his 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 

join with the other members and welcome Mr. Schemenauer. 

He‟s a friend of mine and a good member of the Batoche 

constituency. Good to see you here, Joe, and I‟d like all hon. 

members to welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying prior to the introduction of guests that, Mr. Speaker, 

many times when we were the government and they were in 

opposition, the then House leader of the opposition, now the 

current Government House Leader came and requested issues 

and consideration, including sending Bills out to public 

hearings. Mr. Speaker, he got that consideration. 

 

And in fact in one case, I want to inform members of the House 

that may not know that — Mr. Speaker, they may not know that 

— that one piece of legislation that was very important to the 

government wasn‟t passed because it went out for public 

hearings and as a result there wasn‟t time to pass it prior to an 

election. 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we ask no less of the current 

government than they expected when they were in opposition. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should expect no less. Mr. Speaker, if 

you believe in the democratic principles, if you believe in this 

institution, if you believe in the legislature of Saskatchewan, 

and if you believe in fairness, Mr. Speaker, you could give no 

less than what you asked. Because to do so, Mr. Speaker, is 

nothing less than hypocritical. Mr. Speaker, it is nothing less 

than hypocritical, Mr. Speaker, to expect when you‟re in 

opposition one level of consideration and to give another when 

you‟re in fact the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to ask something of another government and 

expect it, and expect that level of co-operation, and then not to 

give the same level of co-operation when you‟re the 

government, Mr. Speaker, is hypocritical. And, Mr. Speaker, 

what we are seeing today is the very, very extreme height of 

hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, because they are doing just that. They 

are refusing this opposition the same consideration that they 

demanded when they were in opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t use our majority when we were in 

government to ram things through without consideration of the 

minority interest, Mr. Speaker, and we have many examples of 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we face a government who will unilaterally 

change the rules in their own self-interest to ram through an 

agenda without public consultations of Bills, without 

consideration of the minority interest, Mr. Speaker. They are 

simply using a bully tactic, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly has 

not seen since the 1980s, Mr. Speaker; that this Assembly has 

not seen since the 1980s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I referred earlier to a book written about the role 

of the legislature in Saskatchewan and it in particular refers to 

the 1980s that talked about the Devine government of that era 

using its majority, using their majority to unilaterally do 

whatever they wanted to do without looking at the minority 

interests in Saskatchewan, without looking at what might be in 

the interest of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re simply asking for public hearings on Bills 5 

and 6. The opposition say no. Does that mean the government 

or the opposition can stop Bills 5 and 6 from going through? 

The answer is no, Mr. Speaker. What this is, is about public 

consultation and public hearings on Bills to perhaps get a better 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker; a better piece of legislation 

that would in fact reflect the interests of all people of 

Saskatchewan, and not simply those who wrote the legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time in this debate, Mr. Speaker, for the 

members of the government to understand what they‟re doing is 

not as simple as they think it is. To unilaterally change the rules 

as they are contemplating doing, Mr. Speaker, is not something 

that they should do lightly and I want to say that very clearly, 

Mr. Speaker. It is something they should not do lightly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the balance between majority and minority 

interests in law and in this legislature is something that we 

should all value; something we should all take very, very 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the inability, or the incompetence of the 

members opposite to manage their time and to manage this 

House should not be justification to be abusive, Mr. Speaker, 

and to unilaterally change the rules and unilaterally change the 

principles of democracy in our province. Our children should be 

concerned with this. Our elders should be concerned with this. 

But, Mr. Speaker, all people, all people in the province of 

Saskatchewan should be concerned about a government that 

will unilaterally use their position and their power to change the 

rules in their own self interest, Mr. Speaker. What else will they 

do? What‟s next? 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw in the year, in the 1980s — that I don‟t 

think anybody in this province appreciated, Mr. Speaker — we 

saw a government that abused its power. In fact there were 

books written about this, about the government using its 

majority to abuse. Mr. Speaker, we don‟t want to see those days 

return in Saskatchewan so we as citizens of this province, we as 

citizens of this province should be concerned about this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time in any type of relationship where there‟s 

a minority and majority interest, or in any relationship when 

one person uses power over another and abuses that power in 

their own self-interest, Mr. Speaker, it is not in the interest of 

the other party, it‟s not in the interest of society, Mr. Speaker, 

and it‟s not in the interest of fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite fully knew, they fully knew 

and understood, Mr. Speaker — they fully knew and fully 

understood, Mr. Speaker — that their six priority Bills would 

each require 20 hours, 20 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker, each. 

They knew that those six Bills alone would require 120 hours of 

debate, Mr. Speaker. They knew that last fall. They knew it 

when they were in opposition. They knew it at the start of this 

spring session, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, did we start on March 3 when we were 

supposed to? The answer is no. We started one week later, 

giving up 20 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, 

one of their members says opposite and one of their more senior 

members who should know and understand this, but because 

he‟s now asked the question, I have to answer and, Mr. Speaker, 

he needs . . . Although he might, he might have some 

responsibility for Education, doesn‟t understand, Mr. Speaker, 

so he needs to be educated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a calendar. We have a calendar that was 

agreed to and posted, Mr. Speaker. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think 

I could send a copy of that calendar over to the member 

opposite if he, if he can‟t find it, Mr. Speaker. We have a 

calendar that was published by the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, on May 24, 2007, Mr. Speaker. About 11, 10 months 

ago, Mr. Speaker, the Office of the Clerk published a calendar 

of next year‟s session because we had agreed, Mr. Speaker, we 

had agreed to a set of rules. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on that calendar it showed the Legislative 

Assembly convening on March 3. So, Mr. Speaker, for the 

member opposite who I hope is paying attention now after he 

asked the question, Mr. Speaker, I hope he pays attention to the 

answer after he asked the question. He said, who said it was 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

supposed to start on March 3, Mr. Speaker? Well I‟ll tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, who said it. The rules said it, Mr. Speaker, the 

rules we all agreed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you‟re the one who notifies us, and I got that 

proper notification. I got the notification saying we were 

supposed to start on March 3. And I appreciate that notification, 

Mr. Speaker, as I think all members do because that is what‟s 

supposed to happen. And, Mr. Speaker, we all got notification it 

was going to start in March 3. We got it in the form of a 

calendar when we‟re supposed to be at work. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m going to accept the fact, Mr. Speaker, that all members of 

this Assembly are readers, Mr. Speaker, in their own right, Mr. 

Speaker, that all members of this Assembly can read, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even easier than that, Mr. Speaker, the 

calendar that was sent to us is shaded, showing us when we‟re 

supposed to sit, Mr. Speaker. So you only have to be able to 

identify the numbers, Mr. Speaker; you don‟t even need to be 

able to read. So, Mr. Speaker, who said when we were supposed 

to sit, Mr. Speaker, and that the Legislative Assembly was 

supposed to start on March 3, Mr. Speaker? The rules said it, 

Mr. Speaker — the rules, Mr. Speaker — the rules we all 

agreed to. So, Mr. Speaker, we all should have known we were 

starting on March 3. But did we start on March 3, Mr. Speaker? 

No. We started on March 10. 

 

And that starting on March 10 denied members of this 

Assembly approximately 25 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. And 

that denial, Mr. Speaker, has resulted in us now being faced 

with a motion by the government, a unilateral motion, not a 

negotiated motion, not an agreed-to motion which has been the 

practice when we‟ve had extended hours in the past but, Mr. 

Speaker, a unilateral motion made by the government using its 

majority power to change the hours, Mr. Speaker. And why do 

we have to change the hours? Because they didn‟t start when 

they were supposed to. They unilaterally changed that, Mr. 

Speaker, which I would question, without a motion from the 

House, whether that would even be acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they shortened the session by four sitting days, 

denying the members of the opposition, denying the minority 

interest 25 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker — and without 

consultation, I might add. Mr. Speaker, now they‟ll say, oh 

we‟ll give it back, they say. Well they‟ll give it back by 

changing the hours and unilaterally trying to ram through an 

agenda that we are now faced with due to their incompetence, 

their inability to follow their own rules, their inability to respect 

the rights of members of this legislature, their inability to 

consult with the opposition about changes, their inability to 

compromise, their inability to negotiate with us in order to 

fulfill their agenda and, Mr. Speaker, an abuse of their power, 

Mr. Speaker, an abuse of their power. And Mr. Speaker, there 

have been books written about the abuse of power by 

conservative governments in the past, Mr. Speaker. I guess 

history is repeating itself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they fully knew and fully understood that each 

priority Bill would require 20 hours of debate. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if they can‟t manage that time within the hours that are 

available, Mr. Speaker, that‟s incompetence. That is nothing 

less than incompetence, Mr. Speaker. And that issue needs to be 

addressed by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it‟s not incompetence — if you want to give 

them the benefit of the doubt and say it‟s not incompetence — 

then, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would question their 

mathematical skills because they simply can‟t add 20 six times 

to come up with 120 hours of debate, Mr. Speaker. And I hope, 

I hope it‟s not simply mathematical skills because my 

four-year-old grandson can probably come to that number, Mr. 

Speaker. My four-year-old grandson can probably add 20, 20, 

20, and 20, six times and come up with 120. And he‟s only four 

years old, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the one, the one regret I might have about 

this long speech, Mr. Speaker, is that my grandson likes to 

watch, likes to watch the legislature, Mr. Speaker. He likes to 

watch and see his grandpa at work. And, Mr. Speaker, he may 

be sitting many, many, many hours watching his grandpa at 

work over the next few, few days. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, my grandson may not understand why he‟s spending 

so many hours watching the legislative channel. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one of the members would be willing to 

bet the price of a smoothie, and my grandson likes those too, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the rules that we all have to live with didn‟t 

sneak up on the members of the government. They weren‟t 

unknown. They weren‟t something that we put in place when 

we were government without consultation. These were rules we 

all agreed to. These were rules we all accepted, Mr. Speaker. 

They knew, they knew, Mr. Speaker, what the rules would 

mean with these six pieces of priority legislation and in fact 

what the rules would mean for their other pieces of legislation 

as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these rules didn‟t sneak up on anybody. They 

didn‟t bite anybody that wasn‟t aware of what the rules were, 

Mr. Speaker. They were plain. They were well understood by 

all members of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all members, all members of, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the members 

opposite are yelling from their seats, Mr. Speaker. And quite 

frankly they‟re talking about how the session, Mr. Speaker, that 

the session can change. Mr. Speaker, we‟ll fully agree the rules 

of the start date of the session can change. Mr. Speaker, the start 

date of the session can change but then you have to manage the 

hours you have available to you and plan to pass your agenda, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there‟s nothing in the rules that 

speak to the government using its majority to abuse the 

minority or the opposition, Mr. Speaker. There is nothing in the 

rules that talk about the government‟s ability to abuse the rules 

on the minority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they knew and 

understood. Mr. Speaker, when they were in opposition they 

knew and understood that they had to co-operate with the 

government, they had to negotiate with the government, and 

that we had to find a compromise in order to move the agenda 

forward. We had to work together, Mr. Speaker. What a 

concept, Mr. Speaker. The idea that you might have to work 

together, that the members of this legislature who are here in 

the interests of the people of Saskatchewan — not their own 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

interests, Mr. Speaker — that are here in the interests of the 

people of Saskatchewan would have to co-operate and work 

together to move forward an agenda; that you just can‟t 

unilaterally use your position of power to abuse the minority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we were in government we fully understood 

that. We worked and co-operated with them in opposition. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, the very things we‟re asking for we gave 

them, Mr. Speaker. We gave them public consultation on Bills, 

Mr. Speaker. We in fact moved legislation off to the next 

session if they needed further time to consult with their 

stakeholders and the public, Mr. Speaker. We did all those 

things. But if we ask for those very same things, Mr. Speaker, 

do you know what we get told? No. We‟re the government, we 

have the majority, we‟ll change the rules unilaterally if we have 

to, and we‟re going to ram through our agenda whether you like 

it or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they say that‟s the way they used to 

do it. Mr. Speaker, they‟re absolutely right. That‟s the way the 

Devine government — Conservative government in the 1980s 

did, Mr. Speaker. They did that. That‟s what the Conservative 

government in the 1980s did. They did exactly that. They 

abused their position. They abused their power, Mr. Speaker. 

But for a number of years now, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve worked 

co-operatively. 

 

So today we have a government that wants to throw out those 

years of co-operative working together where we worked 

together to pass legislation in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. We worked to get the very best legislation 

together in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

Today we don‟t have that, Mr. Speaker. We have a government 

that has their own agenda. We have a government that‟s 

decided to unilaterally do whatever they want to do and, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a government who has no compromise in 

them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think we as citizens and the people of 

Saskatchewan — citizens of the province of Saskatchewan; 

pardon me, Mr. Speaker — need to be concerned about this. 

And we as members of the opposition who represent the 

citizens of Saskatchewan as well are very concerned about this, 

Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, a bully is a bully, and when 

you do things without consultation, without co-operation, and 

unilaterally, what do you have, Mr. Speaker? When you abuse 

majority power, you‟re a bully. Mr. Speaker, we need to be 

concerned about the ideology of being a bully. We need to be 

concerned about what future impacts to that attitude and that 

ideology has on the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw this type of attitude in the past, and we 

saw what it did for the province of Saskatchewan. We don‟t 

want that, Mr. Speaker. We want to have a legislature that 

works. We all want to have a legislature that advances the 

interests of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, we will fully acknowledge as an 

opposition that the majority interests of the government should 

always, should always move forward, Mr. Speaker, but it 

should move forward with co-operation, and we should move 

forward with a timetable that is acceptable to both parties. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it should move forward in the interest of the 

people of Saskatchewan, not in the interest of a few. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is what we strive for. We strive for an 

environment in which we can move forward in an environment 

of co-operation, in an environment where we can sit down and 

work with the government to bring forward the best possible 

legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the opposition ever stop the government from 

fulfilling its agenda? No. But can the opposition help the 

government to bring forward the best possible agenda, bring 

forward the best possible legislation, Mr. Speaker? The answer 

is yes. The answer is yes. We need to work in the best interests 

of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, is it new for the opposition to ask for some 

Bills to go to public hearings, to have consultations through our 

committee process? The answer is absolutely no. No, it‟s not 

unique, Mr. Speaker. In fact many times when they were in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, they asked for that. And many times, 

Mr. Speaker, they received that consideration. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we asked for that consideration on a 

couple of pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 

They won‟t even entertain it. In fact because they can‟t manage 

their time and the agenda in a manner which allows them to 

pass their legislation in a time frame that‟s appropriate within 

the rules, Mr. Speaker, they‟re prepared to change the rules, Mr. 

Speaker. They‟re prepared to change the rules without 

consideration of the minority interests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟re in this situation because of their own mismanagement, 

Mr. Speaker. Yes, there is a rule that says that they can change, 

in the first session of the legislature, the start time, Mr. Speaker. 

But there is an expectation, if they change that start time and 

they know their own agenda, they know their own legislation, 

Mr. Speaker . . . Because the opposition doesn‟t pick the 

legislation they put forward. It doesn‟t pick the number of Bills 

they make priority, and it doesn‟t pick when the session starts. 

That is the unilateral responsibility of the government. And they 

didn‟t consult us, Mr. Speaker, or else we would have helped 

them with the hours a little bit better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would have helped them know that they 

couldn‟t do what they wanted to do without starting a little 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, and without giving due consideration to 

their own legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t ask us or we 

would have helped them. We really would have because we all 

have an interest in making this place work. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have an interest in unilaterally 

changing the rules. We don‟t have an interest in encouraging 

the government to be a bully. And we don‟t have an interest in 

encouraging the government to think that they can do whatever 

they want to do whenever they want to do without due 

consideration of the rules of this Assembly, rules that are there 

to protect the interests of both the majority and the minority, 

Mr. Speaker, and the interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Those are rules that are there to ensure that members of the 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

opposition have adequate time to consult with the public, have 

adequate time to talk to stakeholders about pieces of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, they‟re denying, they are going 

to deny the opposition that by changing the hours so that there 

is no time to consult with members of the public on legislation 

that they‟ve introduced in this session of the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They are denying us that right to consult with the public and to 

consult with stakeholders. And, Mr. Speaker, that denial is a 

denial of the fundamental rights guaranteed in our democracy, 

guaranteed in the rules of which we have. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that denial is shameful. It‟s shameful for the interests of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, but, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

even more shameful that we have a government that thinks that 

they can do that or, Mr. Speaker, even worse, thinks they should 

do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They‟ve introduced Bills up until the last couple of days, Mr. 

Speaker, and now they‟re going to move so that we sit from 

early in the morning until late at night, taking away the ability 

of the opposition to consult with stakeholders, to consult with 

groups, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that is shameful. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, rather than come and consult and rather than 

come and negotiate with the opposition to come to a meaningful 

resolution to this, this impasse, Mr. Speaker, they decided 

they‟re just going to unilaterally change the rules. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, do they have any consideration for what 

they‟re really doing? They‟re laughing about it, Mr. Speaker. 

They continually laugh about what they‟re doing. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that in itself is shameful, because, Mr. Speaker, for 

them to laugh about a unilateral change in the rules, Mr. 

Speaker, shows a total disrespect for the process, shows a total 

disrespect for our democracy, and it shows a total disrespect for 

the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that‟s shameful. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even now, even now if the Government 

House Leader approached us with a willingness to negotiate 

some sort of . . . negotiate a deal that would move forward their 

agenda within the time frames, Mr. Speaker, we‟d be willing, 

Mr. Speaker, because we believe in co-operation. We believe in 

consultation, and we believe in working together. We believe in 

working together in the best interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t only believe in 

those things when we‟re in opposition, Mr. Speaker. We 

believed in those things when we were in government as well. 

And the very things that we would like to see in a deal, Mr. 

Speaker, the very things we‟d like to see in a deal, Mr. Speaker, 

we afforded to the members of the government when they were 

in fact in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve now done about a page and a half of my notes 

of about 400 pages of notes so, Mr. Speaker, this could be a 

rather long debate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we not only know that the members opposite 

knew that each of their priority Bills would require 20 hours of 

debate, Mr. Speaker. In December of this year, or in December 

of last year, pardon me, Mr. Speaker . . . In December of last 

year we made the government aware of our intent on two of 

those Bills; that we‟d like those Bills to go out to public 

consultations, Mr. Speaker, and we‟d like those Bills go 

through the committee process to public consultation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so they shouldn‟t have this spring been at all 

surprised, been at all surprised that they were going to have to 

allow time for debate of those Bills within the time frame. And, 

Mr. Speaker, if their incompetence or their inability to 

understand and add up the hours of debate that would be 

required, that‟s not the fault of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

not the fault of the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s not the fault of 

stakeholders who like public consultations. Mr. Speaker, it‟s the 

fault of the government. 

 

And so those people who want public consultations, those 

members of the public who would like to be able to participate 

in public meetings, and those members of the opposition who 

would like to see these Bills go to public hearings, we‟re not at 

fault, Mr. Speaker. The government is clearly at fault. 

 

And then for them to want to unilaterally change the rules and 

ram through these Bills, Mr. Speaker — to ram through these 

Bills without due consideration and without allowing the 

opposition to exercise their democratic rights, Mr. Speaker, and 

to exercise their rights under the rules of this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker — Mr. Speaker, it‟s incompetence. It‟s fundamentally 

wrong and it‟s deplorable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can any time 

reconsider, decide to negotiate with us, to come up with a 

compromise that will allow them to move forward with their 

agenda and meet our needs, our needs as members of the 

opposition. To meet the needs of the minority interest by 

sending those Bills out to public consultations, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll entertain that any time. Mr. Speaker, we could end this 

debate in just a few minutes if in fact they would agree to those 

types of consultations, Mr. Speaker, and to the other items that 

we said we needed in order to agree to pass their legislation in 

this . . . [inaudible] . . . without changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, 

without doing what is in fact Mr. Speaker, unheard of. The rules 

to be changed without agreement, Mr. Speaker, has not 

occurred in many, many, many years, Mr. Speaker. The last 

time we saw that type of unilateral bullying, Mr. Speaker, was 

in fact when we had the Grant Devine government, 

Conservative government in 1980, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government had ample time and ample 

opportunity within the current rules and structures to choose to 

put forward less legislation, Mr. Speaker, to choose what their 

agenda would be in order to get it forward, and through in the 

time that was allotted under the rules, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We had to manage that many, many years, Mr. Speaker. We 

couldn‟t unilaterally push things through, Mr. Speaker. We had 

a one seat majority, and we managed this House for eight years, 

Mr. Speaker — eight years with a one vote majority. Mr. 

Speaker, they can‟t manage this House with a 19-vote majority 

except to bully through, to pass something unilaterally, to pass 

something that, Mr. Speaker, is not in the interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan, not in the interests of this legislature and not 

in the interests of democracy in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I note as I‟m speaking that the noise continues to 

get louder and louder in the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, it‟s harder 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

and harder to, I‟m sure for my own members, to hear my 

comments, Mr. Speaker. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the 

members opposite respect the democratic principles enough to 

at least sit and listen, listen to why we would speak against this 

rule change unilaterally, why we feel so strongly about insuring 

the democratic principles which, Mr. Speaker, which citizens of 

this country, Canadian citizens, Saskatchewan citizens fought 

and died for the right to have democracy in our country, for the 

right to have a parliamentary system, a legislative system in our 

provinces that balance the rights of minority and majority, Mr. 

Speaker, that ensured the rights and the balance between those 

in power and those in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that the members opposite respect those 

principles because those are fundamental principles that citizens 

of this province, citizens of our country fought and died for — 

the right for us to have a parliamentary democracy that balance 

the rights of minority and majority, that allow the majority to 

always pass their interests in the end, but allows for the rights of 

the majority to have certain rights and responsibilities and 

obligations. 

 

And that in this case, in our legislature anticipates public 

hearings on some Bills, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re asking for. It 

anticipates those very rights for public hearings, Mr. Speaker. It 

anticipates the rights of the public to be heard when the 

opposition believes that better legislation, better provisions 

would come forward as a result of those public hearings. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we bring forward this very issue, as we 

bring forward in the interest of the people of Saskatchewan that 

we hold public hearings on two Bills, Mr. Speaker, what do we 

hear from the government, a government who, when they were 

in opposition demanded the very same things, Mr. Speaker? 

What we hear very clearly is no. No, it will be our way. It‟ll be 

on our time frame, and it‟ll be exactly as we want it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s not democracy. Mr. Speaker, that is not 

democracy. That is not the rules as we anticipated in this 

province. This is not the rules as we agreed to, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is not even fair play, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that is not even fair. And the members opposite need 

to think about what they‟re doing. 

 

I hope that they didn‟t make this decision to try to push this 

through unilaterally without considering the long-term 

implications because, Mr. Speaker, the long-term implications 

of what they‟ve done have made our province less democratic 

and gone a long way to erase the balance between the majority 

and minority interests in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party ignored opportunities to sit in the 

evenings just two weeks ago. They ignored opportunities to 

debate these Bills when they had the opportunity to. Mr. 

Speaker, how do we as an opposition hold them accountable for 

not exercising their majority interest to debate these Bills when 

they could have within the normal rules of the House? Mr. 

Speaker, they chose not to. They chose to use their majority and 

adjourn, Mr. Speaker. Did they consult with the opposition? 

The answer is no. Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t consult with the 

opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite are saying I‟m starting to repeat 

myself, Mr. Speaker. I am saying that they chose, they made a 

conscious choice, they made a conscious choice not to follow 

the rules, not present the opposition with the opportunities to 

debate these Bills during the evenings of the first two weeks, 

Mr. Speaker. And instead, Mr. Speaker, instead, Mr. Speaker, 

instead, Mr. Speaker, they chose to unilaterally today change 

the rules to propose a change to the rules rather, rather than 

present the opportunity for the opposition to be able to debate 

these Bills when we could have, Mr. Speaker, because the 

government controls the agenda. And now members of the 

opposition and the public are paying for the incompetence and 

the inability of the government to know and understand their 

own rules, Mr. Speaker, to know and understand how to 

manage their own agenda, Mr. Speaker. This brings into 

consideration, Mr. Speaker, the fundamental incompetence of 

this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It brings into question in the minds of the opposition and 

members of the public the competence of the government that 

has to change the rules in order to pass their own agenda, Mr. 

Speaker, a government that must change the rules to pass their 

own agenda because (1) they won‟t work within the rules; (2) 

they won‟t compromise, Mr. Speaker; and (3) they think they 

have to be right about all things all the time, Mr. Speaker. And I 

hear them chirp from their seats they‟re always right. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, do the people of Saskatchewan know that they elected 

a government that thinks they‟re right all the time, thinks that 

they can abuse power, and thinks they can unilaterally change 

the rules, circumventing the democratic processes that we all 

agreed to? Circumventing the rules which we all agreed to, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, this is shameful. This is shameful. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite should take the supper 

hour when I conclude my remarks . . . or when we recess for the 

supper hour, to consider, to consider coming back with a 

compromise, that will consider coming back with a compromise 

so that Bills 5 and 6 will go out to public consultations and 

public hearings, Mr. Speaker, and so that some of the other 

things which this opposition asked for, which, Mr. Speaker . . . 

just so you‟re aware of the things that we asked for or we would 

need to have . . . are Bills No. 5 and 6 going out to public 

consultations, Mr. Speaker. And they‟re saying it will never 

happen. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when they were the opposition and we were 

government, when they asked for Bills to go out to public 

consultations, Mr. Speaker, it happened. We gave consideration 

to the needs of the opposition. We took into consideration that 

better legislation, better policy comes out as a result of 

consulting with the public. 

 

And do you know what they say, Mr. Speaker? Do you know 

what they say as they yell across? That we won. We won the 

election. That‟s all they care about. They won the election, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, yes I‟m not going to disagree. They 

won the election, but that doesn‟t mean that the legislation they 

bring forward in the form they bring it forward is the best 

legislation or best public policy for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It doesn‟t mean it isn‟t either. All we‟re asking for is the right to 

take it out for public consultations, to hear directly as members 

of the opposition and members of the government . . . And by 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

the way, Mr. Speaker, in those committees, they would have a 

four-person to two-person majority. They‟d have double the 

number of members the opposition would have in those public 

hearings. So could we the opposition change anything that they 

didn‟t agree to change? The answer‟s absolutely no, absolutely 

no. There could be no changes made without their agreement. 

Then, Mr. Speaker, will they, will they allow these Bills to go 

out for public consultations? The answer is no, and they say 

never, and they say they won the election. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when they were in opposition . . . because 

we have rules that anticipate, and actually anticipate 

realistically, that Bills will go out to public consultations. When 

we were in government and they were in opposition, Bills did 

go out to public consultations, Mr. Speaker. But now that 

they‟re government, it‟s going to be nothing goes out. It‟s 

unilaterally one way, Mr. Speaker. It‟s about we have the 

power, and we‟re going to exercise it, and they have no interest 

in minority interests. They have no interest in the people of the 

public of Saskatchewan being able to make those presentations 

in public hearings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s shameful. Mr. Speaker, once again members 

opposite are indicating very clearly they will not consider, they 

will not consider sending out Bills to public hearings. But when 

they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker, they asked for just that. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they were afforded, they were afforded those 

interests. They were afforded those interests. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was even a piece of legislation that we 

held very, very close to our hearts when we were government 

that didn‟t go through because, when allowed for public 

hearings, Mr. Speaker, there wasn‟t enough time between then 

and the election, Mr. Speaker, to pass that Bill. And we let The 

Status of the Artist Act go out for public hearings when the 

opposition demanded it, in the interest of democracy, in the 

interest of fairness, and in the interest of public consultations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the members opposite can yell from their seats all they 

want, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but that is . . . The members of the 

artist community in the arts community in Saskatchewan know 

fair well that that Bill went out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also sent out a number of other Bills. Mr. 

Speaker, we sent out a Bill dealing with gunshots and stab 

wounds, Mr. Speaker, and that was at the request of the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. They didn‟t like the Bill that was 

there, so we sent it out for public consultations, and we listened 

to representatives of the medical community, representatives of 

the police community, representatives of the Aboriginal 

community, and many, many other public groups that had 

interests in that particular piece of legislation. And then we 

made changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A novel concept that the people who have to use that 

legislation, the people who understand that legislation the most, 

would make presentations to a legislative body, and then we 

would actually amend legislation to reflect what those people 

wanted, Mr. Speaker. What a novel concept, Mr. Speaker, that 

the people of the province — who we all represent — speak, 

and then we might make changes. We might make changes as 

legislators to reflect the interest of the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we‟re here for. That‟s what we stand 

for. And, Mr. Speaker, we, when we were in government, 

allowed those consultations to go on, Mr. Speaker, on a number 

of Bills. Mr. Speaker, the current government won‟t allow 

anything to go to public consultations. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when they cannot pass their own legislation 

within the rules, Mr. Speaker, they‟re prepared to abuse the 

rules of this legislature, they‟re prepared to abuse members of 

this legislature, and they‟re prepared to abuse the public of 

Saskatchewan by unilaterally changing the rules. Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s not fair. And, Mr. Speaker, do they care? No they don‟t 

care. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is sad. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite now, in a short 10, 12 

minutes, are going to have the opportunity to recess for supper. 

And hopefully during that period of recess, Mr. Speaker, they‟ll 

have the opportunity to think about what has been said in the 

last couple, two and a half hours or so, Mr. Speaker, and have 

the opportunity to reflect upon what they‟re doing. And 

hopefully they‟ll take that opportunity to come to the 

Opposition House Leader and negotiate a process that will both 

allow for that greater consultation that‟s requested and the 

opportunity for them to in fact use their majority and pass the 

legislation as they should. But, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t need to 

change the rules. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they keep yelling we don‟t know that we lost 

the last election. Well, Mr. Speaker, yes we know we lost the 

last election. But that doesn‟t mean that the principles of 

fairness, the principles of equality, and the principles of 

democracy are thrown out the door because you have a right 

wing government put in place, Mr. Speaker. The rules of 

fundamental fairness should not change because you have a 

new government, Mr. Speaker. The rights of the people of 

Saskatchewan should not change because you have a new 

government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the democratic 

principles which this legislature stands for should not change 

because you have a new government who has no respect or little 

respect for the rules. And they‟re showing that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Their answer to everything is, you don‟t know you lost the 

election. And, Mr. Speaker, yes, we fully know who won the 

election, Mr. Speaker. But the rules of this Assembly have not 

been changed unilaterally in the interest of a government, Mr. 

Speaker, since the 1980s. And, Mr. Speaker, we saw the impact 

of what happened in 1980s when a government chose to put 

their position forward in a unilateral way and to abuse their 

power, Mr. Speaker. And we saw the results. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why should the opposition and members of 

the public, due to the incompetence, the incompetence of the 

government, because they couldn‟t plan a time frame in which 

to bring forward their agenda and pass it, Mr. Speaker — why 

should others pay for that? Why should members of the 

opposition pay for that and why should the general public pay 

for that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rules are there are to protect this Assembly. 

They‟re there to protect the principles of democracy. And when 



April 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

you have to change the rules, Mr. Speaker, because you‟re a 

bully, because you‟re the schoolyard bully, you want to change 

the rules and ram things through without the proper . . . But 

here, as to the rules of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

fundamentally wrong. 

 

And that‟s what we‟re seeing, Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly what 

we‟re seeing. Mr. Speaker, we‟re seeing a government that has 

no regard for the rules. We‟re seeing a government that has no 

regard for the opposition. They won‟t negotiate with the 

opposition. They won‟t compromise with the opposition. They 

won‟t compromise in sending legislation out for public 

hearings, Mr. Speaker. It‟s their way or it‟s the highway, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as a result we‟re at an impasse. We‟re at a place when the 

members opposite care little or nothing about what the rights of 

the minority are, the rights of the opposition are. They care very 

little or nothing about what rights of stakeholder groups are. 

They are going to pass their legislation, they are going to pass 

their budget, they are going to pass their agenda without any 

consideration for the minority interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this type of behaviour is shameful. This type of 

behaviour is unacceptable. And, Mr. Speaker, we saw that type 

of behaviour in the 1980s. It‟s an attitude, and that attitude 

resulted in some of the worst years of governance this province 

ever saw, both for this legislature and for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the 

members opposite need me to go back to where I started my 

fundamental speech, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s quoting from a book 

about the role of the legislature in Saskatchewan written by 

Merrilee Rasmussen. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to go right 

to the conclusion because, Mr. Speaker, it sums things up rather 

nicely. And in that conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it says this. And 

this is talking about the period from 1982 to 1991, the period of 

the then Conservative government in our province. And it was 

talking about the erosion of the legislature and the erosion of 

the fundamental principles of democracy. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to just read this back into the record one more time for 

some of those members who weren‟t here when I introduced 

this topic. Mr. Speaker: 

 

The erosion of the legislature continues, [and this is 

talking about the period ‟82 to ‟91] albeit perhaps 

somewhat more slowly than at times in the past. The 

Devine Conservatives believed that they had a majority of 

the seats in the legislature so they could do whatever they 

wanted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly what we are seeing today from the 

newly elected Saskatchewan Party government. They cannot 

get through their agenda in the time frame they want to get it 

through without changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, although they 

knew from day one they couldn‟t, Mr. Speaker. So they‟re 

unilaterally going to change the rules and ram things through, 

Mr. Speaker, without consultation, without consultation of the 

opposition, without any consideration for the interests of the 

opposition and/or the public which we need to consult on pieces 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they‟re going to just 

unilaterally change it. 

And they say they‟ll do the consultations. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s a reason why you have an opposition. You have an 

opposition to ensure the interests of those people in the 

province of Saskatchewan that may not agree with the 

government. And the opposition has to have the right, the 

opposition has to have the right to go out into the public, Mr. 

Speaker. They have to have the time to go out into the public 

and talk to stakeholder groups away from the legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this government introduced legislation up 

until last week, Mr. Speaker. And then they‟re going to change 

the hours, keeping us in this legislature from early morning 

until midnight, Mr. Speaker, and so that members of the 

opposition don‟t have the time to properly consult with 

stakeholder groups about legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But do they care, do they care, Mr. Speaker, about the role of 

the opposition? No they don‟t. When they were in opposition, 

Mr. Speaker, and they came to the government saying they 

needed more time to consult with stakeholders on pieces of 

legislation, what happened, Mr. Speaker? They got more time. 

They got more time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Give us some examples. 

 

Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Speaker, they keep asking, give us 

examples. I‟ll give you an example, Mr. Speaker — The 

Ambulance Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they fundamentally disagreed with a portion of 

The Ambulance Act, as did some stakeholders in the province. 

Mr. Speaker. They asked for additional time for public 

consultations. They asked for additional time to speak to their 

stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. They asked the government not to 

force that piece of legislation through, Mr. Speaker. And what 

happened? We didn‟t, Mr. Speaker. We allowed them another 

session. We tabled that Bill and allowed it to continue on to the 

fall just as we‟re asking on public consultations on two Bills 

today. We allowed that to be carried on to the fall so they could 

meet with ambulance operators, private ambulance operators 

around the province, Mr. Speaker, to fully understand what 

their concerns were, to fully understand what their concerns 

were before ramming through a piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now that‟s how democracy should work. That‟s how the 

legislative process should work, Mr. Speaker. And on The 

Ambulance Act it did work, Mr. Speaker. We gave them 

additional time to go and meet with stakeholders. We held the 

Bill off until the next session, Mr. Speaker. They went and met 

with stakeholders on The Ambulance Act, Mr. Speaker. And at 

the end of the day there were amendments made to The 

Ambulance Act to reflect the interests of those stakeholders. 

That‟s what good public policy‟s about. That‟s what the 

legislative process is about, Mr. Speaker. It‟s about taking into 

consideration the interests of all. It‟s not about ramming things 

through. It‟s about taking into consideration the interests of all. 

 

And when they asked for an example, Mr. Speaker, they get it. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they say, oh yes, oh yes, oh yes. Like it‟s 

not important that, in fact, they got exactly what they asked for 

when they were in opposition on Bills — the same type of 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 7, 2008 

things being asked for today on two pieces of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a difference, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. 

Speaker, previously you had a government who believed in the 

legislative process, Mr. Speaker. They believed in fairness. 

They believed in democracy. And they believed in the rights of 

stakeholders to have input in the legislation, Mr. Speaker. And 

the government prior to this government believed, Mr. Speaker, 

in minority and majority rights and the balance between them. 

Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have that today. And as a result, Mr. 

Speaker, we face a situation we‟re facing today. 

 

Did we have the Government House Leader try to negotiate any 

type of resolution to the impasse? The answer‟s no. The 

answer‟s no. He never once. It was either his way or the 

highway. And we suggested he could make an offer to us, Mr. 

Speaker. This is exactly what happened, Mr. Speaker. They said 

they were going to move this resolution forward. And when we 

asked them to bring forward some consideration for the 

opposition in that, his caucus told him he couldn‟t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Did they make the opposition any type of offer or compromise 

or consideration on any of this legislation in order to work 

through this in a manner that was not unilateral, was not 

abusive or bullying in nature, Mr. Speaker? The answer‟s 

absolutely no. Did they bring forward any position to the 

opposition? The answer‟s no. He did not bring forward any 

position to the opposition. 

 

And I challenge him to say he did, because he didn‟t. I would 

know, Mr. Speaker. I‟m the Opposition Deputy House Leader, 

Mr. Speaker. And no, they did not bring forward any type of 

compromise. Basically they said, we‟re the government, we 

won the election, we‟ll do it our way and we‟ll do it on our 

terms, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, they‟re going, hear, hear 

now. And that‟s a shame because, Mr. Speaker, they would not 

have accepted that. They would not have accepted that when 

they were in opposition. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the difference was that you had a government 

then that had integrity. You had a government that wouldn‟t 

unilaterally use its power to abuse the opposition or the 

minority interest in the province. Mr. Speaker, you had a 

government that would work with the opposition. You had a 

government that believed in the democratic principles, Mr. 

Speaker. You had a government that believed in working 

co-operatively in the best interest of the province of 

Saskatchewan and its citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You didn‟t have a government, you didn‟t have a government 

that was so full of itself, Mr. Speaker, that they will do 

whatever they want to do and damn the torpedoes, Mr. Speaker, 

and forget about the interest and balance of democracy in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t bring forward any, any proposal to 

work with the opposition to get their legislation through. 

Nothing, Mr. Speaker. No, Mr. Speaker, they can chirp from 

their seats and say, that‟s a lie. And that‟s unparliamentary 

language to use in this House, Mr. Speaker, but they‟re saying 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not . . . Mr. Speaker, they brought forward 

nothing. They brought forward absolutely nothing to try to 

work with the opposition. Did they try to compromise? Did they 

try to deal with the opposition in order to look at the interests of 

the minority in this province, to look at the interests of the 

opposition in this province, Mr. Speaker? 

 

No they did not, Mr. Speaker. They simply said, we won the 

election; we‟ll do it our way whether you like it or not, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 5, this House is 

recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 591 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ....................................................................................................................................................................... 592, 604 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 593 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................ 593, 613, 616 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 593 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 593 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 594 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 594 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 594 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 594 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 594 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 594 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 594 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 595 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Paragon Awards 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 595 

 Saskatchewan Tartan Day 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 

 Spring Fling Fundraising Event 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 595 

 Artistic Director Celebrates 10 Years with Globe Theatre 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 596 

 World Health Day 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 596 

 Saskatoon Junior Achievement Awards 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 596 

 Community Walk to Support Station 20 West 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 597 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Station 20 West 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 597 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 597 

 Intolerant Comments 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 598 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 599 

 Apology 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 599 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 599 

 Liquor Store Closure 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 599 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 599 

 The Legislative Sessional Agenda 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 601 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 601 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Sitting Times for the Assembly and Standing Committees 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 602 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 603 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


