




















































Hansard: November 05, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1581 

 November 5, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure 

today to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this Legislative Assembly, a number of student leaders that 

have joined us today in your gallery. 

 

While there‟s a group of students here, I‟d like to identify a few 

people. There‟s Jessica Sinclair, the president of the University 

of Regina Students‟ Union or URSU; there‟s Kristy Fyfe who is 

the vice-president of external affairs with URSU; Craig Fink, a 

vice-president of operation and finance with URSU; Sean 

Dunham, vice-president of student affairs with URSU. And also 

joining us is Nicole Kenney who is the vice-president of 

external affairs with the University of Saskatchewan Students‟ 

Union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

students to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I‟d just like to 

you and through you join the member opposite in welcoming 

the students from the University of Regina Students‟ Union as 

well First Nations University Student Association and the 

University of Saskatchewan student association. We‟re 

delighted to welcome these students to their legislature, as well, 

and I‟m looking forward to having a meeting with them later 

this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to also introduce Ms. Colleen 

Konkin, accompanied by her father, Doug. Colleen has joined 

us today at the legislature as part of the Take Our Kids to Work 

program. I hope Colleen enjoys her day with her mom — my 

chief of staff, Mary Donlevy-Konkin — and leaves here with a 

renewed interest in the good work of our public service and our 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me . . . I welcome the members of this 

legislature in joining me in welcoming all these special guests. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in your gallery are 11 guests from the province of 

Manitoba. It‟s my pleasure to introduce to you, teacher and 

chaperones and students from Riverdale School in Kenville, 

Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, these students took up a challenge, and 

the challenge was to walk or jog from their community to 

Regina, Saskatchewan. And they averaged about 2 or 3 

kilometres per day per student. And they arrived on October 29, 

and they began that journey on October 22. 

 

So I‟d like to welcome teacher Darcy Wohlgemuth, chaperones 

Merlin Bartel, Ang Bartel, and Earl Unruh, and students Tyson, 

Sheri, Skyler, Megan, Samuel, Jared, and Gabriela. Welcome to 

the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d just like to join with 

the minister and have the opposition and both sides of the 

House again extend our greetings to the students from Riverdale 

School. And I think that the activity that you embarked on in 

running a few kilometres each day is a very valiant one. I think 

most of us in here could probably do a little bit more of that. 

And we welcome you to Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you and through you two of my favourite girls in 

the whole world. Jasmine Heppner is my niece. She‟s 14 years 

old and going in grade 9 at the school in Waldheim, and today 

is a take-your-kid-to-work day. And she didn‟t want to haul 

drywall around with her dad at the lumberyard, so she asked if 

she could come here with me, and I‟m very excited to have her 

here. 

 

And joining her today is my mom, Arlene Heppner, who is no 

stranger to this legislature. The last time that Mom was here 

was the day that I took my seat in opposition, and I‟m thrilled 

that she‟s today to see us on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. And I ask that all members welcome them here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I can just very, very briefly 

join with the member for Martensville, the Minister of the 

Environment, in welcoming her guests here — Jasmine and 

especially Arlene. We don‟t see her nearly enough here in 

Regina, understandably so. It‟s quite a distance. We see her 

daughter quite a bit, just about the right amount. But we 

welcome every chance we can to say hello to Arlene and wish 

her the very, very best. It‟s great to have her here, and I join 

with the member in welcoming her to this Legislative Assembly 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



1582 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you a school group 

seated in the eastern gallery. They‟re no strangers to the 

legislature. They‟re very faithful about coming to the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They‟re from the Morning Star 

Christian Academy, and we‟ve got 16 students in grades 6 to 

11. They‟re accompanied by, I believe, Lannette Povey, Shawn 

Allen — of course, you know, always faithful on this trip; good 

to see you again, Shawn — and Aimee Holland. I look forward 

to meeting with them later on, Mr. Speaker, and again add a 

sincere word of welcome to all the students. I look forward to 

talking to you in a little bit. And on behalf of all members of the 

Assembly, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to this Assembly, I‟d like to introduce to you 

in your gallery a friend of mine, Paul Herd. Paul, give us a 

wave so we know who we‟re talking about. 

 

Paul‟s originally from Milden. When he graduated high school, 

he joined the US [United States] Army, had a stellar 

20-plus-year career there. He has since retired from the army 

and now is in private business in Colorado Springs, Colorado. 

And I‟d like to welcome him to the Assembly. And I‟d like to 

point out to him that there‟s thousands of people moving back 

to Saskatchewan, and his family and friends hope eventually 

he‟ll join them. Please give him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 

you to members of the Assembly, I‟d like to introduce two 

members of my constituency. Pastor Jack Dyck who is the 

brother of Henry Dyck, one of the MAs [ministerial assistant] 

for our Minister Lyle Stewart . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

our minister, and his nephew Josh who is doing a job shadow 

today and decided to roam around with his uncle to see what we 

actually do here. Welcome to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my pleasure today to introduce my chief of staff in your 

gallery, Laurie Pushor, and he has his son with him for 

bring-your-kid-to-work day. And so I‟d like everyone to 

welcome Quinn Pushor. And if everyone in the Assembly could 

please give them a big round of applause. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly in 

the west gallery, I would like to introduce Mathew Florizone 

who is 14 and who is here from Moose Jaw, made the travel 

over to Regina today. He is accompanied by his dad, Dan 

Florizone who is the new deputy minister for the Ministry of 

Health and doing an absolutely wonderful job. Both of you, 

hopefully you enjoy the proceedings. Perhaps after, Mathew, 

we can have a little bit of a debriefing as to exactly what 

happened here, but certainly I‟d like all members to join me in 

welcoming the Florizones. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure today 

to stand and present a petition brought to me by some of the 

guests that are in our gallery, and the petition is concerning 

funding for post-secondary education. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by over 350 individuals, and 

it is a pleasure to present this to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise to 

present a petition in support of public safety and security in 

Saskatchewan. The petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of the safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders — including the 

policing community; corrections community; community 

agencies, organizations, and educators that interface with 

gangs — so that he might understand the risks and 

challenges that gangs present to our communities. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1583 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Accessibility to Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is an important 

day for students here in Saskatchewan, across Canada, and 

around the world. November 5 is the International Day of 

Action against the Commercialization of Education. Here in 

Canada, students across the country are mobilizing to take 

action on issues facing post-secondary students. Saskatchewan 

is no exception, and we are honoured to have students visiting 

the legislature today. 

 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government is failing to 

address the issues facing Saskatchewan students. Over the past 

four years our university students have been benefiting from an 

NDP [New Democratic Party] tuition freeze. And now, when 

the Sask Party government has more resources at its fingertips 

than ever, Saskatchewan students want that tuition freeze to 

continue. 

 

And students across our province also want this Sask Party 

government to address the critical issue of affordable housing 

because, Mr. Speaker, though we all know students work hard 

and spend many hours on campus, sleeping in student lounges 

is simply not an option. Students need affordable, quality 

housing. But regrettably the Sask Party government just doesn‟t 

get it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, accessibility to education is important for all 

Saskatchewan residents. Success in education means the full 

participation of our First Nations and Métis people. 

Saskatchewan students want government action on this to 

match government talk. 

 

On this important day of action, I would like to congratulate all 

students who are fighting for a better and fairer post-secondary 

education system. This NDP official opposition is on your side 

and working for you. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in extending our 

appreciation for the students participating in the day of action. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Saskatchewan Economic Growth 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Fortune Magazine has named the Premier of Saskatchewan 

Canada‟s pro-growth premier. The latest issue of the prestigious 

financial publication with a readership of 5 million contains an 

article about Saskatchewan entitled, “Where business is 

booming.” What is remarkable, Mr. Speaker, is that a year ago 

this sort of exposure was unheard of. Under a 

this-is-as-good-as-it-gets premier and government, the 

Saskatchewan story was not being told. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, over the past year things have changed and 

for the better. Under our government, Saskatchewan has seen 

historic, unprecedented growth. We will lead Canada in 

economic growth this year and next year. There are more than 1 

million people living in Saskatchewan today. There is 

unprecedented demand for our natural resources, and that 

demand has allowed us to reduce the provincial debt by almost 

40 per cent, invest more than $1 billion in infrastructure, and 

give the people of Saskatchewan the largest ever single-year 

income tax cut. 

 

Our government is taking steps to ensure that everybody feels 

the benefits of our new-found prosperity through measures such 

as the new low-income tax credit and the first increase to the 

seniors‟ income program in 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our pro-growth government refuses to buy into 

this this-is-as-good-as-it-gets mentality, and we‟re building a 

stronger Saskatchewan and a better life for all Saskatchewan 

people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Bicycles for Humanity Fundraiser 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, October 25, 

almost 1,000 people flocked to Prairieland Park to kick off a 

fundraiser presented by the Saskatoon chapter of Bicycles for 

Humanity. 

 

This international organization raises money to collect new and 

gently used bicycles to send to the African nation in Namibia. 

Namibia is a peaceful country hard hit by the AIDS epidemic 

that has devastated the country‟s economy. There is inadequate 

transportation to take people to their jobs, to school, or to 

transport food and water. Women and children may walk 20 or 

30 miles a day to retrieve necessities for their families. In many 

villages AIDS patients have no access to ambulances to 

transport them to health clinics, and health workers have no 

transportation to visit patients in rural areas, delaying access 

and treatment for serious health conditions. 

 

Bicycles for Humanity works to mitigate these harsh living 

conditions by shipping good new and used bicycles for use. The 

new Saskatoon chapter of this charity offered an evening of 

dining and entertainment for which the entry fee was the 

donation of a new or usable bike. Volunteer mechanics from the 

community ensured that the bikes were in fine repair and helped 

to pack them into two shipping containers to be transported to 

the West Coast shipping port by Yanke Transport. 

 

Bike mechanics from Bike Doctor and Doug‟s Spoke ‟n Sport 

supervised volunteers‟ work on the bikes, and Brainsport the 

Running Store helped to assemble and pack the bikes and also 

donated hundreds of good, reusable running shoes for 

Namibians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Bicycles for Humanity for 



1584 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

this worthwhile mission. I also thank all of the many generous 

and energetic community volunteers who participated in 

Saskatoon‟s first contribution to this charity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

North Central Family Centre Halloween Party 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A short 

while ago a wonderful, although not very sports savvy friend in 

Winnipeg called to wager 10 pounds of chicken wings that the 

Winnipeg Blue Bombers would defeat our Saskatchewan 

Roughriders at the annual Labour Day Classic. I happily agreed 

and waited the inevitable outcome of the game. 

 

After the Riders won, my friend bet another 10 pounds on the 

Banjo Bowl. Having lost both games, he called to say, what are 

you going to do with 20 pounds of chicken wings? A good 

question indeed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I called my very good friends, Marty, Laurie, and Lowell 

Lanigan who operate Brewsters in south Regina, successful 

business people with a big heart who are always ready to help 

out their community. They immediately decided to more than 

match my Winnipeg friend‟s kind contribution by turning it into 

a full meal, complete with a beautiful salad, and donated it to 

the children‟s Halloween party at the North Central Family 

Centre. And what an incredible event it turned out to be. 

 

Some 200 north central youngsters were treated to a hearty 

meal and a fabulous evening of Halloween entertainment, 

provided by all the hard-working volunteers at the centre. Mr. 

Speaker, to see beaming smiles on these 200 young faces was 

an inspirational and truly memorable experience. 

 

Sincere thanks to Sandy Wankel, Ivan Amichand, Ben 

Hernando, and their volunteer team at the North Central Family 

Centre for their dedicated efforts. And special thanks to the 

Lanigan brothers and Brewsters for turning a mere football 

wager into a community event to remember. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, a cheery hello to my buddy, Dr. Brian 

Ritchie, in Winnipeg, whose commendable — although 

arguably misguided — passion for football made this great 

adventure possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Pre-Health Professions Club 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

September the students from Prairie South and Holy Trinity 

school divisions, both from within Moose Jaw and the 

surrounding area, discovered more about careers in nursing, 

medicine, and pharmacy. This is all thanks to an exciting 

mentorship program that is a key feature of the new Pre-Health 

Professions Club. 

 

The club brings together post-secondary institutions, school 

divisions, health regions, and practising health care 

professionals to share information and hopefully spark an 

interest in the students taking part. 

 

A few months ago, nearly 100 students took part in the first 

session of the club. The next session took place in September 

and focused on mentorship with professionals in the health care 

field, and the commitment required for this type of career. 

Students also learned about safety and confidentiality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

consultants and the coordinators who brought about this 

innovative idea. I would also like to show appreciation for the 

health care professionals involved and wish the student 

participants much success in their desired field of study. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Reaction to Speech from the Throne 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday our 

Premier rose to speak about this government‟s Throne Speech, 

a Throne Speech that included historic debt reduction, the 

largest income tax cut in our province‟s history, the largest ever 

investment in infrastructure, and a prudent fiscal insurance 

policy. What did the members opposite do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Premier rose to speak, and they turned their backs. Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite did not just turn their backs on 

the Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Yesterday I asked members to be 

mindful of how they express themselves and manners in which 

they may cast aspersion on other members, and I would ask 

members to be mindful of that when they are doing their 

member statements, as well as any other time in the Assembly. 

The member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, through the Throne Speech 

they turned their backs on those who were helping the people of 

Saskatchewan, regardless of age or income level. Mr. Speaker, 

they turned their backs on a speech; they turned their backs on 

the people of Saskatchewan. Shame, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

one year . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just ask the member to be 

mindful of casting negative aspersion against other members. 

And I would ask the member, if he has anything to add that 

does not cast that aspersion, I would recognize the member. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one 

year ago this Friday the people of Saskatchewan voted for a 

change in Saskatchewan, and they got it. This summer the 

people of Saskatchewan told us loud and clear what their 

priorities were, and this Throne Speech was that. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m very proud to stand behind this Throne Speech. It makes a 

stronger Saskatchewan and a better life for everyone. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1585 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Volunteers in Northern Communities 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like 

to take this opportunity to pay tribute to people that make an 

incredible contribution to our northern communities. Many 

times the forgotten northern people feel isolated and alone, and 

these spiritual leaders volunteer their time to help many of these 

people that are suffering or need assistance. The people that I 

speak of assist in funerals, weddings, and prayer services. They 

help with baptism and confirmations. They help with choirs and 

help look after our churches. They console our elders and the 

sick, and they counsel our youth and help forge our children‟s 

beliefs. Mr. Speaker, they add so very much to our communities 

and our families. I am speaking of our lay ministers and church 

leaders that assist our dedicated clergy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m humbled by the love and dedication that these 

men and women have for their people. I name the following 

people in this Assembly to honour and thank them for their 

great service as lay ministers and leaders of our parishes: Louis 

Dubrule, Dorothy Dubrule, Leonie Durocher, Yvette 

Daigneault, Martin Durocher, Louis Roy, Alfred Petite, David 

Seright, Gloria Desjarlais, Marie Favel, Victoria Daigneault; 

Nancy Hartley, Joyce Raymond, Doris Woods, Marie Adele 

Desjarlais, Rose Raymond, Marie Trottier, Monique Bouvier, 

Adelaide Bouvier, and Nora Corrigal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while these are just a few of our church volunteers 

from Ile-a-la-Crosse and Buffalo, there are many more in many 

other communities in the North that do serve. I say in this 

Assembly, I thank God for all these people. And I want all of us 

to show our appreciation to them and thank them. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students across 

Saskatchewan are participating in a day of action to call on this 

government to make education a priority. Some of them have 

joined us here today. These students and their counterparts 

across the province are calling on the minister to crack open the 

government vault just slightly and spend at least some of the 

massive government surplus to make sure that post-secondary 

education is both accessible and affordable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don‟t want rhetoric or catch phrases. They 

want a commitment. They want action. To the minister: will he 

continue the tuition freeze for Saskatchewan students — yes or 

no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

It‟s a great news story for the support that we‟ve demonstrated 

to our advanced educational institutions. Rhetoric versus reality 

— 15 per cent increase to support those institutions. That‟s one 

of the fundamental components, Mr. Speaker, of ensuring 

quality education, accessible education, affordable education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then we can turn and say, look, the provincial 

training allowance, gone up twice already, Mr. Speaker — 

empirical realities. Mr. Speaker, we can then look at the 

graduate retention program, not only launched but expanded 

already, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we have the most 

aggressive youth retention program in the country. Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, what you‟ve just noticed is 80,000 people 

in this province taken off the tax rolls, Mr. Speaker, including 

students, something overlooked by the last government, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re taking tangible, real steps to help support our 

students. 

 

And I was happy to be on a campus this morning to ensure that 

we‟re in touch with the students and our scholars and our 

researchers and our institutions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll have to wait for the 

English translation, but I think it‟s safe to assume that there‟s a 

no in there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has told reporters that continuing the 

tuition freeze is likely out of the question. Instead he says he 

prefers to move to a quote “tuition fee management system.” 

But like many of the minister‟s catchphrases, students are left 

scratching their heads, trying to understand what the minister 

means. 

 

To the minister: what is a tuition management system and how 

is it not simply a euphemism for skyrocketing tuition fees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it is on the shifting sands of 

sanctimony the member stands. Mr. Speaker, maybe what we 

should do, Mr. Speaker, as a Pavlovian experiment, when we 

begin to talk about, Mr. Speaker, tuition increases, we can look 

at your record. We can see that under the former government, 

99 per cent increase in tuition at the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; 88 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, 

at the University of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fully respecting the autonomy of those 

institutions, that member has a long way before he can point 

any fingers, Mr. Speaker. But there‟s one small point and that 



1586 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

is, a former minister of Learning weighed into this issue on 

February 10, 2005 saying, anywhere that we‟ve seen tuition 

freezes put in across the country, they haven‟t worked. That 

was none other than the former and maybe the future minister 

of Learning, and that was Andrew Thomson. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand how these 

northern Republicans are in a bad headspace today, but even by 

this minister‟s standards these answers are just not adequate and 

quite frankly confusing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, instead of just admitting that he plans to make 

students pay more at a time when his government is sitting on 

billions of dollars, the minister described his plan as a paradigm 

shift. Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

the minister can talk about the new tuition paradigm all he 

wants, but at the end of the day he is simply forcing 

Saskatchewan students to pay more. The minister keeps sitting 

on billions and billions, while the students have to dig deeper 

and deeper into their own pockets. So much for accessible 

education. And what his tuition management system really 

means is that students will be managing increased student debt 

and juggling more part-time work. 

 

To the minister: will he put aside the rhetoric today and admit 

that his plan simply means that students and families will pay 

more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, let me reinforce the 

significant contributions and commitment this government has 

for students, for scholars, and for institutions of advanced 

education. What we haven‟t seen, Mr. Speaker, we haven‟t seen 

the member opposite say a word about the VIDO [Vaccine and 

Infectious Disease Organization] contribution, nothing about 

the contribution to First Nations University, nothing regarding 

the 900 new apprenticeships, nothing regarding the creation of a 

new regional college, nothing regarding the installation of a 

new president at the University of Regina. What we have seen 

though is a small pronouncement regarding the academic health 

sciences with reference to chump change. Mr. Speaker, a virtual 

critic he is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, students are tired of the minister‟s 

rhetoric, as we all are. Students are clear, Mr. Speaker: they 

want the tuition freeze to continue. But the minister is choosing 

to ignore them. For months the minister has been talking about 

engaging stakeholders and discussing his paradigm shift, and 

for months the phones of student leaders have been silent. 

 

To the minister: why is he ignoring the voices of those who will 

be forced to pay more as a result of his so-called plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s unfortunate 

when empirical inaccuracies come up because that‟s just not the 

case. We have sat down with students, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re 

going to continue with those consultations. In fact we‟re going 

to meet a little later today and we‟re arranging to meet with 

other stakeholders. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, again let me reinforce: over a 15 per cent 

increase in support for our institutions, Mr. Speaker. We have 

the largest and most significant graduate retention program of 

any Canadian province — recently expanded, Mr. Speaker — 

and that way we can ensure that our young people are staying 

here. Thirty-five thousand people left the province between 

2001 and 2006. We‟re seeing 16,000 people have moved back, 

Mr. Speaker, to come into institutions. But most especially to 

our students, to our scholars, to our researchers, affordability, 

accessibility — that‟s a key component of any strategy moving 

forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Student Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the fall of 2007, 

Saskatoon has been having problems with student housing, and 

the top student housing problems are affordability and 

availability. 

 

With on-campus sites filled to the brim, even off-campus sites 

do not have enough vacancies to deal with the increasing 

number of people in the area. And even when students are able 

to find a place to stay, it‟s usually overpriced. Even with student 

loans, it would still be difficult to pay for such high rent bills 

while studying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what are you doing about the sorry 

state of student housing in Saskatoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we understand the 

significance of housing, not just simply for students but for the 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1587 

people of this province. The easy answer is, we‟re doing a lot 

more than that former government ever did. 

 

There are conversations going on with two institutions, Mr. 

Speaker, regarding student housing. And, Mr. Speaker, the goal 

here is to ensure that students are better positioned to spend 

more time on their studies, thereby ensuring that they‟re more 

successful as they enter employment. Mr. Speaker, that‟s why 

we‟re taking care of the graduate retention program — we‟ve 

just expanded it. 

 

So we see a number of initiatives, Mr. Speaker. There are 

dialogues under way with two different institutions, and that‟s 

two more than ever occurred under that former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 

latest report from the Canadian home mortgage corporation in 

June this year, Saskatoon is tied with Vancouver for the fourth 

lowest vacancy rate in the country at 0.9 per cent. Saskatchewan 

as a whole had a vacancy rate of only 1.2 per cent. With these 

historically low vacancy rates, soon housing is more of an issue 

than it‟s ever been before. 

 

To the minister: how low does the vacancy rate have to go 

before this government will act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, once again obviously the 

housing issue is quite critical, and that‟s why a report was 

commissioned. That‟s why two respected former MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] came forward. That‟s 

why their recommended immediate steps were undertaken by 

myself and, most especially, one of my cabinet colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the dialogue that‟s under way is helping to correct 

part of the infrastructure deficit that has been allowed to 

compound over the last 16 years. So if you want to make 

specific reference to Saskatoon, how much student construction 

went on in Saskatoon over the last 16 years? None, Mr. 

Speaker. None. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a sad legacy of that 

party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, again according to the latest 

report from CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation], rates for apartments are skyrocketing. The 

average rent for a two-bedroom apartment in Saskatoon has 

gone up by 13 per cent and the average rent of a two-bedroom 

apartment in Saskatoon has gone up by 21 per cent. Compare 

that to Winnipeg at 2 per cent or even Calgary at 5 per cent. 

Rents are going up, vacancy rates are at a historic low, and 

students are getting squeezed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why doesn‟t this minister have a plan to deal with 

this? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, obviously the 

housing shortage, it‟s endemic across the province. It‟s part of 

the sad legacy of the previous government. 

 

Most especially, Mr. Speaker, steps were taken. A report was 

commissioned. Steps have been taken to act immediately on 

that report. Mr. Speaker, as far as attempting to take action, one 

has to ensure that this can be done in a prudent, sustained 

framework. And, Mr. Speaker, what we can see from there, the 

dialogue is under way, twofold dialogue, two different 

institutions to help ensure that our post-secondary students have 

more affordable housing, more opportunities to focus on their 

studies, to graduate, to take their rightful place as being 

employed, staying here, keeping Saskatchewan home, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s in stark contrast to the 35,000 people that left 

between 2001 and 2006, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not just an issue for 

Regina and Saskatoon. Soon housing is an issue all over the 

province. Look at Meadow Lake, for example. We‟re told there 

is absolutely no affordable student housing to be had and that 

this is causing serious problems. We are told that North West 

Regional College in Meadow Lake is reducing the number of 

courses that they offer because students are signing up for 

classes and then finding out that there‟s nowhere to live and so 

they are forced to drop out. 

 

To the minister: is it the case that North West Regional College 

in Meadow Lake has had to cancel classes because students 

dropped out because there is no student housing? And if so, 

what is the minister going to do about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question. The housing challenge confronting Saskatchewan is a 

result of growth, Mr. Speaker. That is, there are challenges 

associated with growth. But those stand in stark contrast to the 

challenges associated with decline, and that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — A growth agenda, Mr. Speaker, we know 

there are challenges associated with it. Obviously housing for 



1588 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

students is part of that. But, Mr. Speaker, the challenges 

associated with growth are far more advantageous to the people 

of this province than the problems associated with the decline 

that the previous government oversaw, Mr. Speaker. That was 

their approach. 

 

They were content to have a small, wee province, Mr. Speaker. 

They were content to see 35,000 people leave the province. 

We‟re more than pleased to see 16,000 people either move back 

to or move to for the first time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more work to do. It‟s part of a sad legacy 

of the infrastructure deficit that the former government left to 

the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Post-Secondary Education for First Nations 

and Métis Students 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not 

sure how that houses the students in Meadow Lake. 

 

But another area of concern for members on this side of the 

House is what that government is doing to ensure more First 

Nations and Métis students are able to access post-secondary 

education. While members opposite have been reluctant to 

stand up to their good buddy Stephen Harper, we hope that they 

agree that this issue is too important to let their marching orders 

from Ottawa Tories get in the way. 

 

To the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations: what is 

she going to do and what is she doing to ensure that Ottawa 

steps up and fulfills the responsibility to Aboriginal people with 

respect to access to post-secondary education? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we really appreciate this 

question. For a reference point, we have over 12,700 First 

Nation and Métis students in the advanced educational system, 

Mr. Speaker. We know there‟s more work to do, but we‟re 

satisfied that there are some initial steps. 

 

As far as progress being made co-operatively with the federal 

government and other partners, I can simply turn to a few 

examples. Mr. Speaker, the labour market agreement, we were 

the third province to sign that early this year, Mr. Speaker. That 

allowed us to ensure that those monies were inserted into our 

budget, and it‟s helping to ensure that more training is under 

way. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, the ASEP [Aboriginal skills and 

employment partnership] initiative, that‟s a $33 million 

initiative. It‟s a public-private partnership where the federal 

government has come in with a little over $15 million, we‟ve 

come in with over $6 million, and the private sector has come in 

with the rest. That‟s going to ensure that over 1,500 people are 

trained in the North with reference to First Nation and Métis 

peoples. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just a couple of examples that reinforce 

co-operative federalism. Co-operative federalism, Mr. Speaker, 

something that was elusive to the previous government, is 

helping to ensure our First Nation and Métis peoples . . . We‟re 

making progress incrementally, but significantly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — He did everything but sing “. . . give 

appeasement a chance,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

At present, the fundamental source of funding for the case of 

First Nations students is the post-secondary student support 

program or the PSSP. The program provides funding to treaty 

First Nation and Inuit students to help them access 

post-secondary education. Over the years cuts and changes to 

transfers have meant that funding was capped, resulting in 

many fewer First Nations students being helped. Currently there 

are hundreds of Saskatchewan First Nations students unable to 

access this support. 

 

To the minister . . . And, you know, perhaps the First Nations 

minister doesn‟t want to answer this; maybe the Advanced Ed 

does: have they told Ottawa to take the cap off post-secondary 

student support program? And what are they doing to ensure 

that Ottawa addresses the wait-list so that First Nations students 

can access post-secondary education? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to answer 

this question on behalf of the First Nations and Métis people 

and our government. We know that there is a real scarcity of 

money in many cases for post-secondary education. It was the 

letter that I wrote the day that the new minister was announced, 

just a week and a half ago. I asked for a meeting immediately to 

talk about the first issue that we have in this government for 

First Nations, and that is education. We know that it has to be 

addressed. We know there was a 2 per cent cap. 

 

We know that we‟ve, as a province, stepped forward. We‟ve put 

money into First Nations University. We put money into 

Dumont Institute. We‟ve put more money into additional 

training seats. And we know the federal government has a 

responsibility, and our government is pressing the federal 

government to work with the First Nations to do something. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well I‟m glad to hear it, Mr. Speaker, because 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1589 

the members opposite mumbled into their desks when the 

federal Conservative cousins in Ottawa tore up the Kelowna 

accord. In fact some of the members opposite helped to tear it 

up. And now with First Nations being shortchanged, their 

response does not get the job done for First Nations access to 

post-secondary ed. Even worse, Mr. Speaker, members opposite 

have presided over a startling decrease in off-reserve Aboriginal 

employment when the first six months of 2008 saw the gains of 

2007 completely wiped out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to publishing the 

response that she gets from the minister, from the feds? And 

will she provide ample opportunity for First Nations to get that 

critical access to post-secondary education? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be part 

of a government that recognizes First Nations issues, not just in 

this ministry, but across our whole government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — And we are very pleased to see that 

Saskatchewan has seen a 2,500 job increase for off-reserve 

Aboriginal employment. We had the Aboriginal labour force 

increase by 2,500 people. Aboriginal unemployment rate was a 

12.6 per cent decrease. The unemployment rate has been 

trending down over the last number of years. And we know that 

the rate between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal rates is actually 

closing. 

 

For off-reserve Aboriginal youth employment, in September 

2008 compared to 2007, employment was up 500 to 8,100 jobs 

for Aboriginal youth. We are very pleased that our young 

people — First Nations and non-First Nations and Métis people 

— can be a part of our growing economy and part of our 

province and we‟re proud of them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when questioned 

about providing livestock producers with assistance, the 

Minister of Agriculture said, and I quote, “We‟re working with 

our producers to see where they would like to go.” 

 

On August 1, 2008, a letter was sent to Sask Party MLAs on 

behalf of Saskatchewan livestock producers expressing, and I 

quote: “. . . extreme frustration with the lack of positive 

livestock policy formed by the Saskatchewan Government to 

date.” 

 

Clearly this letter states where livestock producers would like to 

go. The letter says, and I quote: “. . . we are asking the 

Provincial Government for immediate financial assistance to 

maintain Saskatchewan‟s cattle industry . . .” 

 

Will the minister provide livestock producers with the 

immediate financial assistance that they‟re asking for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to the member opposite, as I had stated yesterday, I 

think we‟re doing a number of things to help the livestock 

industry out there. The first one might be the education tax 

rebate that we‟re increasing every year — far more than that 

government ever did in 16 years for rural Saskatchewan and 

rural producers. Bringing the AgriStability administration back 

to Saskatchewan is looked upon as a real positive by the 

livestock industry. 

 

But I might go on to add, and I‟d like to have a quote here from 

the Edmonton Journal, October 31, and this is about what‟s 

happened in Alberta, and this is from the hog industry. 

“Province misled us, hog farmers say; Alberta Pork says secret 

changes to program reduced funds for producers, suppliers, 

[and] lenders.” 

 

What he‟s talking about is the ad hoc payment in Alberta is now 

being clawed back from the AgriStability program so they‟re 

not one bit farther ahead than the producers in Saskatchewan. 

The ad hoc did absolutely no good for producers in Alberta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yesterday the minister stood in the Assembly 

and said, and I quote: 

 

I have made one commitment to the livestock industry 

here and I stand behind it. We will not force them into any 

program like Alberta has done until they ask for it, and 

then we will assist them to go that way. 

 

Well Saskatchewan producers are clear. They want a program 

that places them at a level playing field with Alberta producers. 

The August 1 letter states, and I quote, “Without similar and 

immediate support for Saskatchewan‟s cattle producers, a 

significant reduction in forage acreage and cattle numbers 

within the province will occur.” Is this a do-nothing 

government, or will the minister stand today and honour his 

commitment to Saskatchewan livestock producers and provide 

them with a program so that they‟re on a level playing field 

with Alberta stock growers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the member 

is talking about here is not considered by Alberta producers as 



1590 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

being very dollar-friendly to their operations. I have a couple 

more quotes that I‟d like to give. “Alberta livestock payments 

will be considered eligible income under AgriStability.” 

 

Now the member opposite, I‟m sure, understands what that 

means. They got an ad hoc payment, so if a producer in Alberta 

got a $50,000 cheque, and now they go to apply for 

AgriStability — the same as we have the option to do in 

Saskatchewan — that $50,000 is clawed back because it‟s 

shown as income. They have no opportunity to have any benefit 

because our producers can also apply under AgriStability to get 

their payment out of it, except they won‟t have the clawback. 

They‟ll be on the same footing with the Alberta producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention what Brad Wildeman, 

president of the CCA [Canadian Cattlemen‟s Association] had 

to say. “„Part of the initial opposition to the program is the 

mandatory part of it and also the way it was delivered without 

industry consultation.‟” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what I mentioned yesterday. We are 

working with our producers. We‟re working with our producers 

in joining with Alberta to see where traceability and age 

verification, premise ID [identification], and all those things are 

going to lead us, Mr. Speaker. We are working with our 

industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a letter signed 

by three representatives of the industry. Now, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well I would think that Bob Ivey, 

Bill Jameson, and Ed Bothner represent the stock growers in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government opposite said in their Throne 

Speech that there were economic challenges facing the livestock 

industry and the need to develop long-term strategies for growth 

and co-operation with the livestock industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the recommendation accompanying the letter, 

cattle producers outlined a short-term, immediate strategy. They 

want a support payment of $148 million. Will the minister listen 

to these livestock producers, and will he commit an aid payment 

of $148 million so that we have some semblance of an industry 

in this province a year from now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite must have a really short memory 

because last year, for the November 7 election, does she 

remember what the NDP‟s commitment was to agriculture 

producers in this province? To exclude them from any 

education tax rebate increase in the province of Saskatchewan . 

Should I repeat that, Mr. Speaker? Once again, ignore and 

exclude agriculture producers in this province from any 

education tax rebate. 

Mr. Speaker, that government when they were in power totally 

ignored rural Saskatchewan, didn‟t count agriculture as any part 

of the economy in this province. Totally opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

from where a Saskatchewan Party government come from 

because we represent all of Saskatchewan, including rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The members will come to order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question no. 86. 

 

The Speaker: — Answer to question 86 is tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order so that I can 

hear the Bill that‟s being called by the Clerk. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Medical 

Profession Amendment Act, 2008. This Act was introduced to 

remove a restriction in the way that the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons of Saskatchewan is allowed to conduct the routine 

investigations into quality of care issues, including patient 

deaths. 

 

In particular, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will allow the college to 

release information about these investigations to external 

stakeholders. This would include health regions and other 

stakeholders who are investigating the same or a similar matter. 

The amendment also allows the college to share this 

information with the Minister of Health where it believes that 

providing the information is likely to improve health care 

delivery in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this proposed amendment applies only to 

investigations, and studies issues related to patient care 

including patient death. It is important to note that this 

amendment does not apply to investigations conducted into 

physician discipline or competency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have discussed this amendment with the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the 

regulating body that requests this amendment to the Act. We 

have also consulted with the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses‟ Association, 

the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists, representatives from 

the regional health authorities, the Saskatchewan Cancer 

Agency, and the Office of the Information and Privacy 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1591 

Commissioner. These groups all support the changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m confident this amendment will be beneficial in 

a number of ways. First, by permitting the college to share 

information about routine investigations with appropriate 

groups, this amendment will help to ensure optimal quality of 

care for Saskatchewan patients. Second, it will also help to 

encourage co-operation in investigations and reduce 

redundancy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, physicians are a vital part of our health care 

system in this province. The high quality care they provide must 

be supported. Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to move second reading 

of The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 53, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 

2008. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise on the second reading of Bill No. 53, The 

Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008. Listening carefully 

just now to the Minister of Health, and having read the Act as it 

was introduced over the last week, Mr. Speaker, I‟m inclined to 

indicate temperate support for this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have always respected the role of 

people who are involved in the medical professions. We have a 

great deal of respect for the organizations representing the 

professions, those who are regulating the professions, and those 

who are providing direction and education to those who are 

within the professions. Mr. Speaker, public safety is important. 

Ensuring that we have a process that provides protection of 

members of the public, Mr. Speaker, is indeed a shared 

responsibility between members of government and the 

professions. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have many organizations around the 

province where there are industry and sector representatives, 

public representatives appointed to take care of in some cases 

consumer protection, in other cases public protection. It exists 

for not only the medical profession but also the legal profession 

and even, Mr. Speaker, the real estate profession. 

 

Members may know that for a number of years I was a 

commissioner on the Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission, 

providing professional advice to the sector and at the same time 

ensuring public protection. I have a great deal of respect for 

those who have committed themselves to serving the public. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister in his remarks referenced a 

number of the professional associations that have been 

consulted on this Bill, professional associations who he says 

have now agreed and support the legislation in front of us. Mr. 

Speaker, as members of the official opposition, it‟s incumbent 

upon us to ensure that not only the minister‟s word is strong but 

also, Mr. Speaker, that we discuss these matters with those 

associations as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, indicating our support for any efforts that will 

expand public protection and indicating a need to ensure that 

that‟s exactly what this Bill does, Mr. Speaker, today I would 

like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 53, The Medical Profession 

Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of The Ambulance Amendment Act, 

2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act was introduced to repeal obsolete sections 

of The Ambulance Act and portions that are covered in other 

legislation. Notably, Mr. Speaker, this Bill repeals sections of 

the Act pertaining to the ambulance boards and ambulance 

districts which no longer exist. 

 

Also it is no longer necessary to include registration and 

licensure of paramedics in The Ambulance Act. Recently The 

Paramedics Act was proclaimed. It now provides 

self-regulation for the profession. 

 

The amendment also repeals sections of The Ambulance Act 

dealing with provisions of granting for emergency medical 

services. This area is covered under The Regional Health 

Services Act which provides the authority to the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have discussed these amendments with 

representatives of the regional health authorities and with 

SEMSA, the Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services 

Association. These groups support the changes. I am confident 

that this spirit of co-operation will move us forward as our EMS 

[emergency medical services] sector continues to evolve to 

meet the need of patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our ambulance service and emergency medical 

services personnel are a vital part of the health care delivery 

system in Saskatchewan. The high quality service they provide 

must be supported. These changes will help ensure that 

legislation governing this section is current and appropriate. 

Our government is committed to work with health regions and 

ambulance services to improve emergency medical services and 

access to those services. 

 

With that, I move second reading of The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, 2008. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 49, The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 



1592 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise on second reading of Bill No. 49, The 

Ambulance Amendment Act. And again, having listened to the 

Minister of Health and having read the Bill, I have a few 

comments to make at this point. But, Mr. Speaker, certainly on 

The Ambulance Amendment Act there are still more things that 

we are going to need to know, and of course there are quite a 

number of questions that need to be asked. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have demonstrated in 

the past, and will continue to demonstrate, that we very much 

respect and honour the work of ambulance operators, the people 

who work for them, and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the 

developments that have occurred recently with regards to 

expanded role of paramedics, not only within the ambulance 

system but within the health system as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the expanded role of paramedics in rural 

Saskatchewan is improving the quality of health delivery to 

residents across the province, but more importantly to rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And members of SEMSA in 

particular have brought forward to the previous government, 

and I know to the current government, quite a number of ideas 

and arguments about continuing to develop the role of the 

ambulance provider in rural Saskatchewan for improving the 

quality of health care there. 

 

[14:30] 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the fact that The Ambulance Act has been 

opened as a result of these amendments brought forward gives 

us an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to perhaps explore some 

additional areas that have yet to be explored to this date. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I think there are opportunities here for further 

consultations with the industries, with the regional health 

authorities, and with the public, Mr. Speaker. There are 

opportunities here perhaps to expand this legislation before it‟s 

passed by this legislature to truly represent the needs of 

Saskatchewan people, especially those in rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, as far as their ambulance services go and the 

delivery of emergency health care. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, knowing that we still have some consultation 

to do with the various and respected associations and 

representative groups and the public, Mr. Speaker, today I 

would move adjournment of debate on Bill No. 49, The 

Ambulance Amendment Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 49, The Ambulance 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the privilege of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 47, An Act to 

amend The Pipelines Act, 1998, henceforth known as The 

Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments that we are bringing forward in 

this Bill are housekeeping in nature. They‟re designed to 

expand the definition of pipeline to include all pipelines that 

might be used in the province for the transportation of carbon 

dioxide. 

 

Our system under the current legislation allows for the 

transportation of crude oil and natural gas by pipeline as well as 

the pipelining of carbon dioxide where the carbon dioxide is 

incidental to or used in the production of crude oil and natural 

gas. 

 

When the Act was initially brought in, the only anticipated need 

for carbon dioxide pipelines related to the use of carbon dioxide 

or CO2 to enhance the recovery of crude oil from underground 

reservoirs. 

 

And the best example of that, of course, are the CO2 enhanced 

oil recovery projects operated by EnCana oil and gas 

partnership at Weyburn and Apache Canada Ltd. at Midale. 

These projects are the leading edge work done by the Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre, in connection with them, that 

have garnered international acclaim. Indeed Saskatchewan has 

become a world leader in research connected to carbon dioxide 

capture and storage. 

 

And it‟s in that regard this existing legislation needs 

amendment, for as it currently stands The Pipelines Act, 1998 

does not apply to the transportation of carbon dioxide by 

pipeline for purposes outside those related to enhanced oil 

recovery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the concern we all share around addressing 

climate change and reducing greenhouse gas emissions, we see 

the potential for carbon dioxide captured from industrial 

facilities to be transported by pipeline to disposal sites. At such 

sites, the carbon dioxide then would be injected safely into 

underground saline or other suitable geological formations. 

 

We will be removing these gases from our atmosphere and 

effectively combatting climate change. We want to be able to 

facilitate new CO2 storage projects, and the expansion of the 

definition of pipeline will ensure that these types of carbon 

dioxide pipelines are subject to the same regulatory oversight 

around safety and the environment as the other pipelines 

currently licensed under the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will bring our legislation in line 

with legislation administered in other jurisdictions. I 

specifically note the pipeline legislation administered in Alberta 

by Energy Resources Conservation Board and at the federal 

level by the National Energy Board. I should also note that the 

major companies and associations that make up our oil and gas 

industry have been consulted on these changes and are 

supportive of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to move the second reading of 

The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008. 

 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1593 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Energy 

and Resources that Bill No. 47, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to enter into the debate on An 

Act to amend The Pipelines Act, 1998. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the surface this piece of legislation appears to 

be mostly housekeeping and those changes that are made are in 

the interest of industry. 

 

We believe that, Mr. Speaker, but we still have some work to do 

to check with industry to ensure that this is what industry would 

like done and they‟d like it done in this particular manner. And, 

Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure that we do the job that we have 

as opposition to ensure that this is what the stakeholders in this 

province want, Mr. Speaker, we need some time to meet and 

consult with industry to see if this is adequate for what their 

needs are moving forward in our ever-growing and emerging 

gas and oil industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And because these industries are so important to the future of 

our province, we need to take the time to ensure that this is 

what they want, Mr. Speaker, and that we know that that‟s what 

they want, Mr. Speaker. So for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, at 

this time I‟d like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 47, An Act to 

amend The Pipelines Act, 1998. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Securities Amendment Act, 2008. 

Mr. Speaker, The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 contains 

amendments that will further the implementation of the passport 

system of securities regulation. The amendments will further 

the creation of a seamless, harmonized securities regime in 

Canada where market participants can access capital markets 

throughout our country, while dealing with one regulator or one 

set of laws. 

 

Many of these amendments repeal the registration and other 

related provisions in The Securities Act, 1988. These repealed 

provisions will be replaced by a national instrument that 

contains the harmonized registration requirements that will 

apply in all jurisdictions in Canada. This national instrument is 

expected to come into force in 2009. 

 

The result of these amendments and the subsequent adoption of 

National Instrument 31-103 Registration Requirements is a 

creation of a single window of access to capital markets in 

participating provinces and territories. The harmonized 

registration requirements means that a participant will only 

have to register in one jurisdiction instead of 13, Mr. Speaker. 

The amendments seek to continue the harmonization of 

regulatory requirements and lessen compliant costs for 

Canadian businesses, while increasing protection for those who 

invest in them. 

 

The provisions in this Bill contain detailed rules issues such as, 

firstly, new and improved definitions that reflect the change 

from a trade trigger to a broader in-the-business-of trigger for 

registration that is consistent with models in the United States 

and other countries. These definitions are being adopted in all 

provinces and territories in Canada. 

 

It also includes the power to impose terms and conditions on 

registrations at any time. It also includes the power to review 

and require changes to a registrant‟s promotional material. It 

also includes provisions dealing with applications for a 

discretionary exemption and the Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission‟s power to make an exemption order in 

certain enumerated situations. It also provides clarification of 

the power of the commission to assure a reciprocal order based 

on a decision of a regulator or court in another jurisdiction, and 

the hearing process for such orders, and also deals with 

consumer protection measures that allow a claimant to reserve 

the right of action in civil courts pending a decision from the 

commission. These measures create civil rights of action for 

misrepresentation in issuers‟ secondary market disclosure. 

 

The Canadian Securities Administrators worked with all of the 

provinces and territories to develop harmonized registration 

requirements in national instrument 31-103 registration 

requirements. The Canadian Securities Administrators are 

striving to have this national instrument finalized and ready for 

implementation by April 1, 2009. It is necessary for all 

provinces and territories to amend their respective securities 

legislation to adopt these provisions. Saskatchewan is the only 

passport jurisdiction that has not yet passed or that has not yet 

scheduled to pass this fall these proposed amendments that 

adopt the harmonized registration requirements. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am requesting that this Bill be passed 

in the fall 2008 sitting of this Legislative Assembly. Mr. 

Speaker, I have discussed this with my colleague across the 

way, and I‟ll look forward to speedy passage of this Bill. 

 

If Saskatchewan is unable to pass this Bill prior to April 1, 

2009, then the rest of the provinces and territories must wait for 

Saskatchewan in order to implement these harmonized 

registration provisions. It is advantageous to Saskatchewan not 

to be the source of the delay in implementing these harmonized 

provisions. It is advantageous to the passport jurisdictions to be 

able to demonstrate co-operative and timely implementation of 

harmonized improvements to the country‟s securities regime. It 

is advantageous to participants in Canada‟s capital markets to 

have these harmonized provisions implemented as soon as 

possible. It is advantageous to all provinces to know that the 

passport jurisdictions are able and ready to proceed with 

implementing the harmonized registration requirements. 

 

These requirements must be implemented as the Canadian 

Securities Administrators finalize the national instrument as 

there are a number of consequential items that must be 



1594 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

completed following the passage of these amendments. 

 

I realize that under the rules of this Assembly this Bill would 

not normally be passed until spring of 2009. However due to 

the reasons that I have just highlighted, I encourage all 

members to support the expedited passage of this Bill in the fall 

sitting of the legislature. Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move 

second reading of The Securities Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Justice minister that Bill No. 42, The Securities 

Amendment Act be now read a second time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I‟m pleased to rise today to speak on Bill No. 42, The Securities 

Amendment Act, 2008. It was a pleasure to listen to the 

minister‟s speech outlining the reasons why the Act is required 

and the part where he says we have to absolutely pass this or 

everybody‟s going to be mad at us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three things I think that I want to say on this Bill 

right now. First of all, we are certainly aware that it is important 

to deal with matters relating to this passport system and 

updating the federal regulations. Mr. Speaker, we have certainly 

in the past been involved in discussions with other provinces on 

this matter as, of course, members on this side of the House 

have in a number of different areas, Mr. Speaker, been involved 

in federal-provincial discussions that have resulted in 

federal-provincial programs across the country. Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s no doubt about it; this securities piece is one that we are 

quite familiar with. 

 

The second thing I wanted to say is a direct result of that first 

comment. My colleague, the member from Saskatoon who was 

formerly minister of Justice, has certainly been involved in 

these discussions as a former minister of Justice with his former 

colleagues in other provinces and is quite familiar with the 

process that‟s being discussed here in Bill No. 42. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, my colleague here is trying to very much 

determine how much of the speech just given by the current 

Minister of Justice he wrote when he was the minister of Justice 

sitting on that side of the House. And we have calculated, Mr. 

Speaker, roughly that probably about half of what the current 

Minister of Justice had to say has been delivered in the past, a 

speech that has been delivered in the past by the member here 

from Saskatoon. 

 

That having been said, the other half, Mr. Speaker, I mean 

before we even have debate begun on this legislation, the 

Minister of Justice is already accusing the opposition of holding 

up the Bill. He‟s actually charging us, Mr. Speaker, with doing 

speedy passage of legislation we might otherwise be inclined to 

support, but he‟s charging us with making sure that we do this 

as quickly as we can. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we pride ourselves on our due diligence. When we 

did news releases in government, Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t have 

to correct them two, three days in a row, Mr. Speaker, because 

we did our due diligence, Mr. Speaker. We worked very hard 

with the constituent groups around the province on various 

issues, Mr. Speaker, and because of that due diligence, at the 

end of the day, Mr. Speaker, we knew we were doing the right 

thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we would certainly do that as far as The 

Securities Act is concerned. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be 

interested in asking the minister a few questions in committee 

because of course, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will go to committee. 

But I‟m sure now, thanks to the minister‟s intervention, his 

speech, we‟ll probably ask the minister, why is it that if all the 

other provinces have taken care of this in the last year, why 

hasn‟t this government dealt with it in the last year? Why is a 

last-minute introduction into the Chamber our fault in the 

opposition of holding it up? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this approach doesn‟t make a lot of sense. If the 

Bill needs to be passed and can be passed, Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition will certainly be there to support and play our role in 

federal-provincial negotiations and ensuring that there are 

regulations in place protecting individuals, particularly 

investors, who live and work and make their living here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while I can indicate some support for this 

legislation at this time, the minister has opened some doors that 

will require us to ask a few questions. So, Mr. Speaker, that 

having been said, I would therefore move that we now adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 42, The Securities Amendment Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the House to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Trespass to Property Act. This Act will 

create a new provincial offence of trespass. Unlike other 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan does not currently 

have petty trespass legislation of general application. We do 

have legislation dealing with specific circumstances like 

snowmobiling and operation of all-terrain vehicles. The new 

legislation is not meant to replace those pieces of legislations 

and they will continue to apply. 

 

The Act will make it an offence to do a number of things, 

unless acting under lawful authority. The Act will make it an 

offence to enter a posted or enclosed lands or other premises 

without the consent of the occupier. It will be an offence to 

enter onto lands or other premises, even if not posted or 

enclosed, after being requested not to do so by the occupier. 

And further it will be an offence to engage in prohibited 

activities on lands or other premises without the consent of the 

occupier. 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1595 

The Act will also make it an offence to fail to leave premises or 

fail to stop an activity after being requested to do so. It will be 

an offence to re-enter premises after leaving pursuant to a 

request to do so and to resume an activity after discontinuing 

the activity pursuant to a request to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the onus will be on the defendant to prove that he 

or she had the consent of the occupier to enter onto premises or 

to engage in activity on the premises. A person found on 

enclosed land will be presumed not to have the consent of the 

occupier to be there. 

 

Under the Act, a peace officer may request that persons leave 

private property or stop activities on private property. If they 

don‟t, the peace officer may issue a ticket. A peace officer may 

also do this with respect to any property in situations that 

require prompt action to prevent harm to people or property. 

Peace officers will have the ability to arrest persons refusing to 

comply with the Act. People in contravention of the Act will be 

liable on summary conviction to a fine of up to $2,000. 

 

It will be a defence to a charge under the Act for a person to 

prove that he or she reasonably believed that he or she has title 

to or an interest in the premises in question. It will also be a 

defence that that person had the consent of an occupier of the 

premises or was acting under lawful authority or that he or she 

had an honest and reasonable belief that he or she was acting 

with consent or under lawful authority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act contains detail about appropriate signage 

and other notice that may be given under the Act. 

 

If a contravention is committed with a motor vehicle, the driver 

of the vehicle will be liable under the Act. If the driver is not 

the owner of the vehicle, the owner will be liable unless the 

driver is convicted of the offence or the motor vehicle was in 

possession of someone other than the owner without his or her 

consent. 

 

The Trespass to Property Act seeks to balance the reasonable 

expectation of landowners and those wanting to access privately 

owned property to enjoy the great Saskatchewan outdoors. To 

that end, Mr. Speaker, the Act is not applied to individuals 

engaging in lawful hunting, fishing, or trapping activities, and 

for the benefit of my mother, berry picking. As well the Act 

will not apply to vacant agricultural Crown lands, Crown 

resource lands, or parklands that are used for public recreation 

purposes. It is not the intention of our government to restrict 

access to such lands intended for public use beyond current 

regulation contained in other Acts. 

 

The Act will also not apply to people acting in the course of 

their duties, such as emergency personnel or meter readers, etc. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Trespass to Property Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Justice minister that Bill No. 43, The Trespass to 

Property Act be now read a second time. Is the pleasure of the 

Assembly . . . ready for the question? I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise today on Bill No. 43, The Trespass to Property 

Act. 

 

I appreciate the explanation provided by the minister here a few 

moments ago. The minister does provide us with enough 

information to begin some work in this regard. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the public needs to be aware of course that this 

is a new Act for the province of Saskatchewan. It‟s going into 

territory that for all intents and purposes there has not been a 

broad discussion across the province. 

 

There are a number of issues here including the fact that, as the 

minister alluded to, certain offences result from the Act, and the 

police actually are being given new responsibilities. And I think 

when that happens, there‟s a number of questions that need to 

be asked. There‟s some subjectivity in the Bill, certain things 

that are not as clear as perhaps they could be on the surface, and 

indeed we need to investigate those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the most significant element about this Bill 

that needs some further review, of course, is what‟s called the 

law of unintended consequence because it‟s a new Act, Mr. 

Speaker, and on the surface, there are clauses in the Act that 

seem to make perfect sense. One has to look beyond the clause 

itself to determine what the unintended consequence may be 

and what the response or follow-up will be. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, of course there are some exemptions 

and the exemptions again seem to make sense. It‟s one of the 

reasons why Saskatchewan didn‟t have a trespass Act in the 

past, Mr. Speaker, primarily because the people who have been 

exempted, Mr. Speaker, had legitimate reasons why trespass 

Act was unnecessary. So, Mr. Speaker, part of the questions 

about why the Act is necessary does go back to why the 

exemptions are necessary in the Act and were reasons for an 

Act not to exist previously. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we have considerable amount of work 

to do on the new trespass to property Act. Mr. Speaker, this is 

an area that of course we will want to do a considerable amount 

of work on. Mr. Speaker, I also think this is one of those Acts 

that perhaps once it gets to committee, that committees could 

have some role in identifying some public participation in the 

review of the clauses within the Act and of course the 

consequences attached to them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, because we have quite a bit of work to do both 

on this side of the House and the other side — because I‟m sure 

that the government has as much interest in unintended 

consequences as the opposition does — I think because there is 

considerable amount of work that yet has to be done in this 

regard, Mr. Speaker, I would move that the debate on Bill No. 

43, The Trespass to Property Act, that the debate be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



1596 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 48, An Act to amend The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act, 1993. This Bill 

increases automatic interim funding at the start of a fiscal year 

from one-twelfth of the previous year‟s estimates to 

two-twelfths. This will allow ministries to operate existing 

programs until the main appropriation Act is enacted by the 

normal completion date of the legislative session. The normal 

completion day is the Thursday before Victoria Day in May. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the old fiscal year has expired on March 31 

and before the main appropriation Act is enacted for the new 

fiscal year, the government requires funding to operate. 

Automatic interim funding currently provide the ministries with 

one-twelfth of their previous year‟s estimates. 

 

In prior years, certain ministries have required additional 

funding in order to address their spending requirements. For 

example Education has required additional funding to pay 

grants to schools. This has meant that the legislature had had to 

deal with an interim supply Bill at the same time it was dealing 

with other estimates concurrently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increasing automatic interim funding to 

two-twelfths will improve the administrative efficiency of this 

Assembly because it would allow the Assembly to focus more 

on the main estimates and other important work such as the 

legislative agenda. As before, automatic interim funding 

becomes a part of the next appropriation Act. This amendment 

will be effective upon assent. Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of an Act to amend the financial securities Act, 1993. 

 

The Deputy Speaker — Question for the Assembly is the 

motion by the Finance minister that Bill No. 48, The Financial 

Administration Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise at second reading here of Bill No. 48, The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act. Listening carefully 

to the minister across the way and having consulted with the 

Finance critic for the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

inclined to indicate our support for this legislation. 

 

It is the type of legislation that indeed makes perfect sense. The 

minister opposite has provided strong arguments in this regard. 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, there are one or two things that 

we just need some clarification. Once we get that clarification, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this is one of those pieces of 

legislation that we could, having done some, as I say, our due 

diligence on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, we could probably provide 

support to expedite the passage of this Act. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, we are going to seek some 

clarification on this Bill, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, for today 

anyway, I would move that debate on Bill No. 48, The 

Financial Administration Amendment Act be adjourned. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to present to the House for second reading The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008. As the members of 

this House are aware, our province is in the midst of an 

economic renaissance. However labour challenges have become 

one of the most important issues facing the drivers of this 

economy — Saskatchewan businesses. The Act seeks to address 

an aspect of this issue from the legislative quarter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the critical importance of labour issues with 

respect to our economic momentum and the quality of life for 

the people of this province, we must be bold, timely, and above 

all proactive in our approach to them. It is our mandate to do so 

and indeed our responsibility to those who have given us this 

mandate. For this reason several key amendments are contained 

in the Act. 

 

One relates to Enterprise Saskatchewan. Under The Enterprise 

Saskatchewan Act, the agency will be instrumental in working 

with labour organizations as it moves forward with its goal to 

make recommendations to government about economic growth 

and removing barriers to that growth. Because of the major 

labour issues related to this goal, it is necessary for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to have a close working relationship with the 

Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission. To this end, the 

revised wording of the Act lists one individual appointed by the 

minister to represent the agency. This amendment will allow 

this close working relationship with the agency. 

 

Also the commission board currently has 19 members. The 

recommended amendments reduce the size of the board to 11 

members in order to enhance its efficiency, its ability to react in 

a more timely fashion, and continue to ensure the diversity of 

its representation. Existing legislation commits government to 

appointing labour and business board members in consultation 

with the most representative organizations of labour and 

business. The recommended amendments to appointment 

criteria increase flexibility and ensure that increased 

representation of the province‟s workers and business persons is 

achievable. The recommended amendments also limit board 

members by two two-year terms rather than unlimited 

three-year terms. This is in order to promote turnover and new 

input. 

 

We feel these amendments are in the best interests of the 

Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission, of the current and 

future provincial economy, and the people of this province. Mr. 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1597 

Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2003. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation that Bill 

No. 46, The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased today to rise on second reading of Bill No. 46, The 

Labour Market Commission Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation, I think, is going to prove to be 

very problematic for members of the opposition and for the 

public generally. I am quite torn, Mr. Speaker, in this regard 

because what I would like to do today, Mr. Speaker, but I‟m 

going to spare members of government and the public my 

speech in this regard, but what I would like to do today, Mr. 

Speaker, is provide quite an extensive speech with regards to 

the needs of labour, the needs of business, the needs of our 

economy that ties business and labour together, Mr. Speaker, 

because certainly the labour shortage in our province right now 

is creating undue stress in a lot of our communities and on a lot 

of business people currently. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no doubt that we need to find a way 

to ensure that training and the providing of labour to business 

and investors who are putting money into businesses in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, are aligned to ensure the continued 

growth. I know that‟s the minister‟s intention. I know that‟s the 

government‟s intention of dealing with this particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

But why this is somewhat problematic for me, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Actually let me back up just for a second. We go back to 

question period today. One of the questions asked to the 

government across the floor earlier today had to do with the 

circumstances in the town of Meadow Lake. The town of 

Meadow Lake, the regional college operating there, has a very 

close working relationship with the business community in the 

town and surrounding the town of Meadow Lake. 

 

They have determined over the last two years what the 

long-term needs for labour are going to be in that community. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the college designed and set up programs to 

deliver to ensure that students who want to work within these 

certain industries can get the proper training, and employers can 

indeed find trained workers for the jobs that they need to do to 

further build the economy in the town of Meadow Lake. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the college went to all of the work to consult 

with industry, to build the courses, to put them in place and to 

advertise them. And, Mr. Speaker, the unemployment rate in 

Meadow Lake and north is still considerable. And, Mr. Speaker, 

young people and older people were applying for jobs at the 

regional . . . for training opportunities at the regional college. 

 

They come into town to take these courses and find that they 

have no place to live. Mr. Speaker, they can‟t put up tents to 

take programs through the winter months in the town of 

Meadow Lake. So they abandon the courses. And the regional 

college, as we understand it, has had to cancel some programs. 

Business people are unhappy. Students are unhappy. Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s a failure here, a breakdown between what it is 

that we need to do with what it is that‟s actually being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are responsibilities that government has to 

help to deal with the challenges that growth is presenting to our 

municipalities, to our regional colleges, and to the people who 

are in position to benefit from the growth that‟s taking place, 

because they aren‟t currently, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now I jump further ahead to again some of my concerns, my 

personal concerns. I‟ve worked with the existing Labour Market 

Commission, Mr. Speaker, as a member of government and 

formerly as an individual in my community. I have a great deal 

of respect for the work that the Labour Market Commission has 

done in this province. I don‟t believe that there are a lot of 

obstacles, roadblocks or barriers to growth that the current 

commission has, Mr. Speaker, and therefore I‟m torn with the 

arguments of course that are being brought forward that we 

need to do something to further bring business and labour 

together. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I fear that what this legislation does is it 

basically guts the intent of and the benefits of the Labour 

Market Commission and ties it to Enterprise Saskatchewan, 

which for all intents and purposes has not been well 

communicated to the public in Saskatchewan. People all over 

the province are still wondering, what is this Enterprise 

Saskatchewan anyway? It‟s a ministry. It‟s an agency. It‟s got 

some people appointed. Where did they come from? 

 

There‟s a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker, about Enterprise 

Saskatchewan and now we‟re kind of rolling the Labour Market 

Commission into Enterprise Saskatchewan. We‟re moving 

away from the expectations and needs of the Saskatchewan 

people while at the same time talking to the people of 

Saskatchewan as if we were doing all the right things. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that‟s going to 

require a considerable amount of work by members of the 

opposition. It should also require a considerable amount of 

work by government because I think there needs to be a lot 

more consultation out there from a lot of different individuals, 

groups, organizations, and communities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, without going into a great deal of detail on a 

day when we have quite a number of second readings that we 

want to get in process, Mr. Speaker, I will save further remarks 

in this regard for another day and perhaps in the committees. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would therefore move that debate on Bill No. 

46, The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Amendment Act, 2008. The Agreements of Sale Cancellation 

Act was enacted in 1917 and requires that all proceedings by a 

seller to end a contract or agreement for sale of land go before a 

court. The Act was intended to address the bargaining positions 

that often existed between sellers who were in a position to 

provide financing and less sophisticated buyers. The Act was 

intended to protect buyers who, by virtue of the agreement for 

sale, had established equity in the land through payments, but 

had not yet obtained title to the land. The Act was not intended 

to address sales of land where one payment transaction takes 

place between the parties following which the title is transferred 

or where the seller is not providing financing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will add a definition of 

contract or agreement for sale of land. This will limit the 

application of the Act to proceedings brought by sellers who 

provide financing or accept instalment payments for the land 

over a period of time of more than six months. By defining 

contract or agreement for sale, the application of the Act will be 

clarified for users and avoid unnecessary court applications 

where the cancellation of an agreement does not fall within the 

scope of the Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will also define 

agreement for sale in each of The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 

The Limitation of Civil Rights Act, and The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act. All of these Acts consider actions for the 

cancellation of an agreement for the sale of land. Adding the 

same definition to each of these Acts will ensure that agreement 

for sale is given the same meaning for all types of land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, adding a definition to each of these Acts will not 

change the substance of those Acts, as each was intended to 

protect purchasers who enter into an agreement for sale over a 

period of time and establish equity in the land. Each Act will 

continue to protect purchasers who have an established interest 

in land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Justice minister that Bill No. 44, The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate you recognizing me on second reading of Bill No. 

44, the agreements of sale cancellation agreement Act. Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to be able to say a few 

words in this regard on Bill No. 44, and I appreciate the 

comments made by the Minister of Justice. 

 

It does appear, Mr. Speaker, on the surface, that this Bill is 

primarily housekeeping. Mr. Speaker, I don‟t have a lot to say 

about this legislation. However I do know that because this will 

affect a number of people in the legal community, now that the 

Bill has been published and the minister has his comments on 

record, I would like to circulate those comments amongst some 

people that I . . . I know I respect all members of the legal 

community, but for this purpose some members that I 

specifically respect, Mr. Speaker, in the legal community to 

review the Bill and provide me with some additional advice in 

this regard. 

 

So while I think this Bill is housekeeping and can be supported, 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move that Bill No. 44, The 

Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Opposition House Leader has moved 

to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise 

today to move second reading of The Credit Union Amendment 

Act, 2008. Mr. Speaker, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 

2008 amends The Credit Union Act, 1998. 

 

The Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation, also known 

as CUDGC, is a body corporate created pursuant to The Credit 

Union Act, 1998. CUDGC was formed in 1953 as Canada‟s first 

deposit protection agency and has successfully delivered on its 

mandate of protecting depositors. CUDGC serves as the 

in-system regulator of Saskatchewan‟s 66 autonomous credit 

unions and provides an unlimited guarantee on all funds on 

deposit. CUDGC employs a risk-based prudential regulatory 

approach that holds credit unions to standards of sound business 

and financial practice. Consequently, Saskatchewan credit 

unions are strong, stable, and well capitalized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with the governance of CUDGC. 

The Credit Union Act, 1998 currently provides that the CUDGC 

board is to consist of — and I‟ll list them — two individuals 

appointed by Credit Union Central, the chief executive officer 

of Credit Union Central or the CEO‟s nominee, the deputy 

minister of Justice or the nominee of the deputy, and the deputy 

minister of Finance or the nominee of that deputy. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The current legislation governing the composition of the 

CUDGC board is out of step with current governance principles 

and the trend towards board members who are independent of 

the regulated entity. The current structure of the CUDGC board 

is not in keeping with similar deposit guarantee corporations in 

other jurisdictions where the majority of board members are 

government appointments or are otherwise independent of the 

regulated entities. 

 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will modify the composition of 

the CUDGC board so that Credit Union Central appoints two 

independent members and one credit union affiliated person in 

addition to the CEO of Credit Union Central or the CEO‟s 

nominee, who remains as a member of the CUDGC board. The 

amendment also requires that the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council appoint one independent member in addition to the 

deputy minister of Justice and the deputy minister of Finance 

appointments, who will remain as members of the CUDGC 

board. Credit Union Central and the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council through the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General 

will consult with one another before making their independent 

appointments. 

 

The result of this amendment will be a seven-person board 

comprised of three independent members, two Government of 

Saskatchewan members, and two credit union affiliated 

members. With five out of the seven board members outside of 

the credit union system, the legislation achieves the goal of a 

more independent CUDGC board. These additional 

appointments continue to ensure a CUDGC board with 

sufficient expertise to conduct its business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments reflect our province‟s 

commitment to stable and secure financial institutions. Credit 

Union Central and CUDGC have been consulted and are 

satisfied with the proposed amendments. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to move second reading of The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question for the Assembly is the 

motion by the Justice minister that Bill No. 45, The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise on Bill No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment 

Act. It is with appreciation that I have had the opportunity to 

listen to the minister‟s explanation as to why The Credit Union 

Amendment Act is necessary and what purpose it serves. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of concern about 

the financial sector as a result of the turmoil in the United 

States. There is some recognition by many in this province that 

the federal government has been regulating the banks in Canada 

to the extent that what is taking in place in the United States 

certainly will not happen here in Canada, but those same 

individuals wonder about what is taking place within our credit 

union system — a financial system, Mr. Speaker, that the 

majority of Saskatchewan members have got some relationship 

with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister talks about the Act helping to 

secure or to build or to maintain stability within the credit union 

system, these are words that the people of Saskatchewan need 

to hear, want to hear. So, Mr. Speaker, when we see words like 

that — stability within the system — being brought forward by 

the minister and an Act that he argues will provide some 

additional stability in a system that is providing good service to 

the people of Saskatchewan, well of course, Mr. Speaker, we 

feel that this is heading in the right direction. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, obviously it‟s very 

important that if we‟re sending a message to the public about 

the stability of the credit union system, we need to know what 

we are talking about, and we need to provide the examples and 

the information to them that they can have confidence in our 

communications in that regard. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while I think that this Bill may be doing the 

right thing at the right time, any time government starts to 

concern itself with the numbers of people on boards and who 

gets to be on those boards and what the criteria for those 

boards‟ actions are, of course there‟s a need for some questions 

to be asked. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, we in the New Democratic Party 

want to do some consultation. In this case it shouldn‟t take very 

long to do that, and we‟ll have a few questions in committee 

when the Bill finally gets there. We aren‟t ready to send it to 

committee just yet, Mr. Speaker, so therefore I would move that 

debate on Bill No. 45, The Credit Union Amendment Act be 

now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Opposition House Leader has made a 

motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and 

Presumption of Death Act 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Missing Persons and Presumption 

of Death Act. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce a Bill that 

will update the province‟s antiquated legislation with respect to 

the property of missing persons, will also create presumption of 

death provisions and address concerns raised by the provincial 

partnership committee on missing persons. 

 

The provincial partnership committee on missing persons was 

established as a response to concerns arising from the tragedy 

of missing persons in this province. The committee, which 

consists of representatives from 14 organizations throughout the 

province, recently issued a final report that considers 20 areas 

of recommendation. 

 

One recommendation was that a comprehensive legislative 

response be undertaken to deal with the estates of missing 

persons. Families of missing persons have raised concerns 

regarding the lack of a clear process with respect to an interim 

authority to act, and the ability to obtain information. 

 

Families have also had difficulty dealing with the day-to-day 

affairs of a missing person, the declaration of a person as 

missing, and later the presumption of death. The Government of 

Saskatchewan has adopted the committee‟s recommendation 

and with this new Act we are undertaking legislative reform by 

repealing The Absentee Act and proposing new legislation 

regarding missing persons and the presumption of death. 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

The Absentee Act does not adequately address the 

administration of the absentee‟s estate or consider the 

presumption of death of an absentee for the final distribution of 

the estate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will update provisions surrounding 

declaration of a person as missing, appointment of a property 

guardian, and management of the missing person‟s estate. By 

defining missing person, the new Act will establish a 

three-month benchmark to assist the court in making a 

declaration where appropriate. A person may also be declared 

missing prior to three months elapsing if the court is satisfied 

that other circumstances are met. 

 

The new Act will also establish clear provisions with respect to 

the appointment process, with relatives and the Public Guardian 

and Trustee being given copies of the application and also the 

opportunity to object. 

 

The new provisions will also allow the court to place conditions 

and restrictions upon the appointment of a property guardian, 

require the property guardian to file an inventory and provide a 

yearly accounting. They will also allow for the removal of the 

property guardian who fails to comply with his or her duties 

under the Act. 

 

The Bill clarifies the role of the Public Guardian and Trustee in 

the management of the estates of missing persons. The new Act 

creates specific provisions for the Public Guardian and Trustee 

to act without an order where the estate of an alleged missing 

person is valued below a specified monetary limit or where a 

property guardian has not yet appointed and the estate needs to 

be preserved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also establish access to information 

provisions to assist families and the police in obtaining 

information. Often those applying to manage the estate of a 

missing person cannot obtain information without a court order 

and cannot obtain a court order without information regarding 

the estate. Police officers have also expressed difficulty in 

obtaining information for the purpose of a missing person 

investigation. The new Act contains provisions allowing for 

access to information with a court application. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new Bill will create clear presumption of death 

provisions to allow the family of the missing person and the 

court to more effectively deal with estates in the long term. 

New provisions will also consider the actions of an executor 

and an administrator where they have reason to believe that a 

person presumed to be dead is still alive and how property may 

be returned to the person presumed to be dead if he or she is 

later found to be alive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will ensure that the families of missing 

persons are able to address interim and ongoing concerns in an 

effective manner during an incredibly difficult time, and will 

also assist in the ongoing investigation into the location of 

missing persons. This Bill is a step towards establishing a full 

response towards missing persons and also continues this 

government‟s commitment to legislative reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of The 

Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Justice minister that Bill No. 50, The Missing 

Persons and Presumption of Death Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure for me to rise to speak on Bill No. 50, The Missing 

Persons and Presumption of Death Act. And once again I 

appreciate the Minister of Justice clarifying some of the 

explanatory notes and providing us an opportunity to 

understand what the intention of the government is in moving 

forward with this Bill. 

 

There‟s a couple of things that the minister said that make me 

feel pretty good, Mr. Speaker. Number one is that he indicated 

that of course the commission — I think it‟s the commission, 

the group that was consulted on this matter — that by and large 

their recommendations are being adopted by this. The reason I 

say that, Mr. Speaker, is I believe that my colleague from 

Saskatoon Meewasin, the former minister of Justice, established 

that commission or that group, and so to recognize and 

understand that the work that they did is being respected in the 

development of this Act, Mr. Speaker, does make me feel pretty 

good. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no doubt that whenever a 

government must deal with estate matters of any kind, there are 

generally complications. And we need to be sure that matters 

are completely clear for all parties involved in an area of 

potential dispute. So I think, Mr. Speaker, the legal community 

will also be quite pleased to see this. 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, of course any time we 

engage in something new, we need to identify how far it goes. 

Does it go far enough? Does it go too far? We have to identify 

those pieces which of course we will get at with some 

consultation ourselves, and of course through some questions at 

the committee stage. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Act in front of 

us calls for the repeal of The Absentee Act. Mr. Speaker, any 

time you repeal an Act, you are getting rid of some things that 

people have come to know. And one of the things that we‟ll 

have to do in our review of this legislation is of course review 

what is being repealed in getting rid of The Absentee Act and 

how those changes or the loss of that is incorporated back into 

the new legislation. Some parts of it may be gone because 

they‟re redundant, other parts may be gone because of a 

subjective argument. So, Mr. Speaker, we do have a little bit of 

additional work to do here in reviewing the 

about-to-be-repealed Absentee Act. 

 

And secondly, to ensure that those who will most benefit from 

the new Act are in concurrence that the benefits that are desired 

are in fact being able to be delivered. This is an area of 

considerable importance to the public in this province and 

across Canada for that matter, Mr. Speaker. But the importance 

here today is for the people in this province. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, because we still have a considerable 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

amount of work to do on this Bill, I would move that debate on 

Bill No. 50, The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death 

Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Opposition House Leader has made a 

motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 

2008. This Act will provide that for allegations of misconduct, 

the Judicial Council will retain jurisdiction over judges for a 

period of two years after they have resigned or retired. It will 

also provide detail about the valuation and division of a judge‟s 

pension upon a spousal relationship breakdown. 

 

Presently a Provincial Court judge who may be the subject of a 

complaint of misconduct is able to avoid investigation and 

discipline by the Judicial Council by resigning. The Provincial 

Court Act, 1998 only gives the court jurisdiction over current 

judges. 

 

The amendments will provide that proceedings may be 

commenced against a former judge within two years of 

resignation or retirement if the Judicial Council receives a 

complaint of misconduct or otherwise becomes aware of 

possible misconduct by the former judge. This provision is 

consistent with professions legislation in Saskatchewan 

allowing discipline of former members. Examples of such 

legislation are The Legal Profession Act, 1990, The Medical 

Profession Act, 1981, The Pharmacy Act, 1996, and The 

Veterinarians Act, 1987. These Acts provide that proceedings 

must be commenced within two years of the day the person 

ceased to be a member of their professional association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the pension amendments will provide detail about 

the valuation and division of a judge‟s pension on a spousal 

relationship breakdown. The Family Property Act, 1997 

provides that, as a general rule, family property is to be 

distributed equally between spouses on marital breakdown. 

 

The courts have said that pension benefits accruing to spouses 

during the relationship are part of family property. While 

section 31 of The Provincial Court Act, 1998 allows for a 

payment out of the pension fund to satisfy an order made 

pursuant to The Family Property Act, the Act does not deal or 

does not contain more detailed administrative provisions found 

in other pension legislation regarding division on spousal 

relationship breakdown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the recommended amendments are similar to 

provisions in The Pension Benefits Act, 1992. The amendment 

Act will place a requirement on the plan administrator to divide 

the pension in proportion set out in a court order or interspousal 

agreement made pursuant to The Family Property Act. It will 

stipulate that the spouse‟s portion must be transferred to an 

RRSP [Registered Retirement Savings Plan] or a similar 

retirement savings vehicle. It will also specify that the judge‟s 

remaining entitlement may not be less than 50 per cent of the 

total value of the pension entitlement. 

 

If an order or interspousal agreement is filed solely by the 

spouse, the Act will require the plan administrator to give notice 

and an opportunity to object to the plan member. This follows 

the model for division of defined benefit pension in The 

Pension Benefits Act, 1992. The amendments will provide rules 

for division of the pension, depending on whether the plan 

member has retired or is eligible to retire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will ensure proper scrutiny of a 

former judge‟s conduct and will provide certainty respecting the 

division of a judge‟s pension on the breakdown of a spousal 

relationship. I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Question for the Assembly is the 

motion by the Justice minister that Bill No. 51, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure and a privilege to rise on Bill No. 51, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act at second reading, and I thank the 

Minister of Justice for his explanation of this Bill. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that any time that we do work that has to 

do with pensions and benefits and matters that are relating to 

remuneration and those things that assist with ensuring that the 

people who serve the public through government are 

compensated in manners similar to those in other provinces, 

etc., always requires updating and always require a little bit of 

extra work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that this legislation has taken a little while 

to come through the Ministry of Justice. I remember back a 

little over a year ago when I was sitting on the legislative 

instruments committee of the then New Democratic Party 

government, Mr. Speaker, we were talking about legislation that 

would have taken us very much in a similar direction. It wasn‟t 

finished, Mr. Speaker, because additional work needed to be 

done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in principle, the legislation that‟s currently in 

front of us is supportable in principle, Mr. Speaker, because I, at 

this point anyway, I recognize a considerable amount of what‟s 

there from discussions that I‟ve been engaged in previously. 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, there are some clauses that 

appear in this legislation that had not been discussed a year ago 

that have come forward since the new government took office, 

and as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, I believe that our Justice 

critic wants to review the words of the minister in introducing 

the legislation and consult with representatives of the legal 

community, including those in the academic area of the legal 

community, to ensure that the direction that the government is 

taking is indeed the correct direction. 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, I think that this also is one 

of those matters that we would like to see move to committee in 

case some of the consultations that we undertake convince us 

that perhaps some amendments to this legislation might be 

necessary, and were that to be the case, Mr. Speaker, we could 

only do that at the committee stage. 

 

I‟m not trying to prejudge the consultations, Mr. Speaker, but 

knowing that we support the Bill generally in principle, I‟m not 

anticipating a great deal of time to be involved in this. So that 

having been said, Mr. Speaker, I therefore move that debate on 

Bill No. 51, The Provincial Court Amendment Act be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/ 

Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to move second reading of The Vital Statistics Act, 

2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will repeal and replace both The Vital 

Statistics Act, 1995 and the unproclaimed vital statistics Act, 

2007. The Vital Statistics Act is bilingual legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. As such both the English and French language 

versions must be passed by this legislature. 

 

The English language version of The Vital Statistics Act, 2007, 

Bill No. 61, was passed in the spring 2007 session and received 

Royal Assent but has not been proclaimed. The French 

language version was not passed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

As you know, transfer of responsibility for the administration of 

vital statistics from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of 

Crown Corporations through ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] occurred on October 12 of this 

year, with the proclamation of The Vital Statistics 

Administration Transfer Act, Bill No. 28. As a result of the 

administrative transfer, the unproclaimed vital statistics Act, 

2007 needed to be updated. 

 

Also in the course of translating the English version into 

French, a number of other substantive changes were identified 

and as a result The Vital Statistics Act, 2008 came into 

existence. The new Bill recognizes the transfer to the 

Information Services Corporation, and continues to contain 

many of the policy choices and responsibilities on the previous 

Bill. 

 

The collection and maintenance of vital statistics has been an 

important part for a long time of this province‟s history. The 

core legislative principles for the registration of vital statistics 

dates back to 1888, predating the creation of the province of 

Saskatchewan. The current draft embodies the core legislative 

principles that have been carried forward throughout the years 

to the most recent vital statistics legislation that came into force 

in 1995. 

 

That today I‟m here introducing new legislation modernizing 

but still maintaining the major principles of the original 

legislation, goes to show how important vital statistics are. 

Birth, marriage, and indeed death are the cornerstones of 

statistics in Saskatchewan. The vital statistics registry is 

responsible for that information, and so we‟d better make sure 

that we collect, record, and use the information in the right way 

for this day and age. 

 

And how do we make sure we do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

First we recognize that today‟s world is much different than 

1888. It‟s even different than 1995. Hospitals and funeral 

directors don‟t use the same processes that they did in the past, 

nor should they, since technology has advanced so much in just 

the past 13 years. What used to be done on paper is now done 

electronically, and we can use new technologies to streamline 

the process so it runs as efficiently as possible. 

 

The need for vital statistics legislation is something that isn‟t 

going away. Just as babies were being born and people were 

getting married in 1888, babies are being born and people are 

getting married today and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, babies will be 

born and people will marry in 2088 as well. 

 

That means that this is important that we get this legislation 

right, and to do that we need to consult with the experts who 

deal with vital statistics on a daily basis. Most of those 

consultations were done when the policy choices were made in 

the 2007 Act which forms the basis of the 2008 Act. The Vital 

Statistics Act, 2008 reflects the hard work and effort of those 

people who were consulted previously, including the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, the Funeral and Cremation Services Council of 

Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan Justice, among others. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank them all for their 

contributions. 

 

The Vital Statistics Act, 2008 will modernize the existing vital 

statistics Act, 1995. The new Act will allow for electronic 

registration and notices. The new version of the Act also 

reflects with greater clarity the way in which vital events are 

recorded by funeral directors, hospitals, and the vital statistics 

registry. Because the information we collect is important, we 

take our stewardship of that data seriously — especially when it 

comes to privacy protection. The new Act also provides 

transparency regarding the right of access to records and the 

rules in which personal information in vital statistics 

registration documents are collected, used, and disclosed. 

 

With the proclamation of The Vital Statistics Act, 2008, 

Saskatchewan‟s disclosure policy will be more transparent than 

the legislation you‟ll find in most other provinces and 

territories. The proposed Bill will reflect the transfer of vital 

statistics to the Information Services Corporation, streamline 

vital event registration processes, create transparent rules with 

regard to access to information contained in vital statistics 

registrations, and enshrine rules governing the collection, use, 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

and disclosure of vital statistics information — which includes 

personal health information contained in the statement of birth, 

stillbirth, marriage, and death in the records held by the 

registrar — and adopted processes and protections consistent 

with the privacy law, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And it would also enshrine in the legislation the persons who 

will be eligible to obtain certificates and other documents 

pertaining to registered vital events, create authority in the 

legislation for vital statistics to enter into information exchange 

and service provider agreements with other provincial and 

federal ministries and agencies, provide authority for electronic 

vital event notification processes, recognizes co-parents on the 

statement of live birth and stillbirth for children born in 

non-traditional family structures or born through assisted 

reproduction technologies, expanding the methods available to 

the registrar for the permanent retention of vital event 

documents to include scanning of the records into electronic 

databases, replace the requirement for the minister to table an 

annual report before this Legislative Assembly with the 

requirement for the registrar to annually publish statistical 

information respecting the live births, deaths, stillbirths, 

marriages in the preceding calendar year, and also provide the 

registrar with authority to correct an error or omission or fact on 

a statement that has already been registered. 

 

Paper used to be the way records were kept. First we used pen 

and ink and then typewriters, then we used computers to make 

the records, and today the records themselves can be stored 

electronically. This legislation reflects the reality of technology 

and the benefits that technology can provide for record 

maintenance and retention. The new legislation facilitates the 

use of technology to make the process more efficient. We‟ve 

removed the requirement of the district registrars. We‟ve also 

allowed electronic registration and electronic storage of vital 

statistic records. This enables us to keep information longer and 

in a more secure manner. 

 

We‟ve also not only recognized changes in technology but also 

changes in family structure. Vital statistics legislation has 

served the people of Saskatchewan since 1888. I know I was 

speaking to the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford who said he 

was reading the legislation last night, and he knows that this has 

been around a long time and served our province very well. But 

times do change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With the changing times 

comes the need for the update to The Vital Statistics Act‟s 

language and its policy to ensure Saskatchewan‟s legislation 

remains aligned with the times and the vital statistics legislation 

of other jurisdictions. This legislation achieves these goals. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank the 

employees of ISC for taking on these new responsibilities with 

such enthusiasm. I know other jurisdictions are watching what 

we were doing in Saskatchewan. I would also like to thank 

previous members who have served as minister of Health and 

minister in charge of the Information Services Corporation as 

they began this work, and I‟m just completing it for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move today second reading of The 

Vital Statistics Act, 2008. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Crown Corporations that Bill No. 

54, The Vital Statistics Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

thank you for recognizing me to speak here at second reading of 

Bill No. 54, The Vital Statistics Act. Mr. Speaker, I‟m very 

pleased to speak on this Act. As a former minister of Health, I 

view the work of the vital statistics people, the department, 

those that have been involved in this over the years, as being 

incredibly important to the well-being of this province. 

 

The minister made it very clear in his remarks why maintaining 

vital statistics are important. And I don‟t have to say to those 

watching, anybody that‟s ever had a need for having some of 

their information from vital statistics knows how important it is 

that that information was collected properly and is available to 

be distributed properly. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it‟s also the protection of 

that information that‟s important. And this is one of the reasons 

why the Department of Health, the former Department of 

Health, now the Ministry of Health, is one of the last 

departments — or now ministries — within government to 

transfer its data collection over to the Information Services 

Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health information is protected under the HIPA — 

H-I-P-A — The Health Information Protection Act. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the public has a right to know that the health 

information that is collected on them is fully protected. That‟s 

what HIPA is all about. So, Mr. Speaker, whenever health 

information and vital statistics and that have the capacity of 

crossing, well of course, Mr. Speaker, we need as government 

to assure the public that of course their information is certainly 

protected. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we know that the collection of 

vital stats and the utilization of vital stats is something that 

people on a regular basis will want access to. You lose your 

birth certificate; you need to, as we‟ve done in the past, update 

our health cards — those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. Vital 

statistics, collection of information, is very helpful to the public 

and to government in that regard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, technology has proven itself in the health system, 

and it‟s proving itself in so many different ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am one of the older generation now. I hate to 

think of myself as being older, an older member of our society. 

I still think of myself as being around 35 years old, able to play 

football with absolutely anybody. But I know that‟s not true, 

Mr. Speaker. I just feel that way. 

 

But when it comes to technology, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t have the 

ability here to plug something in, although the technology is in 

this room, and google up any information that I want. But I was 

thinking that I would love to be googling right now comments 

that members opposite made when they were in opposition 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

about money that government was spending on the Information 

Services Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember very, very clearly when they were 

firmly, firmly opposed to any of this movement to change the 

way land titles was operating or transferring data into this huge 

corporate structure, Mr. Speaker, for the collection of 

information. And now of course, Mr. Speaker, here they are a 

year into their mandate and they‟re transferring the largest data 

collection base into Information Services Corporation. Mr. 

Speaker, it is very interesting how indeed a little bit of time 

changes the way people think. 

 

Now I might not, as an older person, have the full capacity to 

adapt to all this new technology. But certainly government 

does, Mr. Speaker, and government has adapted well to 

information technology maintenance and development. And the 

new government, Mr. Speaker, who apparently were very old 

when they were on this side of the Chamber and opposing all 

this technology development, has now on that side of the 

Chamber fully embraced, fully embraced the Information 

Services Corporation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — So, Mr. Speaker, the point that I want to make 

quite clearly is, obviously the development of ISC was a good 

move on behalf of government. It was the right thing to do. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it continues to be the right thing to do to 

ensure that all of the data is being centralized and maintained in 

one location. 

 

What this legislation does, Mr. Speaker, is it effects the transfer 

of data from what was being kept by the Department — or now 

Ministry — of Health, to Information Services Corporation. 

The Act doesn‟t necessarily change things; it effects the 

transfer. Health was taking care of it; now ISC is taking care of 

it. 

 

We will want to, Mr. Speaker, ensure that this transfer ensures 

the protection of information for where privacy is appropriate, 

and that ISC is fully, properly financed, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

that they can do what it is that they are being asked to do. 

 

There will be some questions that need to be asked, a little more 

research that the opposition needs to do. But, Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s no doubt, there‟s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that what the 

government is doing with this legislation is continuing the 

work, the good work that has been in process for quite a number 

of years now, started by the previous government. 

 

So given that we have a little more work to do, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move that debate on Bill No. 54, The Vital Statistics Act 

be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 55 — The Vital Statistics Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of CIC. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise today to move second reading of 

The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008. 

 

I listened intently to the member opposite speak about the 

Information Services Corporation and I‟m glad that he 

recognizes that this government is committed to running the 

Crown corporations in a business-like fashion. The large 

unbudgeted losses that happened under their term are a thing of 

the past and will not be something that this government 

undertakes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we will do is recognize good ideas when we see them. 

Moving vital statistics from Health to ISC is a good idea and 

we‟re acting upon that. And we will move in that direction to 

increase efficiencies and to ensure that this corporation remains 

in the black and remains able to pay a dividend to the people of 

Saskatchewan — not the red ink that we saw from members 

opposite. Those days are gone, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I rise today to talk about The Vital Statistics Act, 2008, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, which is bilingual legislation. That Bill 

contains consequential amendments to bilingual statutes, like 

The Marriage Act, The Adoption Act, and The Change of Name 

Act. However, consequential amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

have also been made to the English-only legislation. And so The 

Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 is 

required to ensure the new vital statistics Act applies to those 

English language Acts and makes them compatible with the 

2008 legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I am pleased to move second reading of 

The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of the Crown Corporations that Bill 

No. 55, The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 

2008 be now read a second time. 

 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise on Bill No. 55, The Vital Statistics 

Consequential Amendments Act. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to say a few words and I will say only a few words 

on this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Indeed this Bill does have to go in concert with The Vital 

Statistics Act, Bill No. 54. Since we‟ve adjourned debate on 54, 

we will have to do the same with Bill 55, because they should 

be moving forward at the same pace. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

would move that debate on Bill No. 55, The Vital Statistics 

Consequential Amendments Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 



November 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 52 — The Trustee Act, 2008 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Trustee Act, 2008. This new Act 

modernizes and updates the legislation respecting the 

responsibility and powers of trustees. Although many of the 

basic principles covered by legislation have not changed, the 

legislation has not kept up with changes in the law and in 

society over the past century. The new Act will be easier to 

understand and more relevant for trustees, those who advise 

trustees, and those who deal with trustees. 

 

Trustee legislation facilitates the creation and administration of 

trusts. Prior to the enactment of trustee legislation, trustees were 

limited by the powers conferred upon them by the trust 

instrument. Thus trust instruments had to authorize all of the 

actions a trustee might be expected to take in administering the 

trust property. 

 

The current trustee Act was originally enacted as a territorial 

ordinance in 1903 before Saskatchewan became a province, and 

is based on 19th century English legislation. The current Act is 

very dated in both its language and content. 

 

The proposed amendments are based on recommendations 

made in a major report by the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan in 2002. The new Act addresses the fact that 

trustees are in a fiduciary position, administering property on 

behalf of another individual or group. This Act includes a 

duty-of-care provision and provides that professional trustees 

will be subject to a standard of care that relates to their 

profession or business. 

 

Although a general conflict of interest rule exists in the case law 

as a deterrent to trustees from profiting from their position, it is 

not included in the current Act. Trustees must be aware of 

conflicts of interest and must govern themselves accordingly. 

The new Act includes provisions that address the conflicts of 

interest that trustees may face. 

 

Trustees often administer trusts for long periods of time and are 

required to make substantial decisions regarding the trust. They 

need the flexibility to be able to take a variety of actions with 

respect to the trust. Trustees currently lack express statutory 

authority to undertake some basic actions such as obtaining 

insurance for trust property or maintaining or repairing property 

that is part of a trust. The new Act will provide trustees with the 

necessary powers to administer a trust. 

 

The provisions for the removal and replacement of trustees 

require changes. In some circumstances a change in trustee may 

be necessary before the trust runs out. The current Act is 

unclear about the process and in what circumstance a trustee 

may be appointed or removed. The legislation should address 

situations where a trustee should not or cannot continue to act 

as a trustee. 

 

The provisions for appointment and discharge of trustees‟ 

duties are being expanded to address situations where it is 

necessary to remove or replace a trustee. 

 

This Act abolishes the rule against perpetuities and 

accumulations. And if you didn‟t go to law school, you won‟t 

even know what those things are. Nonetheless they are things 

that should be dealt with by the legislature. The rule against 

perpetuities is currently part of Saskatchewan law, dates back to 

the 17th century. It was devised to keep the English aristocracy 

from tying up its real property indefinitely. The complexity of 

the rule against perpetuities and its various modifications and 

exceptions creates a situation where most laypersons and many 

lawyers do not understand it and can run afoul of it unwittingly. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Saskatchewan Law Reform Commission stated in a report 

in 1987 that the rule against perpetuities is perhaps the most 

notorious example of lawyers‟ law, quote. The commission 

concluded that the rule creates more problems than it solves and 

recommends its abolition. During the consultation process 

respecting this new legislation, persons in the Saskatchewan 

legal community who practise in the area of trust law requested 

we include the abolition of the rule as part of the reform of The 

Trustee Act. 

 

The Trustee Act, 2008 will respond to the need to modernize the 

legislation to reflect current trustee practices and principles. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to move the second reading of The 

Trustee Act, 2008. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 52, The 

Trustee Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise on Bill No. 52, The Trustee Act and I want to 

thank the Minister of Justice for providing us with some 

explanation with regard to this Bill. 

 

I must say that on my first reading of the legislation, I 

developed some immediate questions, not the least of which 

was sort of the motivation behind it, and so the minister has 

provided some direction in that regard. 

 

I had to think twice when the minister made his comments 

about if you didn‟t go to law school, you wouldn‟t understand 

certain things. And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think the minister is 

aware that at one point in my education I was in law school. It 

was the best coffee on the university, Mr. Speaker. I was at the 

law school cafeteria and had coffee over there. It was absolutely 

wonderful, and I still don‟t understand some of the things that 

the minister has said even though I was in law school for a 

couple hours once. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I think that legislation does indeed need 

to be modernized. We need to seek advice when we are 

modernizing legislation, especially where human lives, quality 

of life are concerned. Trust relationships are indeed some of the 

most important ones that we must look after. And therefore 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2008 

modernizing this legislation is important, and we need to ensure 

that those to whom we are seeking advice understand the 

various needs that go with that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I was not previously aware, on having read the 

legislation, that indeed the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan‟s 2002 recommendations were what was behind 

some of the changes, modernization changes that have been 

brought forward. I have a great deal of respect for the Law 

Reform Commission here in Saskatchewan, so I am pleased that 

those recommendations have been incorporated into this 

legislation. I‟m now going to review the reports of the 

commission back in 2002 before further judging the legislation 

and talk to a number of experts in the fields of trusts, Mr. 

Speaker, before proclaiming one way or the other on this Bill. 

 

I do again thank the minister for some of the explanation. I‟m 

sure that he will be able to provide additional information when 

required by members of the opposition. So at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, given that there‟s now additional work that needs to be 

done in this regard, I would move that debate on Bill No. 52, 

The Trustee Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 56 — The Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 

2008/Loi de 2008 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Trustee Act, 2008 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 

2008. This Act consequentially amends the three bilingual Acts 

that adopt the investment principles of The Trustee Act. In each 

case, the amendment makes a change to refer to the new 

legislation. These changes are made to ensure consistency with 

The Trustee Act, 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Justice minister that Bill No. 56, The Trustee 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 56, The Trustee 

Consequential Amendment Act, and I again thank the Minister 

of Justice for his explanation of the Bill. 

 

The fact that we are talking about consequential amendments to 

an Act that has not yet been studied, reviewed or passed by this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, would indicate that indeed we can‟t 

allow this Bill to proceed any more quickly than the Bill that 

preceded it, Bill No. 52, The Trustee Act. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, until such time as our work proceeds on Bill No. 52, I 

would move that debate on Bill No. 56, The Trustee 

Consequential Amendment Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

now being near to the close of day and the end of the second 

readings, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

made a motion to adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:08.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1581 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1582 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1582 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1582 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Accessibility to Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1583 

 Saskatchewan Economic Growth  

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1583 

 Bicycles for Humanity Fundraiser 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1583 

 North Central Family Centre Halloween Party 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1584 

 Moose Jaw Pre-Health Professions Club 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1584 

 Reaction to Speech from the Throne 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1584 

 Volunteers in Northern Communities 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1585 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Post-Secondary Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1585 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1585 

 Student Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1586 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1586 

 Post-Secondary Education for First Nations and Métis Students 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1588 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1588 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1588 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1589 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1589 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1590 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1590 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1591 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1591 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

 Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1592 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

 Bill No. 42 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1593 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

 



 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1594 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1595 

 Bill No. 48 — The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1596 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1596 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1596 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1597 

 Bill No. 44 — The Agreements of Sale Cancellation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1598 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1599 

 Bill No. 50 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1599 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1600 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1601 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1601 

 Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1602 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1603 

 Bill No. 55 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1604 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1604 

 Bill No. 52 — The Trustee Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1605 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1605 

 Bill No. 56 — The Trustee Consequential Amendments Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Trustee Act, 2008 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1606 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1606 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


