




















































Hansard: May 07, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 39A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 7, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1239 

 May 7, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour to introduce four 

distinguished guests seated in your gallery. These individuals 

are members of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the 

Saskatchewan Provincial Council. And I‟d ask them to wave or 

stand as I acknowledge them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d first like to introduce Ed Lysyk of Regina. Ed 

is the president of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the 

Saskatchewan Provincial Council. Orest Gawdyda of Regina — 

Orest is a director at large of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, 

the Saskatchewan Provincial Council. Seated next to Orest is 

Orest Warnyca of Regina also. He is president of the Ukrainian 

Canadian Congress, the Regina branch. And also in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Eugene Krenosky of Regina. Eugene is 

the past president of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, 

Saskatchewan Provincial Council and now serves as a director 

at large of the Regina branch. I‟d ask all members to welcome 

these distinguished gentlemen to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I as well would like to join 

with my colleague across the way in welcoming these 

representatives of the Ukrainian community — Orest Gawdyda, 

Ed Lysyk, Orest Warnyca, and Eugene Krenosky to our 

legislature here. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 

the west gallery is a group of 14 grade 3 and grade 4 students 

from Lipton School. Mr. Speaker, maybe they could give us a 

little bit of a wave. The gallery is quite full. They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Marni LaBrash, and their 

bus driver, Ms. Janet Samoisette. 

 

I met with them just a few minutes ago, and I must say they 

were very well prepared. They had a series of questions. We 

had our own little question period. The questions were 

excellent. I hope the answers were appropriate. And I would ask 

all members of the Assembly to welcome our grade 3 and 4 

students from Lipton. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the legislature today, 36 grade 10 students from the 

Melville Comprehensive School; their teacher, Perry 

Ostapowich; and Gladys Kohlenberg and Abe Weiler, bus 

driver. 

 

And I want all my colleagues to notice how well-dressed and 

well-behaved this group is. And I think that goes back to Mr. 

Ostapowich being a very faithful teacher out there, bringing all 

his groups into the legislature and making them aware of how 

the legislature functions. So I would ask all members to 

welcome this group here today, and welcome to your 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to introduce a former student, that is someone 

who went to school at one time a few years ago. My buddy, 

Fred Kress, is seated in the east gallery, and good to see you 

here, Fred. 

 

I know from long experience and association with my good 

friend Fred that he has a keen interest and always follows what 

goes on around politics and the legislature and follows our 

careers quite closely. So I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming Fred Kress. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in 

support of a petition for new child care spaces. And the petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 more new child care 

spaces in Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Prince 

Albert, Arborfield, Saskatoon, and Spruce Home. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

that calls upon the government to support Station 20, and the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And this is signed by citizens throughout the city of Saskatoon, 

including people on Jackson Avenue, Leddy Crescent, Murphy 

Crescent, MacDonald Crescent, Spadina Crescent, Calder 

Crescent, Highbury Court, Schwager Crescent, Munroe, East 

Heights, Clavet, Mr. Speaker, William Avenue, Bayfield 

Crescent, 112th Street, as well as the 4040 8th Street East, Mr. 

Speaker. I so present to the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition signed by residents of 

The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, the petition calls for the 

immediate reduction of the education portion of property taxes 

for Saskatchewan families. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Call on the Legislative Assembly to be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately implement its promise to 

reduce the education portion of property taxes for 

Saskatchewan families by doubling the property tax 

rebate. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions today in 

opposition to the government‟s Bill 5, The Public Service 

Essential Services Act, and Bill 6, An Act to amend The Trade 

Union Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of St. Walburg, Meota, 

Paradise Hill, Livelong, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Grenfell, 

Hafford, North Battleford, and Meadow Lake. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on behalf of Moose 

Jaw residents, and it speaks to the shabby way that employees 

and our community was treated with the lack of consultation on 

the abrupt closure of the South Hill liquor store. And the 

petition reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of my Moose Jaw 

constituents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Wall of Fame Inductees in The Battlefords 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

Saturday, May 3, I had the pleasure of once again attending the 

induction ceremonies for the Frontier Mall Wall of Fame in 

North Battleford. 

 

Three outstanding citizens of northwest Saskatchewan were 

added to the Wall of Fame. These three are: Marjorie Tatchell, 

who lent her musical talents tirelessly to the North Battleford 

City Kinsmen Band, St Paul‟s Anglican Church, and The 

Battlefords music festival, for her significant contributions to 

music and the community; Phoebe Cutbush, for her 

contributions to music and education within the community; 

and John Henry Fineday, a young man who recently passed 

away after a battle with leukemia, for his contributions to The 

Battlefords and the province through his multidisciplinary 

artwork. 

 

The Wall of Fame was established in February 2000 as a 

vehicle to engage the community in honouring its citizens. It 

provides recognition of residents who have made significant 

contributions to The Battlefords and area in the fields of art, 

business, community service, education, entertainment, 

government, philanthropy, and sports. 

 

I ask the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to join me in congratulating 

the 2008 inductees for their lifetime of contributions and to the 

organizers, especially Linda Lewis, the event master of 

ceremonies, and Tamara Sonmor, marketing director of the 

Frontier Mall, for making the event itself such a success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

South. 

 

Radiothon Raises Money for Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. $326,204 — 

$326,204 was raised for improvements toward the intensive 

care unit at the Moose Jaw Union Hospital during a 36-hour 

radiothon last Thursday and Friday. 

 

Hundreds of donors called to pledge in funding for the new 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

medical equipment in the intensive care unit and for the ICU 

[intensive care unit] family room area of the Moose Jaw Union 

Hospital. Pledges came from citizens, from businesses, from 

medical and hospital staff, and from the Kinsmen Telemiracle 

Foundation, all who gave generously for the cause. 

 

The radiothon was organized by the Moose Jaw hospital 

foundation and broadcast over CHAB radio. During the 

radiothon, members of the Five Hills Health Region heard 

testimony of the dedication of the medical staff and former 

hospital users who expressed appreciation for the work done in 

the hospital and the needed upgrades for the ICU. 

 

Thank you to Kelly McElree, the executive director and all the 

members of the Moose Jaw Health Foundation board for the 

organization of the radiothon and to CHAB radio, the 

management, and staff for their dedicated efforts in the 36-hour 

radiothon — and of course to the citizens of the Five Hills 

Health Region for the $326,204 success. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Teachers Role Models in Physical Activity 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s my 

pleasure to tell you about a group of teachers from Moose Jaw‟s 

Peacock Collegiate who are setting a good example for physical 

activity. A current hot topic for our youth is physical inactivity, 

so 13 of the school‟s teachers decided to become role models in 

physical activity. 

 

The group started out by making a pledge to walk 10,000 steps 

per day. Then the idea to participate in the Regina Police 

Service Half-Marathon, a 22-kilometre run, became the 

challenge. The group had a 12-week training program to 

prepare for the race, and it was a huge commitment to go from 

rookie runners to a half-marathon in less than three months. But 

that makes the feat all that more impressive. 

 

The highlighting of physical activity has made the students very 

aware of what kind of dedication the teachers have and the 

importance of setting goals. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all 

members join me in congratulating this dedicated group of 

teachers from Peacock Collegiate for leading and teaching by 

example and for truly walking — or should I say running — the 

talk. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Yorkton Couple Author Western Books 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yorkton is known 

for many things, and arts and culture is no exception. Local 

western writer, Elmer McInnes, along with his wife and 

co-author, Lauretta Ritchie-McInnes, regularly spend their 

holidays researching libraries and other information sources 

throughout the Western United States and Canada in search of 

facts for their next literary project. 

 

Elmer McInnes began researching and writing 15 years ago, 

Mr. Speaker, and has material for a number of books. But 

according to his wife Lauretta, things really began to happen 

and take shape when she became involved. Elmer agrees behind 

every successful man is a dang good gal. 

 

Elmer‟s first book, Gamblers and Gunmen Along the Northern 

Pacific Railroad, was self-published last year and was very well 

received. He has now released his second book, Bud Ballew: 

Legendary Oklahoma Lawman, this time through American 

publisher Two Dot/Globe Pequot and has already received 

invitations to do speaking engagements in the US [United 

States]. 

 

Mr. McInnes is now halfway through writing his third book, 

this time about one-time North West Mounted Police officer 

Walter Ross, one time stationed in Yorkton. 

 

I would ask all members of the Assembly to help me 

congratulate Elmer and Lauretta in his latest project and wish 

him all success in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Autism Services Spring Gala 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 3, I along 

with members from Saskatoon Centre, Saskatoon Fairview, 

Saskatoon Nutana, Saskatoon Meewasin, Saskatoon Southeast, 

and Saskatoon Sutherland had the honour of attending the 

Autism Services 10th annual spring gala at TCU Place. The 

gala included a champagne reception, silent auction, a fantastic 

dinner, and an outstanding musical performance by Canadian 

vocalist Ibomeka. Thank you. 

 

The gala was a fundraising opportunity for Autism Services, 

which is a non-profit organization that provides many services 

to the Saskatoon community such as group homes, home-based 

services for children, and social and educational support for 

individuals with autism and their families. 

 

I would like to congratulate the organizing committee as well as 

executive director Shannon Friesen and the staff, board, and 

volunteers of Autism Services for organizing this successful 

event. The money raised will go a long way to help those with 

autism in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to highlight the support to 

Autism Services by the Safeway in Market Mall, who have 

chosen Autism Services as its designated charity to support, and 

I had the privilege of sitting with two managers from that store 

location during the dinner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would ask all members of this legislature to join me in 

congratulating Autism Services for hosting another successful 

gala and to thank them for their hard work in the Saskatoon 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Tale of the Missing Maps 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to rise today to tell 

members of this House the tale of the missing maps. As you are 

aware, Bill 25 was scheduled to be up in committee last night. 

In order to better help them understand the Bill, the member for 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote requested copies of the maps 

relevant to the Bill. Maps were promptly provided by the 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

However yesterday the panicked member for Regina Walsh 

Acres contacted the minister‟s office four times to try and get 

another copy of these maps. Hours later the minister was again 

accosted by the member who again demanded a map, saying 

she had left them in her constituency office. This might be a 

good time to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the office of the 

member in question is just minutes from this building. In the 

hour she spent hassling the minister‟s office, she could have had 

someone go retrieve them, have them faxed over, or if so 

inclined, have them sent over by courier pigeon, but she didn‟t, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That evening in committee the truth came out. It turned out that 

the incompetent NDP [New Democratic Party] had lost the 

maps. We can only assume that, like thousands of other public 

documents, the maps ended up in a box in the basement of one 

of those former ministers — maybe the member for Regina 

Lakeview. Maybe the member for The Battlefords strayed off 

with them or maybe the member for Saskatoon Massey Place 

has them locked away in his secret safe. We‟ll never know, Mr. 

Speaker. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the tale of the missing maps. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Keepers of the Land 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In my continuing 

effort to highlight the northern keepers of the land, I‟d like to 

highlight Ken Larsen of Buffalo Narrows. Ken started in 1952 

when he was seven years old to fish and trap for his dad, Olaf 

Larsen. By 14 years of age he had his own trapping and fishing 

business, and he trapped northwest of Cree Lake for 30 

consecutive years. 

 

In 1967 he participated in the centennial year dog mushing 

competition in Prince Albert and actually graced the cover of 

the Prince Albert worker festival brochure for 15 years because 

of his impressive dog team. 

 

Ken also raised eight children, living off the land. His message 

to us, and I quote: 

 

My message [has always been] I‟ve always believed that 

the people are the government and the governments are the 

people but lately the [Fort] McMurray Oil Patch and other 

exploration companies are destroying trap lines and some 

lakes are being acid killed. People don‟t know about it. 

The Government knows the lakes are being harmed and 

nothing is being done about it. 

 

The cancer rate in Fort Chipewyan [Alberta] is high and 

this affects all of us so we need to stop just talking about 

our children but really begin to protect them. It‟s really 

clear that everyone is disrespecting our environment. We 

need to wake up and we need to stop Institutions from 

brainwashing our children by telling them that trapping 

and fishing are not valuable. 

 

If I say something it is because I‟ve seen it — not heard it. 

 

The Athabasca Tar Sands were there when our 

grandmothers paddled the river and those tar sands shall 

be there after I‟ve gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to hear the words of Mr. Larsen and we 

need to pay attention to his advice. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Seventh-day Adventist Centre Opens in Biggar 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March I had the 

pleasure of attending the grand opening of the Seventh-day 

Adventist Church Community Centre and Chapel in Biggar, and 

took part along with the mayor of Biggar, Ray Sadler, head 

elder, Don Sinclair, and Stephen Little, pastor of Saskatoon 

Central Seventh-Day Adventist Church in cutting the ribbon. 

 

Members of the church included Hazel Weber, Don and 

Marlene Sinclair, Marge and Mike Fortney, Doug and Fran 

Gorbenko, and Jason, Erica, Raine, and Wynter Weber, put on 

activities and chapel for anyone that wishes to drop by and join 

them. 

 

At this time the centre is open three days a week and includes 

activities such as gospel and singalong, kids‟ story hour, 

suppers, and bible study. There are plans to hold a number of 

health programs such as the Break Free program aimed at 

helping people quit smoking, and programs on depression. 

 

The centre and church is a positive addition to the downtown 

core of the community of Biggar and I‟d like to thank the 

members for inviting me to the opening and wish them luck in 

their endeavours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Housing Crisis 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is a growing 

sense across this province that people are being left out of the 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1243 

economic boom they see going on all around them. 

 

Two months ago after cutting the budget for housing, the Social 

Services minister then admitted that there is in fact an 

affordable housing crisis. Her response to the crisis, she struck a 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the crisis is happening now and it appears to only 

be getting worse. The government needs to act now. Renters 

can‟t wait months for a report and then more months before any 

action comes of it. To the minister: what assurance can she give 

renters for action now before the crisis gets worse? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we are committed to making sure that Saskatchewan is ready 

for growth and that we avoid problems that other provinces are 

experiencing where rapid growth has made it very difficult for 

individuals and families. 

 

However becoming minister, Mr. Speaker, the previous 

government, the NDP, had put a number of programs in place 

just prior to the election — on the eve of an election — in hopes 

of gaining votes. We didn‟t know if those programs would 

work, Mr. Speaker, so it is only responsible to monitor the 

programs that the NDP had put into place. Obviously that 

member recognizes that their own initiatives are failing, and 

that‟s why I‟ve asked the task force to take a look at the issue 

once again and come forward with more recommendations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, that member put the task force in 

place after cutting the housing budget by $5 million, their first 

at bat, Mr. Speaker. In north central we now have a saying that 

everything sells. Houses are selling at record rates, but renters 

are footing the bill through higher rents. Since May 1, May 1, 

15 individuals or families have come to my office looking for 

help in coping with upcoming rent increases. 

 

A single mom, eight months pregnant, was told this week that 

she would be evicted at the end of this month because her rental 

house had been sold. She was able to get another month 

because of a technicality, but she still can‟t find a home even 

though she‟s about to have a baby. 

 

How does the minister justify sitting there on a $1.5 billion 

mountain of money while cutting money for housing? And what 

does she expect renters in crisis to do right now, bunk up with 

the task force until the report comes out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, our government already 

announced the largest increase in the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement. Seventy per cent of the clients that are 

using that supplement, that are relying on them, are single 

parents. Mr. Speaker, we recognize that single parents need 

help, and we have stepped up to the plate, and we have 

addressed that problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can that member please tell me why Bob Pringle, 

which was a former NDP Social Services minister, had this to 

say on March 18, 2008, and I quote: 

 

Well if I look back to three years ago when we had an 

independent study done at the Saskatoon food bank, I was 

saying clearly to government [and that would have been 

the NDP, Mr. Speaker] that the clients at the food bank 

were spending 70% of their income on shelter. There‟s 

nothing left and the issue wasn‟t really addressed. So I 

think that we‟re . . . there was some work done in a flurry 

before the last election but I think the problem with 

housing is it‟s a longer-term proposition and you have to 

keep up as you‟re going. So with this rapid boom we had a 

crisis before then and this just . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, her first response in their first 

budget was cutting the housing budget by $5 million. I think 

that speaks more about their priorities. And when they‟re 

caught, then they move to the task force. 

 

But during the election campaign, the Sask Party refused to 

consider any form of rental rebate. They preferred to stick their 

heads in the sand and hope that their half-hearted property tax 

plan would somehow trickle down to renters. Their Premier 

called it, and I quote, “a market obligation.” And he argued that 

quote, “„If we can make permanent property tax relief in 

Saskatchewan, it‟s going to lower the cost of housing, whether 

it‟s rental or principal residences . . .‟” 

 

And now instead of a permanent solution, the Sask Party budget 

gave homeowners just enough for a half-eaten pizza, and the 

crisis for renters just got worse. That‟s not even trickle-down 

economics, Mr. Speaker; it‟s open the faucet and nothing comes 

out. 

 

To the minister: her task force and her government didn‟t do 

anything to help struggling people pay last month‟s rent. What 

help will they provide when this month‟s rent comes due, or 

will it be another round of all support short of anything 

resembling real help? Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, to explain this cut that 

the member keeps referring to — and I have explained it in the 

past — it was based on the Sask Housing Corporation‟s 

estimate of the cost of operating all of the housing programs. 

 

The provincial contribution towards the housing programs is 10 

million, 10.4 million, which is 5.1 million less, but it is due to 

the timing of the capital projects. It does not change any of the 

projects that are going forward. It does not change any of the 

money available to the present allocation to any of the programs 

that we have in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have dedicated through an expression of 

interest, there will be $47 million given to more housing and 

housing projects. That call for expression went out. The 

responses came in in December, Mr. Speaker. In addition, 26.4 

million for Aboriginal and Métis housing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Family Support Services in Humboldt 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I guess there really is no justice for the people of 

Humboldt. Not only will people living in and around Humboldt 

go without court services, they may soon have to travel to 

Saskatoon for family support services as well. 

 

Partners for Rural Family Support is a family support CBO 

[community-based organization] that works in the community 

of Humboldt and the surrounding area. The funding they 

received from Health Canada has run out, and they are on the 

brink of being forced to close their doors. 

 

To the minister: has she contacted her cousins in Ottawa, and 

will they be reversing their decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am meeting with the 

gal who is looking after Partners on Friday, and we‟ll have that 

discussion then. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope, when she meets 

with the gal, that there is something productive that comes out 

of it. Mr. Speaker, Partners works with families to provide 

health and safe environments, free from violence. They work 

with victims of family violence, but they also work with youth 

to encourage non-violent approaches to difficult situations. 

They are very concerned about what the loss of service will 

mean for people in their community if they don‟t receive core 

funding. 

 

Amy Jurgens, the program co-ordinator, said, “I truly believe 

the people of rural Saskatchewan deserve the same 

opportunities for equal treatment when it comes to the services 

this province provides.” Mr. Speaker, this opposition believes 

that also. With over a billion and a half dollars in the bank, will 

the minister step up and help the people of Humboldt before it‟s 

too late? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 

during the prior responses, I‟m meeting with the woman who 

operates Partners — and I‟m sorry her name is just eluding me 

right at this time — on Friday. 

 

However this government is committed to helping families and 

females for sexual assault and domestic violence. We put an 

additional $1 million in this budget for this year, which is an 

unprecedented increase for facilities and transition houses for 

women who are exposed to domestic violence and abuse. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister should know 

that transition houses are mostly in larger communities in this 

province, and Partners is an organization that delivers services 

in rural Saskatchewan, and this is a difficult area especially 

when we come to issues of violence. And, Mr. Speaker, what 

we have to look at, since this government‟s been elected, 

Humboldt has lost or is at risk of losing the Court of Queen‟s 

Bench, family counselling services, family violence 

intervention services, youth education services including 

anti-bullying education, anger management sessions, parenting 

classes, and suicide intervention workshops. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. Mr. Speaker, the question is 

simple. For the minister, with over a billion and a half dollars 

sitting in reserves and more money coming in daily, will she 

step up to the plate and support the community of Humboldt 

before it‟s too late? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — You know it‟s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that all of a sudden that member is standing up and 

defending Partners when my ministry is maintaining the 

funding that they had in place for Partners. And I‟m meeting 

with them on Friday to see what more they need or what they 

want to talk about. So we maintained the NDP funding. 

 

But what is Humboldt receiving over and above what the NDP 

would do? They are getting a brand new Highway 368. That‟s 

what they‟re getting under this government. They‟re going to 

get their hospital built, which has gone to tender, and my 

understanding is the bids are coming in. That‟s what 

Humboldt‟s going to get under this government. They‟re getting 

a new high school. That‟s what they‟re getting under this 

government. And the NDP just gave promises. They were 

empty promises. That is millions of dollars being invested in the 

city of Humboldt and surrounding area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister can say 

infrastructure till the new paint lines on the new highway dries. 

But it does not help issues of family violence and issues within 

the communities that are not there unless Partners survives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they went and met with Station 20. We didn‟t see 

anything come out of that except the same old no. Mr. Speaker, 

this has been over and over. She can meet. That‟s good. But, 

Mr. Speaker, she needs to make a commitment to Humboldt 

and the communities surrounding Humboldt to provide these 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, she‟s talked, the minister has talked about 

working more closely with CBOs. Will she . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please allow the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow to place her question. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has said that she 

wants to work more closely with CBOs. What we‟re asking is, 

would she please commit to the Humboldt region and to 

Partners today? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I will repeat since the member 

obviously can‟t hear me. I am meeting with this particular CBO 

on Friday. I have already committed as much as the NDP ever 

committed to that particular organization. 

 

But in addition, to Humboldt and area we‟re committing to a 

new highway. We‟re committing to building a hospital. We‟re 

committing to a new high school. Mr. Speaker, the city needs 

more lots because it‟s growing so rapidly. We‟re committing to 

help them with the money for the infrastructure through a loan. 

Mr. Speaker, we are committing millions of dollars to 

Humboldt and surrounding area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Taxation Policy 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, number one among all of 

the ideas being quoted by the Sask Party prior to the last 

election was the promise to reduce provincial income tax for 

low-income residents. 

 

My question to the Finance minister is, when? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the election process we made some fundamental 

commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. And it is with a 

great deal of pride that we announced 40 of those promises 

being kept in the budget, not the least of which were 

meaningful tax relief for property tax owners struggling under 

the burden of property tax for educational purposes. That 

certainly is a commitment that we made and a commitment that 

we‟re realizing, and we‟re going to continue to do that. 

 

We also said on an ongoing basis that we‟re going to monitor 

other tax positions that need to be looked at, and certainly 

things like basic personal exemptions and the rates of income 

tax are issues that we‟re closely monitoring, and it is important. 

And as we unroll our promises that we made, we will make sure 

that these other additional needs are also considered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour 

said, and I quote from a May 2 article in the Leader-Post: “The 

government is looking into the idea of a higher personal tax 

exemption, and will likely have a clearer stance on the issue by 

the end of the year . . .” But the Finance minister told the CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] he‟s focused on property 

tax and won‟t be turning his attention to income tax until after 

the next budget, so nothing until 2010. 

 

Would the minister be so kind as to end the public‟s 

understandable confusion as to where his government stands on 

this matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the public understand in this province that there was a 

huge deficit created by that government in terms of dealing with 

these fundamental issues. For how many years, Mr. Speaker, 

did that government rebuff the idea that there should be lower 

taxes for families? How long does it take for us to move 

ourselves out of the high burden of educational property tax? 

 

Certainly we have the opportunity because our economy is 

growing and people across this province are expressing their 

confidence in this new government‟s direction by making this 

economy prosper, and we are going to do everything we can to 

make sure we remove the barriers and the impediments to that 

growth. Part of that is going to be that we make sure that we 

maintain a competitive position on our tax position and not 

have the highest tax jurisdiction in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, low-income wage earners 

are especially sensitive to very high inflationary pressures in 

areas such as food, shelter, transportation. These inflationary 

pressures are very real. They are here today. People need help 

now. The Sask Party made the promise. They have the money 

— $1.5 billion in the bank. The question is, what is the minister 

waiting for? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, it always strikes me as being a little bit strange when 

that member comes up and asks questions about keeping their 

word in a campaign on an election platform. I recall with some 

interest that in the very first budget when that member was the 

minister of Finance after not wanting to talk about a provincial 

sales tax increase during the campaign, all of a sudden, oops, 

we‟ve got to have a 1 per cent increase in the provincial sales 

tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize, we recognize, we recognize the 

need for making strategic investments in our economy. We 

recognize the need to make sure that we remove the 

impediments to growth, and we recognize that our citizens have 

to share in this prosperity, and that‟s what this government is 

going to ensure. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, historians will look 

at the record of the previous NDP government and they will 

look at the record of the previous Devine government, and the 

people that continue to work . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — And the advisors and the people that 

work in their administration that come from that Devine 

administration, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what is a fact is the 

Sask Party was in favour of indexing the minimum wage before 

the election; now they‟re not so sure. We know that lowering 

the provincial income tax for low-income earners was their 

number one idea, but now they‟re not so sure as to when they‟ll 

get around to it. Were these comments simply election ploys by 

the Sask Party, or can the Finance Minister assure low-income 

workers that they too can share in the wealth in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the citizens 

of Saskatchewan realize very clearly that in order to have the 

wealth shared in, it has to be created. In order to make sure that 

the economy grows and continues to grow, there needs to be the 

removal of the impediments to that growth that have long been 

in place by that NDP government. 

 

It‟s always interesting for me to listen to the members opposite 

talk about the Devine administration when they already are 

tiring of hearing about the failure of their administration over 

16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Nuclear Reactor Site and Study 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the government is in 

discussions with Bruce Power on construction of a nuclear 

power plant in our province. Bruce Power has been in talks with 

the Government of Alberta about the possibility of building a 

reactor near Peace River. We know Bruce Power has had 

concerns about the nuclear reactor site and now feels 

Saskatchewan may be a better option. According to the Minister 

of Energy and Resources, Bruce Power, and I quote “. . . 

indicated to us, as well, that the site selection might be more 

appropriate in our province, so we are interested in that and are 

looking at it.” 

 

To the Minister of Energy and Resources: what sites are being 

looked at? Is Lake Diefenbaker one of those sites? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 

question. And I‟ll answer it by saying that any talks that we 

have had with Bruce Power to this point are very preliminary 

and mostly of an introductory nature. Bruce Power is interested. 

Make no mistake, Bruce Power is interested in building reactors 

in Alberta or Saskatchewan, and they‟re weighing the 

possibilities. And they do, they like the attitude of our 

government towards growth. 

 

But as far as narrowing choices down to specific locations, the 

only one I‟ve heard of so far is Meadow Lake . . . or not 

Meadow Lake, west of Edmonton, Alberta — Peace River. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government wants to 

go to Alberta and brag about competing for a nuclear reactor 

but doesn‟t want to tell Saskatchewan people what their plans 

mean for us. 

 

CBC has obtained a copy of a SaskPower report on nuclear 

energy in Saskatchewan. The report indicates that Lake 

Diefenbaker is the preferred site for a nuclear power plant. The 

CBC also indicates the government had no plans for releasing 

this report. 

 

To the minister: why hide this information and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the CBC indicates that the 

government had no plans for releasing this report. To the 

minister: why hide this information and is Lake Diefenbaker the 

preferred site? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that the 

NDP siting study has made its way into the public domain. I‟ve 

had a conversation with the president of SaskPower, and she 

assures me that it wasn‟t released by anybody from the 

corporation. I leave it to others to speculate where indeed that 

report came from. 

 

The member opposite is correct that that study was not going to 

be released by this government because it is under a 

confidentiality agreement that was signed by her and her 

government, Mr. Speaker — an embarrassing situation for a 

member to be asking that question in this circumstance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, some months ago . . . 

The Speaker: — I call the members to order. The member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some months ago 

the Premier of Saskatchewan, the new Premier of 

Saskatchewan, indicated that he would release that report. But 

we learned today that 40 per cent of Saskatchewan people get 

their water supply from Lake Diefenbaker. That includes the 

city of Regina, city of Saskatoon, city of Moose Jaw, as well as 

many, many other small urban communities. 

 

The SaskPower report apparently indicates that there are 

concerns about risks to drinking water if a reactor were to be 

built at Lake Diefenbaker. To the minister: is the reason that he 

is not releasing this report because he did not want people to 

know about the environmental risks associated with Lake 

Diefenbaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm for the 

member opposite — in case she‟s forgotten — that her 

government undertook this study. It‟s a cost of about $60,000. It 

was performed by Stantec. 

 

Its relevance today is limited. It‟s of some historical 

significance, but that‟s about it, Mr. Speaker, because, quite 

frankly, SaskPower will not be building a nuclear reactor in 

Saskatchewan. The build, own, and operate model is obviously 

something that the previous government was considering, but 

it‟s not something that this government is considering at the 

present time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — . . . the Minister of Energy and Resources is 

in Calgary. He talks to the oil and gas patch, and he indicates 

that Bruce Power is looking at Saskatchewan to build a nuclear 

power plant at the cost of $10 billion. Mr. Speaker, it‟s in our 

province. It‟s in our province — $10 billion for an nuclear 

power plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite need to tell us, where is the 

preferred site? Is it Lake Diefenbaker, where 40 per cent of the 

drinking water in our province comes from, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the 

benefit of the member opposite and all members of this 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

Assembly, this was the NDP siting study. This was done by 

SaskPower on the direction of that NDP government. Under 

that agreement, it was partially funded by AECL [Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.], and members opposite signed a 

confidentiality agreement. That‟s why that report was not 

released. 

 

Also to reiterate my answer to the last question, SaskPower is 

not in the process of looking at a nuclear reactor whatsoever. 

The build, own, and operate model is something that members 

opposite considered. We will be working with the private sector 

to see what is appropriate for the government at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Bruce Power is looking to our 

province to build a nuclear power plant. That nuclear power 

plant . . . Bruce Power has been invited by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. That nuclear power plant will have to hitch itself 

to a distribution system, Mr. Speaker. SaskPower is the 

distribution system in our province. 

 

We ask a very simple question. Where is Bruce Power planning 

on locating its nuclear reactor, and is it Lake Diefenbaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I just have to 

reiterate for the members opposite this is an NDP siting study. 

This was done when they were in government. I‟m not sure 

which members opposite have seen the study and which ones 

didn‟t . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the report was done 

for the previous NDP government. It was funded partially by 

SaskPower, partially by AECL. It was subject to a 

confidentiality agreement. I can‟t speculate on how this 

document became part of the public domain. 

 

But what I can assure members opposite, that SaskPower will 

not be building a reactor. SaskPower will be in discussions with 

companies like Bruce Power, like Cameco, like AREVA, like 

others, and we will invite them to bring their proposals forward 

because we will look at it in an environmentally responsible 

manner, never compromising the safety for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 37, The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in the 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee 

of the Whole on Bill No. 37, The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 

37, The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on the 

Economy. 

 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to 

report Bill No. 25, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 25, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that Bill No. 25, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Unparliamentary Language 

 

The Speaker: — I have a statement to make to the Assembly. 

Before orders of the day I wish to remind members of your role 

in ensuring that the debates of this Assembly are conducted in a 

respectfully and dignified manner. 

 

Yesterday during question period the member from Regina 

Rosemont, Mr. Wotherspoon, used a phrase that upon review 

implied improper motives on the part of another member of this 

Assembly. 

 

At the time I wasn‟t sure whether I heard the member correctly 

and chose to review the verbatim record before interpreting the 

proceedings. In reviewing the record I find that the manner in 

which the member for Regina Rosemont chose to present his 

views could be interpreted as implying that the Minister of 

Education was attempting to deceive the public on the adequacy 

of funding for education. 

 

Members will be aware that it is improper to impute unworthy 

motives to another member for their actions. This parliamentary 

tradition is set out in paragraph 484(3) of Beauchesne‟s, 6th 

Edition and confirmed in rule 50(f) of the Assembly‟s rule 

book. 

 

I appreciate that it is not always possible or desirous to prepare 

in advance every remark or intervention that is made in the 

Assembly. Nor is it reasonable to expect that members will 

review every remark or intervention prior to delivery to ensure 

that they abide by all rules of debate. 

 

Indeed, history records that often the most effective and 

compelling debates occur when members passionately and 

forcefully present their positions. Nevertheless, I do wish to 

caution members on their choice of language, particularly when 

participating in a lively proceeding such as question period. 

 

Challenging the position of another member is acceptable; 

questioning their character is not. A personal charge or 

accusation against any member may only be done by the way of 

a substantive motion. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — By leave, Mr. Speaker, to move a motion 

requesting leave of absence. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has 

requested leave to move a motion regarding absence of a 

member. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Leave of Absence 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. By leave 

of the Assembly I would move: 

 

That leave of absence be granted for the member for 

Regina Northeast for Friday, May 9, 2008 to Friday, May 

16, 2008 to attend the 39th British Islands and 

Mediterranean Regional Conference in Gibraltar on behalf 

of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from The 

Battlefords: 

 

That by leave of the Assembly leave be granted to the 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

member for Regina Northeast for Friday, May 9, 2008 to 

Friday, May 16, 2008 to attend the 39th British Islands 

and Mediterranean Regional Conference in Gibraltar on 

behalf of this Assembly. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Withdrawal of Statement 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I‟m here to withdraw the statement that 

was perceived to attack the minister‟s character. The intention 

wasn‟t there. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide 

(Holodomor) Memorial Day Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 40, The 

Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day 

Act. I am proud to outline today for all members the 

background and impetus for our government introducing this 

important Bill which will ensure that on the fourth Saturday in 

November each year the Ukrainian famine-genocide will be 

remembered and recognized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin by thanking the Ukrainian 

community in Canada and abroad for calling upon all of us to 

remember that respect for human dignity and rights requires our 

eternal vigilance. This is a painful and tragic truth that should 

never be forgotten. 

 

The lesson of the Ukrainian Holodomor, the infamous 1932-33 

event where millions of Ukrainian people died as a result of 

starvation forced upon them by the Soviet regime, informs the 

Ukrainian community‟s call for the remembrance of past and 

present genocides. The Holodomor compels us to remember 

how a foreign government created a man-made famine and 

forced men, women, and children into starvation and death. 

 

Most historians agree that the famine of 1932-33 was caused by 

the inhumane government policies of Joseph Stalin‟s regime. 

The creation of collective farms was seen as a means of 

achieving state ownership of all land under Soviet rule. The 

Ukrainians defied this plan. They refused to give up their land, 

language, and national identity to comply with Stalin‟s policy 

of collectivization. 

 

In an act of unimaginable vengeance, Stalin set impossible 

grain quotas on the Ukrainians as a means of forcing them to 

comply with Soviet policies. Ironically Ukrainians harvested 

record crops in 1932-33, but were not allowed to keep any of 

their grain. If they were caught hiding grain to feed their 

families, they were shot by Soviet authorities. All of the grain 

which was harvested was shipped to other parts of the Soviet 

Union or sold to Western countries. 

 

Stalin‟s regime committed a horrendous act of genocide against 

up to 10 million Ukrainians. An ancient nation of 

agriculturalists was subjected to starvation, one of the most 

ruthless forms of torture and death. 

 

An equally horrific aspect of the Holodomor was that the world 

remained silent as it occurred. This is largely as a result of an 

attempt by the perpetrators of this genocide to erase it from the 

pages of history. On Stalin‟s orders, those who conducted the 

1937 census which revealed a sharp decrease in the Ukrainian 

population as a result of the Holodomor were shot, while the 

census results were suppressed. 

 

Many survivors of this tragic time in history and their 

descendants live in Saskatchewan and have contributed greatly 

to our province‟s cultural, economic, political, and educational 

life. We in Saskatchewan understand the amazing gift that the 

world was deprived of because of this famine and genocide for 

we have been such significant benefactors of the gift of 

Ukrainian values, traditions, and contributions to our province. 

 

In this, the 75th anniversary of the famine-genocide in Ukraine, 

Saskatchewan will be joining the Senate of Canada, the 

province of Manitoba, the province of Ontario, the United 

States Senate, the United States House of Representatives, the 

United Nations, and 40 other jurisdictions in condemning the 

Holodomor and recognizing it as genocide. 

 

Ukraine has recognized the fourth Saturday in November each 

year as the annual day to commemorate the innocent victims of 

the Holodomor. Therefore it is appropriate to extend this same 

annual commemoration in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the call to remember the Holodomor is an 

international event. Here in Canada it is being led by groups 

like the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, which is currently 

sponsoring the international remembrance flame as part of an 

effort by Ukraine‟s foreign ministry to mark the 75th 

anniversary of the Holodomor famine and genocide. 

 

[14:30] 

 

This event promotes the enduring lesson of the Holodomor and 

raises awareness of the disturbing fact that engineered famines 

are still being used as a ruthless weapon of torture and death by 

governments against ethnic and national groups around the 

world. 

 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 40 is an important piece of legislation 

that represents more than the simple act of remembrance. This 

Act reminds us that we must not forget that when we choose not 

to remember, this is a form of apathy. And as history has taught 

us, apathy has a price. By remembering the Holodomor we are 

helping to remember a historical truth and to ensure that similar 

tragedies are not repeated in our lifetimes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move therefore that Bill No. 40, 

The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial 

Day Act be now read a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 40, The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide 

(Holodomor) Memorial Day Act be now read a second time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too would 

like to join my colleague in thanking not only the Ukrainian 

representatives in Saskatchewan, but all those across Canada. 

And we as well on this side will be supporting Bill 40, The 

Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day 

Act. We join Manitoba and Ontario where the Bill is presently 

in their Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the Holodomor Remembrance Flame, a 

flame that‟ll be travelling around the world this year in 

commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the famine genocide 

that occurred in the Ukraine in 1932 and ‟33, arrived in Regina. 

The flame, while in Saskatchewan, visited the cities of Yorkton, 

Saskatoon, and North Battleford as well as Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a bit of background on this very important issue 

for Ukrainians. On Tuesday, April 15, 2008, President Viktor 

Yushchenko appealed to all world human right defenders to 

help recognize the Holodomor of 1932 and 1933 in Ukraine as 

an act of genocide against Ukrainian people. He voiced his 

appeal at the international conference, Modern Challenges to 

Human Rights and Freedoms, in Kiev. He said: 

 

“I call on you, human right defenders of all the world, to 

help recognize the Holodomor of 1932-33 as an act of 

genocide against Ukrainian people” . . . 

 

He also spoke for stepping up protection of human rights 

in Ukraine. 

“A right gives a man power and protection at a time. This 

is a straight edge [he said] dividing progress and 

barbarism” . . . 

 

. . . [President] Yushchenko declared 2008 the Year of 

Remembrance of the Holodomor Victims. 

 

In 2006, the Ukrainian parliament [had] declared the 

Holodomor as an act of genocide against the Ukrainian 

nation. 

 

The International Holodomor Remembrance Flame arrived on 

Canadian soil on Friday, April 18. The flame was presented 

during a ceremony at Toronto city hall, which also included the 

opening of the exhibit, Holodomor: Genocide by Famine 

produced by the League of Ukrainian Canadians. The flame was 

accepted by Ukraine‟s ambassador in Canada, His Excellency 

Dr. Ihor Ostash. The flame was then accepted by Holodomor 

survivor Stefan Horlatsch, who was in our Assembly just last 

week, who symbolically lit the candle presented by the 

community‟s youth before departing on his journey escorting 

the remembrance flame to 15 Canadian cities. 

 

Canadian events organized by the Canadian Ukrainian 

Congress, titled Keep the Flame Alive, will remember the 

victims of the Holodomor while ensuring that their story was 

transferred from generation to generation. Events will also 

launch a campaign urging the Canadian government to 

recognize the Holodomor as an act of genocide and support 

Ukraine‟s motion for such recognition by the United Nations. 

The International Holodomor Remembrance Flame, which will 

visit 33 countries, is the initiative of the international 

coordinating committee in co-operation with the Secretariat of 

the President of Ukraine and Ukraine‟s Ministry of Foreign 

Affairs. 

 

Mr. Horlatsch, who was in our Assembly, is a survivor of the 

Ukraine famine-genocide. He is the initiator of a symbolic walk 

across major Canadian cities to raise public awareness of this 

horrific period of the 20th century. On his visit to Canada, Mr. 

Horlatsch will carry the symbolic remembrance flame to mark 

the 75th anniversary of Ukraine‟s famine-genocide. In 

co-operation with the Ukrainian World Congress and the 

Ukrainian Canadian Congress, this torch, as I have mentioned, 

will travel to 32 countries, ending its journey in Ukraine. 

 

Mr. Horlatsch himself is an author of six books and was 

recently inducted as an honorary member of the Ukrainian 

Writers‟ Union. Mr. Horlatsch himself lost 11 members of his 

family in the genocide. As past president of the Friends of 

Ukraine, Mr. Horlatsch has participated in the opening of 

numerous Canadian libraries in 14 cities across Ukraine. The 

Ukrainian Canadian president, Paul Grod, had this to say: “In 

this, the 75th year since one of the greatest genocides of human 

history, Ukraine remembers and the world acknowledges.” 

 

That is the slogan of this year‟s commemoration of the 

Ukrainian Holodomor, where the lives of millions of innocent 

men, women, and children were suddenly eradicated by 

starvation in the very heart of Europe‟s breadbasket. The 

objective of the Holodomor was to destroy Ukrainian national 

consciousness and to quash the aspirations of Ukrainian people 

for independence, thereby eliminating a serious threat to the 

integrity of the Soviet empire. 

 

The suffering of the Ukrainian people during the Holodomor is 

reflected in a great many publications and documents, as well as 

innumerable oral histories of survivors. With the opening of the 

archives in both the Ukraine and Russia, the overwhelming 

body of evidence continues to grow. The Holodomor was 

undeniably an act of genocide. 

 

This year, Canadians join the international community in 

commemorating this tragedy to recognize the Holodomor as a 

genocide against Ukrainian people, and to ensure this heinous 

crime of using food as a weapon against the people is no longer 

used by despots in other parts of the world. 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, this was not an easy, an easy road. There were 

many people for many years that had presented documentation 

and it was met with everything. But I found a poem which I 

thought kind of summarized that or best dealt with that. So if I 

may, I would like to read that now. This is a poem by Chrystya 

Hnatiw, and it was written in 1988 from “Land of Silent 

Sundays.” 

 

When in the breadbasket 

of Europe 

Ukrainian peasants 

starved to death 

the world was silent 

as it was 

when your people 

perished 

in the horrors of Dachau 

as Nazi soldiers 

drank “to life” 

in brassy cabarets 

 

When the King of Aryans 

unfurled his Master Plan 

we both 

were targeted for extinction 

and so our parents fled 

the haunting sirens 

the hideous war 

leaving their loved ones 

behind 

yours died in Treblinka 

mine lived in hell 

in the Siberian snows 

Yet now 

our communities 

wage a paper war 

the battle lines are drawn 

armed with statistics 

briefs 

and testimonies 

we count 

the dead 

was it the famine 

the holocaust 

that had more dead: 

whose trauma was greater? 

 

Why all this now 

when the Sabbath candles glow 

and bread is plenty? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this side will be supporting Bill 40, an Act to 

recognize the Ukrainian famine. And I look forward to the 

proclamation of this Act. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question put by the Deputy Premier that the Bill No. 40, The 

Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, to the Committee of the 

Whole, and by leave now. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that the Bill 

be moved to Committee of the Whole and that leave be granted 

to debate the Bill at this time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Committee of the Whole. I do now 

leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide 

(Holodomor) Memorial Day Act 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The business before the Assembly is 

Bill No. 40. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to.] 

 

[Preamble agreed to.] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Therefore Her Majesty, by and with the 

advice and consent of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: An Act to recognize The 

Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor). 

 

Would the minister please move the Bill without amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 

report the Bill without amendment. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Is it agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Carried. 

 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the 

committee to report item no. 1, Bill No. 40 without amendment 

and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read the third time? I 

recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide 

(Holodomor) Memorial Day Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

ask for leave to move that this Bill be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked for leave. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 

Bill No. 40, The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) 

Memorial Day Act be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:45] 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 24 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a, I would like to say a 

pleasure, but not a pleasure definitely to enter the debate here 

on Bill 24. Bill 24, as has been, as I heard the other day the 

member from Wakamow call it the oops Bill, and unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, that this is not a laughing matter. 

 

The question that Bill 24 raises for us is the amount of thinking 

and the entire process around the LRB [Labour Relations 

Board]: the firings, the hirings, and the cost, Mr. Speaker, the 

eventual cost to the taxpayer of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill 24 and this whole issue around the labour 

board has got the labour lawyers‟ association of Canada, got 

them to write a letter to the Premier expressing their dismay and 

in fact arguing as to what it was that is happening here to a 

board, a quasi-judicial board, which body is trusted to act upon 

and make decisions on a wide range of labour issues in the 

province, a quasi-judicial board that has to have the respect, that 

has to have the trust of all its stakeholders. Mr. Speaker, this is 

again something that goes directly to the ministry and directly 

to the Minister of Labour and the handling of this file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Labour Relations Board is the foundation, is 

the foundation on which this government is building its labour 

policy. And, Mr. Speaker, this foundation, if we were to look at 

this foundation, has at this time I would say, Mr. Speaker, there 

are cracks in the foundation. The structure has not been built, 

and the foundation has in fact been condemned, condemned, 

Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, because the Minister of 

Labour has come out on many times. He has misspoken, Mr. 

Speaker, statements, too many retractions, and, Mr. Speaker, 

too many I would say video appearances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we need, what we should have instead is a 

thorough piece of work, a competent work, and, Mr. Speaker, 

you get that by consulting people. You can get that by 

consulting stakeholders. You get that by consulting the people 

of Saskatchewan. That is the way legislation, that is the way 

good public policy is made. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 

when you don‟t do that, you get Bill 24. You get the oops Bill, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s what you get. 

 

And I guess perhaps it shouldn‟t surprise us with all that we‟ve 

seen occurring in the legislature to see a Bill of this sort being 

presented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you also cannot get good legislation by not 

meeting with all your stakeholders. You can‟t get legislation 

from hiding from your stakeholders. Mr. Speaker, you can‟t get 

good legislation by doing it behind closed doors. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, much like, I believe it‟s Bill 31, the 

accountability, this minister and this government are failing on 

the transparency, and they‟re failing in accountability. 

Transparency, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what they were doing 

around Bills 5 and 6, transparency in what they were doing with 

the Labour Relations Board has caused, has caused people such 

as the Canadian labour lawyers association to become very 

concerned about the practices, about the hirings, the firings. 

And in fact before this new Labour Relations Board is starting, 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2008 

they are already faced with issues of bias being levelled against 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the way to do things. Mr. Speaker, this 

is not a way to build a labour policy for this province, and as I 

mentioned before, a policy built on a foundation that in fact has 

already, I would say, been condemned. And so, Mr. Speaker, 

the question will be whether that side starts over again and does 

things right by holding public consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The last time The Trade Union Act had amendments, this side 

of the House took time to form a committee, took time to 

consult with the people of Saskatchewan, took time to consult 

with all the stakeholders and then moved forward — moved 

forward, Mr. Speaker, after consultations and hearing all the 

arguments that had to be made, unlike this legislation, unlike 

this government who did consultations behind closed doors and 

had a great, large number of the stakeholders coming out and 

saying, we want public consultations. It is interesting that 

people who met with the minister came out and said, we want 

public consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and again I guess it goes to the ideas that we had 

talked in this House over in this session, their ideas of 

consultation, of democracy, of accountability and, Mr. Speaker, 

I would say where we are today is that this government has 

failed on those issues: failed on accountability, failed on 

transparency. They have failed on consultation, and I think they 

find themselves listening to a debate on a Bill 24, An Act to 

amend The Trade Union Act (No. 2), second try at doing this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this might be a change, where section 2 is 

amended by adding — no more than before — two 

vice-chairpersons. But again if there‟s a question here about 

who was doing the amendments, who was looking at this, that 

we missed this. We not only missed, the government not only 

missed consulting the stakeholders and the people of 

Saskatchewan, but they‟re also starting to miss in terms of 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, going to relationships within the industrial 

relations is a very important matter. Over years people establish 

relationships — stakeholders with the Labour Relations Board, 

unions with their employers. They have established secure 

relationships, mature relationships, bargaining relationships, 

and those have all been turned upside down. We have not heard 

good reasons, good rationale in our committee hearings or here 

in the House that suggest that we should have done, that this 

government had any reason to put forward the Bills that they 

did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this remains for the future to determine how the 

partners will relate to this. I see every day in the papers, both 

sides already taking aim at each other in terms of employers and 

unions. And I think that comes about by a government, a 

government that should play the role, that should understand 

that the role in industrial relations — and I don‟t think they‟ve 

got this one — is to give an environment in which the parties 

can negotiate. It is not to insert themselves in politically, Mr. 

Speaker, into that environment because when you do that, Mr. 

Speaker, you invariably take sides. You invariably tip the apple 

cart, and this is what has happened. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would say that the approach taken here is 

in fact a very heavy-handed approach and that the minister and 

the Ministry of Labour have most certainly, most certainly, their 

actions do not bode well for labour relations in this province. 

 

And again, we have constructively tried to point out the 

shortcomings but, Mr. Speaker, a Bill like 24, the errors 

continue. The lack of planning is abysmal. I would say abysmal. 

And the research, the research, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

research that we‟ve seen, the questions we‟ve asked in 

committees, the research is not only incomplete but suspect. 

And I don‟t say that lightly. Just the questions are not being 

answered, direct questions, good questions which the minister 

acknowledges, but in fact the test of research has not been met. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the unfortunate part, one of the most 

unfortunate things that I have had to witness, is the complete 

oblivious, how oblivious the Minister of Labour is to the 

destructive approach that he is taking — absolutely, absolutely 

no appreciation for the nuances of labour relations and 

specifically collective bargaining. And this bull in the china 

shop, I mean this is definitely a perfect saying for what is going 

on here. This has definitely set a new low bar for labour 

relations in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, acrimony, and I guess as we read in the paper we 

maybe will be looking forward to a summer . . . we will see 

what the summer brings. But with those few comments, Mr. 

Speaker, enough has been said about this Bill. Now at this time 

move the Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour, that Bill No. 24, The Trade Union 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — The Standing Committee on Human 

Services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the work of the standing policy field committees, I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — In order to facilitate the work of policy 

committees, the Government House Leader has moved this 

Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 7, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:55.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1239 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1239 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1239 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1240 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1240 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1240 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Wall of Fame Inductees in The Battlefords 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1240 

 Radiothon Raises Money for Moose Jaw Union Hospital 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1240 

 Moose Jaw Teachers Role Models in Physical Activity 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1241 

 Yorkton Couple Author Western Books 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1241 

 Autism Services Spring Gala 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1241 

 Tale of the Missing Maps 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1242 

 Keepers of the Land 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1242 

 Seventh-day Adventist Centre Opens in Biggar 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1242 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Housing Crisis 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1242 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1243 

 Family Support Services in Humboldt 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1244 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1244 

 Taxation Policy 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1245 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1245 

 Nuclear Reactor Site and Study 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1246 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1247 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1247 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1248 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1249 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1248 

 Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1249 

 Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1253 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Unparliamentary Language 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1249 

MOTIONS 

 Leave of Absence 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1249 

 



 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Withdrawal of Statement 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1250 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1250 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1251 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 40 — The Ukrainian Famine and Genocide (Holodomor) Memorial Day Act ........................................................ 1252 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1253 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1254 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


