




















































Hansard: April 21, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 29A  MONDAY, APRIL 21, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1031 

 April 21, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Highways and Transportation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, I would 

like to introduce a group of 26 of our public servants. They‟re 

in the east wing of your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They‟re here to 

participate in the parliamentary program for public servants. 

They represent a variety of branches of government including 

Government Services, the Ministry of Health, Information 

Technology Office, the Legislative Assembly Service, the 

Ministry of Municipal Affairs, the Office of the Provincial 

Secretary, the Public Service Commission, Ministry of Social 

Services, and the Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the program includes an in-depth history and tour 

of the Legislative Building, and they‟re going to be the 

recipients of briefings by the Legislative Library, the 

Legislative Assembly Clerk‟s office, and Executive Council. 

They‟re here to observe proceedings this afternoon, to watch the 

behaviour of their elected representatives in question period. 

And we‟re going to meet with them a little later this afternoon 

and probably have to explain the whole process because I‟m 

sure that the questions will come freely after they observe this 

proceeding here today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to welcome 

warmly this group of public servants. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased this afternoon to join with the minister and welcome 

these officials from the public service here today. It‟s not often 

that we get to see such a bright and brilliant group of young 

civil servants here today. And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

official opposition we‟d like to join in with the minister and 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, I have some friends and 

neighbours who live in my constituency in the west gallery. 

They are the Cyr family. The parents are Odille and Edgar Cyr, 

and the children are Elise Chand, Jean, Leon, and Ivan Cyr. So I 

would like you all to welcome them here at the legislature 

today. 

They have met with the member and the minister from 

Kindersley. So we‟ve had a very good morning thus far. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s with a great deal of pleasure I rise and present a 

petition on behalf of my constituents in Moose Jaw. And it has 

to do with the closure of the South Hill liquor store, which was 

made without notice — which was a rather shabby treatment of 

employees — and without any consultations with the citizens in 

the constituency. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions today in 

opposition to the government‟s Bill 5 and 6, the essential 

services Act and The Trade Union Act. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations on labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed from people of Shellbrook, Leask, 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Regina, Central Butte, Saskatoon, 

Battleford, Nipawin, Borden, Wakaw, Dundurn, Osler, Clavet, 

Strasbourg, Langham, Warman, Fox Valley, Leader, 

Richmound, Burstall, Zehner . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Richmound, Balgonie, Pilot Butte, Colonsay, Burr, Lanigan, 

Raymore, Cudworth, White City, Emerald Park, Flaxcombe, 

Kindersley, Coleville, Coronach, Assiniboia, Fife Lake, Cupar, 

Dysart, Southey, Craven, Lestock, and Fort Qu‟Appelle, Mr. 

Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2008 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the Sask Party government‟s 

decision to axe Station 20. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the communities of Grandora, Wolseley, St. Brieux, and 

Saskatoon from both sides of the river, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

privilege to table a petition today, a petition in support of 

property tax relief for renters. The petitioners acknowledge that 

during the election campaign there were two specific promises 

with regards to property tax relief. 

 

The petitioners humbly pray and call upon the Legislative 

Assembly to be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately implement the NDP‟s plan to provide 

property tax relief to homeowners and renters. 

 

These petitioners, these petitioners, Mr. Speaker, these 

petitioners are all from The Battlefords, from The Battlefords. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Changing the Rules 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. Only three days 

after the government used its majority to unilaterally change the 

rules, they changed them back, Mr. Speaker. But this time they 

did it the right way. They had the unanimous consent to do so. 

Mr. Speaker, the government panicked. They didn‟t consult or 

negotiate with the opposition. They pushed the panic button, 

and we had a three-day panic drill exercise, Mr. Speaker. I see 

the need for school students to have routine fire drills, but it is 

hardly necessary to have our province‟s leaders panic and a 

three-day panic exercise to follow. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I see the need for school students 

to have a routine fire drill, but it is hardly necessary to have our 

province‟s leaders panic and a three-day panic exercise to 

follow. Mr. Speaker, we told them they didn‟t need to change 

the rules. They had adequate time to pass their agenda. They 

didn‟t listen. Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate to say I told you so 

and hope the government shows greater competence in the 

future. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Heroism Following Nipawin Explosion 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak of 

tragedy and bravery. Everyone knows by now of the natural gas 

explosion in Nipawin and the tragic loss of lives of two people 

and the injuries of several more. Our thoughts and prayers go 

out to these families as material things can be replaced but lives 

cannot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was also bravery involved. People like Mike 

Van Dorpe, who ran back into the fire to pull a victim out of a 

burning truck. It‟s our volunteer fire departments of Nipawin, 

Carrot River, and Choiceland. These brave men and women are 

volunteers who at the drop of a hat will put their lives on the 

line to save someone else‟s. It‟s our first responders, another 

group of volunteers, who make their commitment of helping 

mankind a priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a tragedy, but as I have described, this is 

Saskatchewan. And we Saskatchewanians know how to stare 

adversity down. Some people call a player who can make a hat 

trick in the playoffs a hero. Mr. Speaker, my heroes are people 

like Mike Van Dorpe, the Nipawin, Carrot River, and 

Choiceland volunteer fire departments, and the people of 

northeast Saskatchewan. Those people are my heroes, and I ask 

this Assembly to recognize them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police Charity Ball 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday evening 

within my constituency it was my honour to attend the 2008 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Charity Ball along 

with the member from Regina South. The RCMP have long 

been supporters of our community‟s needs through this charity 

ball. According to Sergeant Serge Robitaille, the genesis for the 

RCMP ball can be traced back to the early days of the force. 

This year‟s charity, The Casey Foundation, was created in May 

2005. Its ongoing goal is to see children with autism receive 

services to assist them with their unique needs. Their website 

states, and I quote: 

 

It is the mission of The Casey Foundation to enrich the 

lives of children with autism. By assisting with the costs 

involved in accessing available services, we hope no child 

need be prevented from [the] developing to their fullest 

potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the foundation was created by a Regina mom, 

Alexis Leippi, whose son and foundation namesake, Casey, was 

diagnosed with autism when he was three. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

honour to thank Alexis Leippi and her son Casey; The Casey 

Foundation board of directors, supporters, and volunteers; 

co-hosts, the RCMP Training Academy Depot Division and “F” 



April 21, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

Division; and the many volunteers, donors, and participants that 

made the 2008 charity ball a resounding success and provided 

The Casey Foundation with needed resources. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in extending this gratitude. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Flooding in Paddockwood Area 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, this past Friday I went out to the 

RM [rural municipality] of Paddockwood to tour the flooding 

that has occurred there and which is still threatening to cause 

even more damage. With my constituency assistant, Marcus 

Abrametz, I toured the RM to see the damage and how they 

have coped with it. I had the opportunity to go to the RM 

building and talk with the administrator, Kathy Borysuik. She 

was extremely capable and helpful and I could see that she had 

things well under control. 

 

I also had the chance to speak with the reeve, Brent Zbaraschuk, 

over the phone. He wanted to pass on how good relations are 

with the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure. During this 

flooding the ministry even offered to use their gravel pit so the 

RM could begin repairing their roads, as the RM‟s gravel pit is 

now under water. It is my pleasure to pass on his thanks to our 

ministry for their help and co-operation to an RM in need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members will join me in thanking 

those who have worked so hard to repair the damage done by 

the flooding not only in Paddockwood, but in all areas of the 

province that are affected by spring runoff. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Clay Serby Roasted and Toasted 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Saturday evening I, along with several colleagues from both 

sides of the House, attended the Clay Serby Roast and Toast 

Dinner in Yorkton. It was an extremely well-attended event 

with guests from Yorkton and area, many who travelled from 

all over Saskatchewan and from out of province as well. 

 

Both the dinner and program were excellent. Mr. Speaker, the 

list of roasters and toasters was extensive and included family 

members, community members, business and social contacts, as 

well as political friends and colleagues. Although all of them 

had a story to tell that brought laughter to the crowd, each one 

of them spoke of a man who gave selflessly and energetically to 

the causes he believed in. 

 

In the words of the Leader of the Opposition, “I couldn‟t 

imagine a more dedicated deputy premier.” And former Premier 

Romanow described how, when he had a tough portfolio to deal 

with, he knew the person who could take on the responsibility 

was Clay Serby. 

 

Clay‟s two beautiful daughters, Kirsti and Stacey, offered 

personal anecdotes, not to mention an amazing tribute through 

song. Others, including the Manitoba Minister of Agriculture, 

spoke of his sports prowess, his political escapades, and some 

stories that should perhaps remain in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The testimonials that we heard that evening were insightful, 

whether they were humorous or serious. However the most 

touching compliment to Clay occurred after the event was over, 

and I returned to my hotel. The clerk at the desk expressed her 

admiration for Clay, telling me that he was her social worker 

when she was only the tender age of five. And that had it not 

been for Clay, she isn‟t sure whether she would be in the 

position that she is in today with a successful life and two 

children heading off to college. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all of my colleagues to join 

me in thanking Clay Serby, his partner Trish, his two daughters, 

Kirsti and Stacey, for the service and sacrifice that Clay gave 

for the betterment of his community and the province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Pork for Food Banks 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday the 

Premier, along with the ministers of Agriculture and Social 

Services and representatives from the Sask Pork, announced a 

major donation to the food banks of Saskatchewan. The 

province is providing $440,000 in funding to process sows 

culled through the national cull breeding swine program. 

 

The processed pork will be donated to food banks and 

charitable organizations across the province. This funding will 

result in 700,000 pounds of processed pork for needy 

Saskatchewan families. The finished product has a retail value 

of approximately $2 million. This funding will provide enough 

pork to last the Saskatchewan food bank for one year. 

 

While we continue to support our hog producers and work to 

address the challenges they face, we are pleased to partner with 

them to create a bright spot in this otherwise difficult situation. 

I would like to thank Mr. Bill Hall of the Food Banks of 

Saskatchewan and Mr. Paul Merriman of the Saskatoon Food 

Bank. I would also like to recognize Joe Kleinsasser and Neil 

Ketilson of the Sask Pork for their support and contributions to 

the project. 

 

Sask Pork will be coordinating the project with the food banks 

of Saskatchewan, provincial meat processors, Jay‟s Transport, 

and other groups to process and distribute the finished product 

to needy families in the province. 

 

It is truly the Saskatchewan way to take a negative situation 

such as this and find an opportunity to turn it around and create 

hope rather than fear for children and families in our great 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2008 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Saskatoon Bakery Receives Torch Award 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to stand today and 

extend my congratulations to John and Audrey Matushewski, 

two constituents of Saskatoon Massey Place. John and Audrey 

are the owners of Nestor‟s Bakery in Saskatoon. On 

Wednesday, March 19 the Better Business Bureau of 

Saskatchewan awarded the annual Torch Awards to deserving 

Saskatchewan businesses. I‟m very pleased to inform this 

legislature that Nestor‟s Bakery was the recipient of the 

Hospitality and Personal Services Award. 

 

In describing the purpose of the Torch Awards, the Better 

Business Bureau states that it wants to spotlight actions of 

businesses that display ethical leadership, either through 

ongoing social responsibility or the value-based resolution of a 

specific ethical dilemma. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can‟t think of anyone more deserving of this 

recognition than John and Audrey. The Matushewskis have 

operated their business on 20th Street for many years. Over this 

time, they have earned a well-founded reputation of being 

honest, generous, and hard-working people. They operate 

Nestor‟s Bakery in a manner that demonstrates they truly care 

about their community. I also know the Matushewskis are 

proud of their heritage and are active members of their church. 

 

And to cap it all off, I can personally attest to the quality of 

their pies and bread. If members haven‟t visited Nestor‟s, I 

would encourage them to stop by and pick up a loaf of their 

signature Uncle John‟s multi-grain. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

all members of this legislature to join me in congratulating John 

and Audrey Matushewski and all the staff of Nestor‟s Bakery 

for receiving this special recognition. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Climate Change 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the last 

time that the Minister Responsible for Environment was on her 

feet in the Assembly, the only question that she answered was 

whether or not she was capable of reading briefing material. 

Maybe today will be better for her. 

 

The Sask Party has always held dubious opinions on climate 

change. In a debate on the Kyoto Protocol, the member for 

Estevan once said, quote, “Scientists don‟t agree. They can‟t 

assure us that there is a trend to global warming.” 

 

The member for Biggar once assured the Assembly that, quote, 

“There‟s also significant debate within the scientific community 

about the validity . . . that man-made greenhouse gas emissions 

are causing climate change to global warming.” 

 

My question is to the Minister of Environment. Has the Sask 

Party changed its views, or is the science of climate change still 

subject to debate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

the member opposite for her question. All she has to do is go to 

the Minister of Environment website and check out the 

information there. And during the campaign, she could have 

checked our platform where we clearly committed to the targets 

adopted previously in the province to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions. 

 

So if she‟s looking to see our position, Mr. Speaker, it has been 

perfectly clear that we are doing what we need to do in this 

province to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, as opposed to the 

opposition who allowed greenhouse gas emissions to increase 

by 62 per cent over the last 16 years, which is double the 

national average. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party seems to be 

long on words and short on action. Mr. Speaker, the now 

Minister Responsible for Government Services once claimed 

that, quote “. . . if the agreements — the CO2 agreements, 

Kyoto — come into place, that will be a severe impediment to 

Saskatchewan . . .” 

 

I believe that the consequences of climate change, regional 

flooding, droughts, and the spread of pine beetles might be a 

more serious impediment to our province, Mr. Speaker. The 

Sask Party has now abolished the Office of Energy 

Conservation established specifically to help address climate 

change in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is to the minister. Why should the people of 

Saskatchewan take anything that the Sask Party says about 

climate change seriously when they view measures to address it 

as impediments to Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would point 

out to the member opposite that in a backgrounder that was 



April 21, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

released by the NDP on September 5, 2005, when they were 

doing their press release on the money that they were going to 

use from the sale of the upgrader, the Office of Energy 

Conservation was going to be rolled into a climate change 

secretariat so the NDP were going to be doing away with the 

Office of Energy Conservation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — As I said before, long on words, short on action. 

Perhaps she didn‟t realize that that was part of a major plan 

with experts on the environment to be taking care of the whole 

situation . . . [inaudible] . . . climate change. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the current Minister of Enterprise and 

Innovation, a minister that soon will be the Chair of a board 

responsible for developing economic policy in our province 

once said that it‟s, quote, “[Now] not that the scientific 

community can even agree as to whether or not . . . global 

warming is occurring outside of normal cyclic temperature 

swings or, if so, if it is a man made or caused by natural 

events.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the first acts of the Sask Party government 

was to abolish the climate change secretariat, a body that could 

have helped our province minimize its contribution to climate 

change. My question is to the minister. What does the minister 

know about climate change that would cause her to abolish the 

climate change secretariat? Does she believe that climate 

change is simply caused by natural events? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And for all 

the member‟s indignation over the climate change secretariat, I 

would point out that the NDP [New Democratic Party] had 

nothing more than a press release. It was not established. 

 

And if she would look at the budget, as I said in committee last 

week, this government has committed $1 million to have the 

Ministry of Environment be the lead agency for climate change, 

as opposed to the opposition when they were in government, 

who had no lead for climate change. They had pieces of it in 

Industry, pieces of it in Environment, pieces of it in CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. We are 

going to house it within the Ministry of Environment with a $1 

million budget and four FTEs [full-time equivalent] of experts 

who can help us out on this file. 

 

And I might point out too, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

opposite said that the climate change secretariat, quote, “would 

have the clout it needs within government to make sure 

programs are comprehensive enough.” And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would submit that on this side of the House, the ministers and 

the ministries have the sufficient clout, and we don‟t need 

another outside agency to do that work for us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

are looking forward to see what that clout will finally bring us, 

since they still have no plan to address how they‟re going to 

meet those targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have no illusions 

about how important climate change is to the Sask Party. They 

have said that the science of climate change is subject to debate, 

that it‟s caused by natural events, and that measures to address 

climate change are impediments to the prosperity of this 

province. Consistent with these views, the Sask Party has 

abolished the Office of Energy Conservation, disbanded the 

climate change secretariat, and cut the funding for climate 

change initiatives to less than 15 per cent of what it originally 

was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is to the minister. Will the Sask Party government 

spare the people of Saskatchewan the rhetoric and admit that it 

has no intention of addressing climate change, a phenomenon 

that its members clearly do not believe in? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The amount 

that was originally allotted to climate change initiatives in this 

province under the NDP was $7.5 million in the ‟07-08 budget. 

In this budget we have added to that, $10 million to a total of 

$17.5 million. I‟m not exactly sure where the member‟s getting 

her information from, other than this press release that was 

issued last fall from the sale of the upgrader. 

 

And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, again for all of her 

indignation, the NDP, when they had the opportunity, 

introduced no legislation, no regulations. They had no target 

specific to industry or SaskPower. Their plan was to, and I 

quote “. . . complying with industry‟s mandatory emission 

reduction obligations under the federal climate change plan.” 

 

They had no provincial plan for industry in this province. They 

were going to default to the federal regulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Release of Confidential Documents 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The Justice minister admits he knows the 

name of the suspect in the case of the unlawfully obtained 

police files but won‟t name him. On three separate instances 

during media scrums with reporters, the Justice minister said he 

did not personally know the subject. Only under persistent 

questioning by the press on Thursday did the minister finally 

admit he had a relationship with the suspect. 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, this question goes directly to the minister‟s 

credibility. Why did he provide false information about 

knowing the suspect in the case of the unlawfully obtained 

police files? What is he trying to cover up? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in our country we have a 

Charter of Rights. We have a presumption of innocence. I was 

surprised and disappointed when the member from Meewasin 

indicated to reporters last week, quote, “that he might be 

obliged to release the name of the suspect” who will in fact not 

be charged. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a challenge for the member from 

Meewasin. I challenge him to look into the cameras today. I 

challenge him to speak directly into the microphone and state 

clearly and unequivocally that he would, if he was Justice 

minister, release the name of that suspect. I challenge him to do 

that today, knowing that he is not just speaking to the members 

in this House but that he is speaking directly to each and every 

prosecutor in this province and each and every law enforcement 

officer in this province. I challenge him today to make that 

statement in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, if I was Minister of Justice, I 

would act like I was a lawyer for the people of Saskatchewan 

and not a lawyer for the suspect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, on April 14 the minister was 

asked if he knew the suspect personally. His answer was no. On 

Thursday April 17, the minister volunteered the suspect is, and I 

quote, “somebody that I don‟t know.” 

 

Later the minister was asked point-blank if he had ever had a 

conversation with the suspect, responding, quote, “I have not.” 

Seconds later he was asked again, but this time his answer was 

quite different. It turns out the minister has written a letter on 

the suspect‟s behalf about the time the police files were dropped 

off at the chief of staff of their caucus‟s home. 

 

Providing contradictory statements on his relationship with a 

suspect brings into question that minister‟s ability to continue 

on as Saskatchewan‟s Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 

To the minister: will he step aside while the commissioner, the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner investigates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve tried my best to be 

open and candid with the media and with the members in this 

House. I‟ve done that, and I‟ve done that without trying to 

compromise justice. 

 

When I stated I did not know this suspect, I was correct in that I 

did not know this suspect within the context of this file. I 

clarified with the media that I had written a letter on behalf of 

this individual two or three years earlier regarding an unrelated 

matter. This clarification was made, Mr. Speaker, immediately 

rather than following the pattern of the NDP cover-up which 

lasted for some 16 years. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party has quickly moved to correct mistakes, 

misstatements. The NDP have consistently tried to play down 

their role in this scandal, Mr. Speaker. The scandal arose in 

1992. Why did it take 16 years and the pressure of Police Chief 

Cal Johnston to end this? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, rumours continue to swirl 

around this Justice minister‟s involvement with the suspect in 

the case of the unlawfully obtained police files, a suspect the 

minister knows the name of. The minister has put contradictory 

statements on the public record about his relationship with the 

suspect saying at first that he had never spoken to the suspect 

and then admitting he had done work on the suspect‟s behalf — 

three days later, not immediately, Mr. Speaker. And now the 

Premier‟s chief lawmaker is admonishing the Regina Police 

Service for its treatment of the suspect. 

 

To the Premier: in the face of escalating concern over this 

minister‟s actions, will he tell his Justice minister to step aside 

until the Conflict of Interest Commissioner investigates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in 1992 the NDP caucus 

was involved in a fraud involving their caucus funds. To avoid 

political embarrassment, they tried to cover it up. Many of the 

members still sit in the legislature today. In . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — In 1994 Pat Lorjé pushed the NDP 

caucus to try to get them to do the right thing and to be upfront 

with the police. Those same members did not. They chose to 

avoid having the story come out. In 2007 Glenn Hagel stood in 

this House and tried to tell the media and the members of this 

legislature that he had been upfront with the police. Only after 

Police Chief Cal Johnston made an unprecedented late-night 

news conference did the entire story come forward — 16 years 

it took, Mr. Speaker. 



April 21, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Northeast. 

 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, the Coachman Insurance 

Company is one of SGI‟s [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] out-of-province investments that the minister does 

not approve of. Like many businesses, it started out slowly but 

now is extremely profitable. Last year alone Coachman 

generated $26 million in revenue for SGI. In spite of these 

success and these investments, the minister responsible has said 

that he intends to interfere with the company‟s affairs and 

prevent further out-of-province investments. 

 

My question is for the minister. Why does the minister believe 

that the people of Saskatchewan does not want to see SGI invest 

out of province when those investments bring millions of 

dollars of profits to our province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much 

for the question. The member opposite wasn‟t at the MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] briefing that this was 

explained at quite in length, with great detail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question was regarding the priorities of the 

Saskatchewan Party, and certainly out-of-province investments 

continue not to be a priority. Operating SGI for the people of 

Saskatchewan, certainly there‟s more business that can be done 

in Saskatchewan. Things like Coachman Insurance, which lost a 

substantial amount of money, are not a priority for this 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, last week the minister 

responsible made it very clear to this Assembly that he intends 

to interfere with SGI‟s operation and to force the organization 

to comply with the views of the Sask Party. SGI is a very 

well-managed and highly profitable corporation that provides 

great benefits to Saskatchewan people. 

 

The question to the minister: why does the minister believe that 

he and the Sask Party know more about what is in the best 

interests of SGI than those who operate it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you again to the member 

for the question. Mr. Speaker, it is very clearly said here in the 

House and in committee and in other areas that we will operate 

the Crown corporations like businesses, providing the service at 

the lowest possible cost for Saskatchewan residents. That‟s the 

commitment that we made to the people of Saskatchewan on 

November 7. That‟s the commitment that they voted for, as the 

results we see in the House today. And that will continue to be 

the commitment of this government now today and into the 

future as we operate SGI in an efficient manner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — The Crown corporations of Saskatchewan are 

run by experienced professionals that have made them strong 

and highly profitable. But last week the minister responsible 

admitted that he is willing to directly interfere with SGI‟s 

operation. And he said in this House and I quote, “I want to be 

clear for the members opposite that yes, we will impose our 

views on the Crown corporations.” 

 

My question is for the minister. What else, what else will the 

minister do to interfere with the operations of SGI and the other 

Crowns? What else? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the 

member opposite is trying to make something out of nothing 

here. What I said was indeed if he calls running a business in an 

efficient manner interference, that‟s indeed what I will do. Mr. 

Speaker, that is our . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hansard 

clearly, clearly has the record of what exactly was said that day 

in the House. And I continue to operate with no apology 

whatsoever that this government will operate SGI in a 

businesslike fashion, providing the service to Saskatchewan 

residents. And there are improvements that can be made — 

contrary to what members opposite may think, that there‟s 

improvements that can be made — within the province of 

Saskatchewan. That will be the focus of SGI. That will be the 

focus of this government, providing the service at the lowest 

possible cost for Saskatchewan residents. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in the committees last week, 

the Minister of Labour had much to say about the parliamentary 

system, ministerial responsibility, continuity versus change, 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2008 

nexuses, tapestries, synergies, and even Peter Gzowski, Mr. 

Speaker. But unfortunately, unfortunately I don‟t think he 

actually understands the role of the official opposition. So let 

me help him out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Official oppositions hold government to account for 

heavy-handedness, like when a government fires quasi-judicial 

boards or refuses to meet with stakeholders. Official 

oppositions guard against cronyism and patronage, like when a 

government appoints a political friend to a cushy position with, 

say, a $60,000 raise. And official oppositions expose utter 

incompetence like when a government breaks a promise or 

introduces legislation it doesn‟t even understand. 

 

To the minister: does he have any idea who is included in his 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s some reassurance. 

Last week the member opposite perhaps got a little bit agitated, 

but I can at least see he was listening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I can say is offer great reassurance to the 

people of Saskatchewan that we‟re dealing with a piece of 

moderate legislation. That is, in Alberta and PEI [Prince 

Edward Island], the governments don‟t allow employees to 

strike. In British Columbia the legislation can apply to any 

employer. It‟s not the case in Saskatchewan. 

 

And more importantly, the federal government, Manitoba, 

Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, and Newfoundland require 

the union and employer to negotiate an essential services 

agreement, and I‟m happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that model 

will be used in Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that answers the question appropriately, but 

I‟m happy to make further reference to Peter Gzowski. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the questions are simple. Mr. 

Speaker, who is in and who is out? That‟s the fundamental 

question this minister is either unwilling or unable to answer. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Please allow the member to place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, who‟s in and who‟s out? The 

president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses seems to have 

an idea about who‟s included. At a press conference called this 

morning to point out the government‟s failure to substantively 

address concerns about Bill 5, Rosalee Longmoore told 

reporters this: that she expects all SUN [Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses] members from all three classifications to be affected by 

this Bill. 

 

To this minister: is this the case? Does every nurse fall under 

the scope of this Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

The scope actually is going to ensure that the people of 

Saskatchewan, up until this point not being served by essential 

service legislation, the scope is that the people of Saskatchewan 

— that is all across Saskatchewan — will have the protection of 

at the one point having the right to strike guaranteed and on the 

other hand ensuring that there‟s public safety guaranteed. 

 

That‟s the balance that we‟ve achieved, Mr. Speaker. It‟s drawn 

on the best practices from across Canada, Mr. Speaker. And the 

key question, Mr. Speaker, is whether the members opposite 

will be voting for this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, still no answers, but I have 

something else. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour told this 

House all along that he had complete confidence in the 

Department of Justice officials who wrote this Bill. He‟s never 

really explained why, if he has such confidence, he‟s had to hire 

Kevin Wilson to give him legal advice. We now know that 

Wilson made over $50,000. 

 

Can the minister answer some very basic questions about his 

decision to hire Wilson? To the minister: what legislation has 

Kevin Wilson provided advice on; how much has he earned 

since the end of January; and how long will the minister have to 

pay Wilson for his advice? And most importantly, what is the 

exact nature of Mr. Wilson‟s legal advice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a well-known matter of 

course that the previous government ensured that there was 

appropriate legal representation and expertise available, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I can say is Mr. Wilson has provided 

expert advice and research to me on obviously the two Bills 

under consideration and a number of other areas, Mr. Speaker, 

and I‟m delighted with the service that Mr. Wilson has 

provided. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 21, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, still, still no answers. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I have this to say, that this minister has raised the bar 

of incompetence to a whole new Olympian level. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if the minister can‟t answer simple questions 

about his own legislation, I wonder who can. I wonder if Kevin 

Wilson can. By the end of January, Wilson, as I have 

mentioned, had earned over 50,000 from the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. And who knows how much more he‟s earned 

since then. Maybe he knows who this Bill covers. 

 

To the minister: will he bring Kevin Wilson into the next 

committee meeting so that we can finally get some answers? 

And if not, Mr. Speaker, can he at the very least promise us 

this: Mr. Speaker, please, please, please no more pontification 

on his immense knowledge of the parliamentary system, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as we look across Canada, 

we see that every province has essential service legislation in 

place, save a couple. We‟re one, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re 

moving forward on that Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why would we move forward on this Bill, Mr. Speaker? We‟d 

move forward to ensure that the people of this province have 

public safety guaranteed during times of labour disruptions, Mr. 

Speaker. That means that at times when we have surprise 

storms that the highways will be plowed. Mr. Speaker, we 

ensure that people . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — We ensure, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we ensure that people in 

need can have access to health care. That is, kids have access to 

care. We saw during the CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 

Employees] strike, Mr. Speaker, that kids weren‟t getting the 

adequate care at the Royal University Hospital. We‟ve seen 

previously that cancer care was not being provided, Mr. 

Speaker, in earlier strikes. Mr. Speaker, we saw previously that 

people with disabilities have been affected by threats of strike. 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re acting of the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, a lot of words. And after over 

a year of study in Saskatchewan Party backrooms, four months 

after introducing the Bill in the House, and after what the 

minister has said are extensive backroom private consultations 

and after finally tabling the amendments, the Minister of 

Labour still doesn‟t know who‟s in the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister even know after the Bill is 

passed? It would be irresponsible to go ahead as planned. It 

would be irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, to ram this legislation 

through which the minister himself has admitted he doesn‟t 

understand. Will the . . . 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to place his 

question. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Will the minister finally do the right thing, 

finally do what the people of Saskatchewan want? Will he 

finally send these Bills to public hearings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I really appreciate the 

concise nature of the question at the end of a drawn-out 

monologue. Mr. Speaker, what‟s key here? What‟s key here, 

Mr. Speaker, is to turn and say the people of Saskatchewan 

want to know how the official opposition‟s going to be voting 

when it comes to essential services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Before orders of the day I would like to 

ask for leave to make a statement about the Nipawin disaster, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Nipawin Explosion 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, April 

18, at approximately 11:15 hours in the morning, the town of 

Nipawin declared a local state of emergency following a gas 

explosion that levelled buildings and created significant damage 

to other property. 

 

I am saddened to report we also learned that the explosion took 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2008 

two lives and as the RCMP confirmed for media and the public 

on Sunday, those deaths were two members of the same family, 

Jack Boxall and Brent Boxall. I can only imagine, Mr. Speaker, 

the tremendous grief the Boxall family and their friends and 

neighbours are experiencing today. 

 

The Premier extended the province‟s sympathies to the families 

of the dead and injured in his own message on Saturday. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat that expression of condolence in the 

House today. 

 

Yet, Mr. Speaker, in the face of such difficult circumstances, 

another story unfolded. The story was characterized by heroism, 

selflessness, and the ability of a community to come together in 

a time of crisis. 

 

Often when life-threatening situations or crises strike, people 

run away, Mr. Speaker. But this was not the case in Nipawin. 

The RCMP, fire, and other emergency workers ran in and 

risked their lives for the safety of others. This action is exactly 

why some people choose other types of careers, Mr. Speaker. 

For those in law enforcement, firefighting, and EMS 

[emergency medical services], it‟s how they are; it‟s who they 

are; it‟s what they do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Nipawin community under the leadership of Mayor Glen 

Day banded together to bring help and solace, to care and to 

support. Mr. Speaker, the actions of the residents of Nipawin 

over the weekend characterized just what Saskatchewan people 

are made of, where helping our neighbours is a way of life. 

 

The local fire service and the services from Carrot River and 

Choiceland who provided assistance should also be commended 

for the quick action in a response whose speed no doubt 

prevented further destruction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge the work of those men 

and women across government and from a number of other 

organizations who marshalled an emergency response within 

minutes of the first reports of the unfolding situation. 

Representatives from the RCMP, the Kelsey Trail Health 

Region, the Salvation Army, SaskEnergy, and the ministries of 

Health, Social Services, and Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing mobilized to coordinate the response to tend to the 

injured, to secure the site, and to work to prevent further 

property damage and injury. They have all been at the site and 

at other locations working tirelessly throughout the weekend to 

restore services and ensure that Nipawin residents could safely 

return to their homes. 

 

I visited the site of this tragic event in Nipawin on Saturday, 

Mr. Speaker. I saw the devastation first-hand. But, Mr. Speaker, 

what struck me the most was the community — neighbours 

helping neighbours, residents, health care providers, police and 

fire services, utility companies and government agencies — all 

working together around the clock. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in today‟s paper is the incredible story of Karen 

Bilec, a licensed EMT [emergency medical technician] who 

raced to help the injured just moments after her own family‟s 

home was completely destroyed by the blast. 

 

On Saturday I learned about the efforts of RCMP staff sergeant, 

Jeff Roscoe, and the other members of the Nipawin detachment, 

who were on the scene immediately and were instrumental in 

assisting the injured and evacuating the area. Some of these 

officers were off duty from the night before, Mr. Speaker, and 

responded without being called. This demonstrates their true 

dedication to the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just two of the examples of the 

courageous and immediate responses to the horrific events. 

There were dozens more. In typical Saskatchewan fashion, I‟m 

sure none of these people would think of themselves as heroes. 

But that‟s exactly what they are, Mr. Speaker. Everyone pulled 

together for the grieving, for the injured, for those forced to 

evacuate. People did not run away but opened their arms and 

hearts for the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the days ahead, the RCMP, the fire 

commissioner‟s office within my ministry, and SaskEnergy will 

be conducting a thorough investigation. This will determine 

how this explosion happened and what we can do to prevent 

such a tragedy from ever happening again. I understand 

occupational health and safety will also be conducting an 

investigation, as is always the case when a worker is killed on 

the job. We will learn from these lessons, from this tragic event, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But today I want to thank everyone involved in responding to 

the Nipawin explosion. I thank them for their courage, their 

compassion, and their dedication to Saskatchewan people. And 

I extend to them my own deepest appreciation and that of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — With leave to make a statement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like first 

to thank the minister for sharing his statement. Mr. Speaker, the 

official opposition will also join, like to join with the minister 

and offer our condolence to the Boxall family as well as to 

recognize the very important work of the emergency workers in 

and around Nipawin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we saw in Nipawin on Friday is truly an 

example of the character of Saskatchewan. People bonded 

together. They worked together to ensure that the very best 

outcome could be achieved out of a very difficult situation, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the fire officials, the RCMP, and the 

EMS officials in Nipawin and area need to be commended for 

their hard work, their dedication, and their willingness to go 

above and beyond the call of duty. But most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that we all need to give the people of Nipawin 

and surrounding area our great appreciation for their 



April 21, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1041 

willingness to come together to help those in need in their 

community. And as I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, this is truly 

about the character of Saskatchewan and the people of Nipawin 

exemplify that. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Questions Taken as Notice 

 

The Speaker: — Prior to orders of the day I want to clarify a 

statement I made last week. Last week the Minister of Finance 

took notice of questions directed to the Minister of Health. 

During question period the following day, the Minister of 

Health stood to answer the questions. Under rule 19(3), 

“Questions taken as notice may be answered at a subsequent 

Question Period.” Following question period, the Speaker asked 

that in future ministers rise to respond during the final minute of 

question period. In that way they would not hinder the flow of 

questioning in question period. 

 

After further discussion with the government and opposition 

House leaders, it was agreed that ministers could rise at any 

time during question period to respond to a question taken by 

notice provided they did not disrupt the flow of a specific line 

of questioning. I want to thank the government and opposition 

House leaders for their thoughts and input regarding the 

application of rule 19(3). 

 

And one further personal announcement. On Friday morning 

our son and daughter-in-law presented my wife and I with our 

second grandchild, a son, Hunter Graham, 8 pounds, 9 ounces. 

Mother and baby are doing well, and grandparents are elated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READING 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 29 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s with a great deal of pleasure I rise to make some 

comments on this Bill. It‟s caused a fair bit of excitement, I 

think, across the province and especially in rural areas. 

 

Many areas of the province had been looking forward to the 

introduction of The Education Act and to see what changes 

were made and what were being proposed by the Saskatchewan 

Party government. And there‟s a number of reasons for that, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there has been a great many changes 

in the education field across the province over the last few 

years, and I know that many in rural Saskatchewan feel that 

their hopes and dreams for their community were really being 

ignored with the way the school review process was being held. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for the past year and before that, the 

Saskatchewan Party has been making some promises and 

commitments and raising hope throughout the province that 

they would do things differently. They would have a different 

look at the education system. They would look differently at 

how education is delivered in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think first and foremost when you look at the reaction 

when the Bill was finally tabled, went through first reading, I 

don‟t believe that this Bill meets those expectations one iota. 

And we can see that quite clearly from the comments. The 

headline on the one website that I was on the other day said, 

“SARM Unhappy with Education Amendments.” And I quote 

from the president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities], President Dave Marit: 

 

The time line of moving it to ten months doesn‟t give a 

community near enough time to do due diligence on the 

opportunity for growth and what to do with the facility 

once the school is gone. 

 

So what we‟ve seen — and really Mr. Marit wraps it up quite 

nicely — instead of putting in any type of process that would 

support the school system, any type of a process that would 

encourage retaining schools in small communities and rural 

communities, all this Bill has done, it‟s done some minor 

tinkering and it has changed the notice, the timeline of notice 

that has to be given to communities for schools that are under 

review. Instead of notice being given in February, that notice 

will now be given in October. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this really contrasts with what‟s been said 

over this past year. And I will go back to the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald on April 18, 2007. So what we‟re looking at is 

almost a year ago, Mr. Speaker, and what the now Premier said 

at that time is, and I‟ll quote from the newspaper article. 

 

Wall said the party would end closure for most of 50 

schools by designating funds to schools of opportunity and 

schools of necessity. 

 

Schools of opportunity would be schools where local 

leaders and business identify pending development that 

needs schools to attract population. Schools of necessity 

are schools where “too much time is spent on the bus.” 

 

Wall said that instead of spending more money on busing 

“we think the money should go to classrooms, more 

teachers.” 

 

So that‟s the kind of comments that this Saskatchewan Party 

was making around the province and, Mr. Speaker, I was at a 

number of meetings and a number of rallies, one out in front of 

this building, where a number of commitments were made, 

hopes were raised. And, Mr. Speaker, that is the most appalling 

of all of this, is that while we played on people‟s emotions, the 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2008 

Saskatchewan Party went out, they built up people‟s 

expectations, built up their hopes, played with the emotions in a 

very difficult situation, and then have not followed through. 

 

Quite clearly they have not come through. They have not made 

the changes that people expected. They have not anywhere 

close to meeting the expectations that they built over the whole 

process of education across Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even earlier this year we can go back to 

when the Saskatchewan Party was already government and the 

Premier was making a speech. There was some comments that 

were posted in The Southwest Booster. And what was the 

headline on this post? It was “Wall keeping promises in 

supporting schools.” And what his comments were in the 

article, and I‟ll quote: 

 

“We have called for a much more rigorous process, when 

we were in opposition we called for a much rigorous 

process before a decision could be taken to close a school, 

because once you close a school it‟s almost irrevocable. 

How do you re-open them? So are all the questions being 

asked around . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟m finding that there‟s a few too 

many private debates taking place at this time and I would ask 

members to recognize the opportunity of members to respond 

when they‟ve been recognized. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟ll go back and I‟ll start again on my quotes from The 

Southwest Booster. And these were comments that the Premier 

made, and he was Premier at this time because these comments 

were made in February of this year. And I quote: 

 

“We have called for a much more rigorous process, when 

we were in opposition we called for a much more rigorous 

process before a decision could be taken to close a school, 

because once you close a school it‟s almost irrevocable. 

How do you re-open them? So are all the questions being 

asked around economic opportunity? We‟re going to work 

on our designation about what we call schools of 

opportunity, which would preclude closure if they receive 

that designation.” 

 

“And then there‟s the remote schools. At some point 

you‟re going to ask kids to be on a bus for too long, and so 

decisions need to be made on that basis. So we haven‟t 

changed that. We‟re still committed to those.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we look at schools of opportunity and what 

have they done? Well we‟re all waiting and all the schools are 

waiting because they haven‟t got their criteria drawn up. And 

what we‟re talking about is $1 million that‟s been put into a 

pool for schools of opportunity. One million dollars for a school 

in a remote area of Saskatchewan or an area that‟s booming — 

that doesn‟t work. That‟s not anywhere near enough money to 

address the issues around the province. 

 

And when we talk about schools of necessity — which the 

members opposite talked about again and again and again — 

well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, what they‟ve done. They have 

taken the description last year from small remote schools. They 

have put it into this year‟s funding manual. And you know what 

they‟ve done? They changed the title. Now small remote 

schools are now schools of necessity — changed the title. 

There‟s not one criteria, there‟s not one change in the 

requirement for a school of necessity. That‟s the kind of 

commitments that these people are angry about that they were 

not, they were not even close to addressing in The Education 

Act. 

 

There‟s many things and, Mr. Speaker, I know some people will 

say I‟m not talking about the same thing. But I am because 

they‟re all directly connected. They all have to do with 

education. It‟s multi-faceted the way education is developed 

and delivered across this province. All of these pieces of 

legislation from the operating grant to The Education Act — 

and it goes on and on — it‟s all intertwined and it all has a huge 

impact on education in our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it even goes to later this spring than the 

comments from the Premier in The Southwest Booster. And 

here we have the member from Thunder Creek who attended all 

of the community meetings for the Prairie South School 

Division, and he made these comments when talking about 

schools of opportunity, schools of necessity, and he said: 

 

“The criteria are being flushed out now, and I‟m not sure 

of exactly what they‟ll be yet, but in the next few days, I 

understand the minister of education will have those 

criteria out to the boards and they‟ll be laid out in detail 

and the boards will have a good idea on how to apply 

them.” 

 

And this was from the member from Thunder Creek and it was 

quoted on February 1, 2008. Well you know what? We still 

haven‟t seen the criteria. And you know what? There‟s a lot of 

regulations that have to be written to back up any of the 

changes that are being made. 

 

So while we‟re sitting here saying, well isn‟t this wonderful and 

they‟re going to be telling us how they met one more of their 

campaign commitments, well to meet it to this extent, in my 

view and the view of many parents across Saskatchewan and 

especially in rural Saskatchewan, this is not a promise kept by 

any means. It‟s been danced around. It‟s been dodged. And 

there is no way that this is a promise kept. And, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve seen the full impact of that when we had a couple in the 

rotunda last weekend and what was it they said? “An „F‟ for 

[the] Saskatchewan Party.” And from the article I want to quote 

just a couple of comments: 

 

Parent lobby groups fighting to keep schools open gave 

the provincial government a failing grade Thursday for its 

proposed changes to the rural school closure process. 

 

And it‟s quite telling in Mr. Lewis‟s comments when he‟s 

quoted in the article. And his question that he asks is important 

I think for each and every one of us to really ask when we are 

looking at this piece of legislation. 

 

“The question that has been asked [to me] by a lot of 



April 21, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

different people is, „Who is this helping?‟” Lewis said. 

 

Who is this helping? It‟s playing politics with a very difficult 

situation in any community. It doesn‟t anywhere near meet the 

commitments and the promises and the hope that was delivered 

by this Saskatchewan Party previous to the election and in the 

few months following the election. They aren‟t keeping this 

commitment. They aren‟t looking at actual fact to the issues of 

education in rural and small communities across this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear from the comments that we see 

over and over again. 

 

And even Mr. Lewis in his comments last Thursday here at the 

legislature said: 

 

“We‟re just at a loss to wonder where a lot of the things 

they spoke about a year ago, where are those promises 

now?” 

 

Mr. Lewis is accurate and there is many people across the 

province that are wondering where they are. 

 

And after assuming office last November, the Saskatchewan 

Party government urged school boards to consider stepping 

back from school closures to see what legislative changes were 

coming. Lot of disappointment out there, Mr. Speaker. Many 

school boards did step back. Is there any support coming? 

Nothing for schools of opportunity. That‟s at least a year away. 

 

We‟ve seen some fluctuations in the grant. But I think more and 

more what we‟re seeing is the disappointment — the 

disappointment of communities, the disappointment of students, 

and the disappointment of citizens right across the province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this, there‟s a list of schools 

that are up for closure and what the Saskatchewan government 

is doing is fiddling away at the edges. They‟re not keeping their 

commitments, keeping the promises they made to people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of more stakeholders that 

we need to talk to about this piece of legislation. So at this time 

I would move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved that we adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly . . . The member from Moose Jaw . . . Order. The 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has moved to adjourn 

debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — In order to accommodate the good 

work of the committees, I move that this Assembly do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that this Assembly 

do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. In order to facilitate the 

working of committees, this Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:38.] 

 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1031 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1031 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1031 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1031 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1031 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1032 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1032 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Changing the Rules 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1032 

 Heroism Following Nipawin Explosion 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1032 

 Royal Canadian Mounted Police Charity Ball 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1032 

 Flooding in Paddockwood Area 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1033 

 Former Member Honoured 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1033 

 Pork for Food Banks 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1033 

 Saskatoon Bakery Receives Torch Award 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1034 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Climate Change 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1034 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1034 

 Release of Confidential Documents 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1035 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1036 

 Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1037 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1037 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1037 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1038 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Nipawin Explosion 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1039 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1040 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Questions Taken as Notice 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1041 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READING 

 Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1041 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


