




















































Hansard: December 02, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 22A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1935 

 December 2, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. It 

is a great honour for me to introduce to you and through you to 

all members of this Assembly some very special guests that 

have joined us in your gallery, including His Excellency, the 

US [United States] ambassador to Canada, David Wilkins. And 

the ambassador is joined by Tom Huffaker from the consulate 

office in Calgary, as well as Kim Klassen, just a few moments 

ago. Also joining us today from the protocol office is Gwen 

Jacobson as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Earlier this afternoon, I guess first thing this afternoon, we were 

able to host a luncheon in honour of His Excellency. And the 

turnout obviously was solid, Mr. Speaker, because people 

wanted to be there to be able to say thank you to him. His tour 

as the ambassador from the United States to our country is 

coming to an end. It ends up in seven weeks, I think. And we 

wanted to take the chance here in Saskatchewan — and we’re 

appreciative of the fact that the opposition leader was there as 

well — to simply say to the ambassador, thank you. 

 

He has been a clarion voice of wise counsel for, we think 

frankly, for Canadians as he has travelled this country 

extensively, but he has also taken our message to the United 

States. He has made sure the importance of our energy 

relationship is known to our friends in the United States, and 

the importance of NAFTA [North American Free Trade 

Agreement] is also known to our friends in the United States. 

He has been a voice for progress and trade and commerce 

between two great friends, Canada and the United States. 

 

And we’re with bittersweet emotions today, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, because we’re grateful that he’s here in the province, 

we welcome him heartily, but we are sad because he will be 

leaving. And I just want to say on behalf on the provincial 

government certainly, and hopefully on behalf of members of 

this House, thank you to the ambassador for all of his work. We 

hope he takes perhaps the time to rest for a while before he 

starts some new adventure, and maybe even some time to 

improve on his judgment with respect to NFL [National 

Football League] teams to cheer for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Would all members of the House join me in welcoming His 

Excellency and our guest from the consulate today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Premier in both welcoming and thanking His Excellency, 

David Wilkins, for his service, not only to his own nation and 

president but to, I would argue, the people of Canada and in 

particular the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I was very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to serve as premier when 

Ambassador Wilkins was appointed and had an opportunity to 

welcome, I think, on his first visit to Saskatchewan and 

subsequent visits. And I very much appreciated both his 

willingness to experience and learn of our great province and to 

represent our interests in his councils, both in Ottawa and in the 

United States of America. 

 

I believe my last meeting of any duration with the ambassador 

occurred in Deadwood, South Dakota when the ambassador was 

kind enough to buy me breakfast. And so not only thanks for all 

of your service, but thanks for the bacon and eggs. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s also an honour and a 

pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to 

members of this House, seated in your gallery are a number of 

constituency assistants for government members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all members of this House will know the 

important role that constituency assistants play as we seek to 

serve the people of the province, as we seek to serve our 

constituents and help them with concerns they may have with 

government, to answer their questions dutifully and as quickly 

as possible. And in many ways, the faces of the MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] office, of course, is represented by 

those shining faces in the gallery today of our constituency 

assistants. 

 

We want to say thank you to them for their work for the MLAs 

and most significantly for the province of Saskatchewan. And 

we also wish to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, I would like to introduce to you a colleague, an 

MLA colleague from the neighbouring province, the great 

province of Manitoba, Heather Stefanson. Heather, if you 

wouldn’t mind standing. 

 

Heather was first elected in a by-election in 2000 in the 

high-profile constituency of Tuxedo. The Stefanson name is 

well known in Manitoba politics for many years. Heather held 

numerous critic portfolios — Advanced Education, Education, 

Health, and is currently the environment critic. 

 

She received her undergrad degree in political science at the 

University of Western Ontario. And prior to her election, 

Heather spent some time working at the Prime Minister’s 

office. I’m sure one of her eyes is on what’s happening there 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

today. 

 

But above all else Heather spends time with her two children, 

Victoria, seven, and Tommy, four. And to those of you that 

know Heather well, you know that her real handful is her 

husband, Jason who is with her in the gallery as well. Jason is 

an investment banker with CIBC World Markets and he did 

some great work for our province on the Saskferco deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 

welcoming the Stefansons to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly a group visiting us today, a group of 

grade 5 and 6 students from the Regina Christian School 

located in my constituency. They’re accompanied by their 

teacher, Tim Irvine, and chaperones, Doug Nielsen, Nina 

Brailean, and Lynette Chalifoux. 

 

I look forward to meeting with this group for my own question 

period with this group after our question period. And at this 

point I would ask all members to join with me in extending 

them a very warm welcome and a Merry Christmas. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — And members, if you’ll allow me a moment 

as well. We’re pleased to have representatives from the 

Saskatchewan House of Prayer as well as representatives who 

have joined us from the Regina Evangelical Ministerial 

Association. A number of members had the pleasure of 

enjoying their hospitality at lunch today. Welcome to your 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of maintaining quality health care 

services within our province, and that includes recruitment, 

retention, adequate staffing, adequate funding, and bargaining 

in good faith. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all health care providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents from 

Kindersley, Eston, Saskatoon, Maple Creek, Piapot, Leader, 

Swift Current, and Regina. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I rise to present petitions on the minimum 

wage, the indexing of minimum wage. We all understand often 

the minimum wage increases are sporadic and do not always 

reflect the cost of living faced by minimum wage earners. Mr. 

Speaker, the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Petitions are signed from people of Saskatoon, Shields, and 

Marcelin. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Now I’ll recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise and 

present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan seniors, an issue that many are thinking about as 

we approach the winter months. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary education. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated through the 

co-operation of the Canadian Federation of Students, University 

of Regina Students’ Union, the University of Saskatchewan 

Students’ Union, and the First Nations University of Canada 

Students’ Association. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens with regard to 

the high property taxes that they’re paying. They’re requesting 

a reduction in the education portion of property tax, and this is 

important to Saskatchewan families and to business. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these are signed by concerned citizens of Regina, Oxbow, 

Redvers, Arcola, and Carievale. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of the residents of Cumberland constituency. The 

petition addresses the issues in La Ronge where SaskEnergy is 

refusing to allow customers to connect to natural gas lines, 

indicates that SaskEnergy is returning deposit cheques to its 

customers, and calls on the government to work with 

SaskEnergy to assist these customers to connect to natural gas 

lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first of several petitions that I will 

present on this important subject. It is signed by residents of La 

Ronge and the Cumberland constituency. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

with a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents. The 

petition is in support of the government’s policy on green 

vehicles, Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named in this petition to follow 

their own platform and government policies and trade in 

their Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI’s 2008 list 

of recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

This petition is signed by members of Regina, Indian Head, 

Yorkton, and Rouleau, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Karate Gold Medal Winner from St. Louis 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

pay tribute to a constituent who has accomplished two gold 

medals at the International Shotokan Karate Federation world 

championships held in Toronto last month. Marcel Lussier of 

St. Louis, a community south of Prince Albert, won gold 

medals in kata, which are the forms, and kumite, which is 

sparring, in the 45- to 50-year-old seniors’ category. 

 

There were some 405 competitors from 31 countries in 

Marcel’s group. He competed against contenders from Italy, 

Barbados, Trinidad, Tobago, and the United States and Canada. 

 

In 1990 he began training and teaching karate in St. Louis, and 

he’s been active on the provincial and national karate circuit for 

the past 27 years. He became chief instructor in Saskatchewan 

in 1999. He soon will travel the world as guest instructor. 

 

Recognition also goes out to the students from the St. Louis 

Karate Club who competed in the world tournament: Rebecca 

Mitchell, Laurene Mitchell, Nicole Boutin, Michelle 

Smytaniuk, Bradley Boutin, Erik Nevland, and Randy 

Smytaniuk. 

 

I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members join me in 

recognizing the hard work and perseverance and 

accomplishments of Marcel Lussier and the St. Louis Karate 

Club. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Reaching the Unreachable 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell you about a 

remarkable and innovative project that teachers and grade 9 

students at Walter Murray Collegiate in the constituency of 

Saskatoon Eastview are sharing with the grade 9’s of a sister 

school in Nepal. 

 

Bruce Bradshaw, the principal of Walter Murray Collegiate, is 

the coordinator of the Canadian side of the project and is 

assisted by two teachers and two grade 9 students who act as 

student coordinators. 

 

The project is called Reaching the Unreachable, and they are 

doing this electronically by establishing a computer learning 

and knowledge network for students in rural Nepal. The project 

connects the grassroots of two very different cultures in an 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

educational setting. 

 

Nepal has many acute needs such as food, clean water, basic 

health services, and education. Less than 30 per cent of children 

reach grade 6. Forty-two per cent of all males and 65 per cent of 

all females remain illiterate. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 

has concluded, and I quote: 

 

Education is the largest single contributor to break 

poverty, income gap, gender . . . and ethnic inequality and 

also to improve nutrition, health and longevity of people. 

 

Reaching the Unreachable is designed to mitigate those needs 

through education. Walter Murray is taking English literacy, 

mathematics, and technical skills all the way to Nepal. They are 

working to assist the school in developing a small computer lab, 

five low-end Pentium computers, and an electronic collection of 

freely available educational materials. They have begun public 

fundraising efforts to see that this is accomplished. 

 

This small group of Saskatoon people aims to provide benefits 

that will affect approximately 2,500 children and adults each 

year through these programs, and the use of computers in the 

community after school time. 

 

It’s important to recognize that this project works both ways. 

While it builds bodies of knowledge resources in Nepal, it also 

provides the opportunity for our young people to gain an 

intimate knowledge and understanding of a people and a culture 

a world away. Thus it brings about transformations at 

community level for both partners and teaches differences while 

sharing knowledge. 

 

Congratulations to Walter Murray, its students and teachers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Victoria Hospital Foundation Festival of Trees 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Victoria 

Hospital Foundation of Prince Albert is a registered charity 

charged with the task of enhancing and enriching the quality of 

health care at Victoria Hospital. Their aim is to meet one of the 

hospital’s major needs every year through fundraising. 

 

The Snowflake Gala is an initiative through the Festival of 

Trees fundraiser. Organizing the festival is a daunting task. It 

takes 13 committees and 250 volunteers planning for almost a 

year. The goal this year was to raise enough money to buy nine 

cardiac crash carts at a cost of $15,000 each. 

 

The Snowflake Gala was held on November 21 and was a 

sold-out event with approximately 200 people attending. Three 

cardiac crash carts were purchased by very generous supporters, 

Malcolm and Melba Jenkins, Roger and Diane Mann, and an 

anonymous donor. Eighteen thousand dollars was raised 

through a gift package auction. The citizens of Prince Albert 

have shown once again their overwhelming generosity. The 

gala alone raised enough funds to purchase five additional crash 

carts. 

 

The Festival of Trees ran from Friday, November 21 through to 

Monday, November 24. It is estimated that between 3 and 4,000 

people attended, with the final fundraising amount to be 

announced shortly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in first, 

congratulating the Victoria Hospital Foundation on these 

successful fundraisers and secondly, in thanking them for all 

their hard work throughout the year to raise funds to support the 

programs and services of the Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Unions of Regina Christmas Dinner 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

working people of Regina are once again joining together in 

support for the less fortunate by hosting the eighth annual 

Unions of Regina Christmas Dinner on Monday, December 22. 

 

Since 2000 a warm dinner has been served annually to 

approximately 1,000 people in the Regina community who are 

given tickets through various human service agencies. 

Following the meal, the children in attendance are treated to a 

visit with Santa, a holiday gift, and the opportunity to 

participate in fun activities. 

 

This event is made possible through the financial donations 

made by Regina’s unions and the volunteer efforts of 

approximately 150 union and family members. Additionally, 

the Delta Hotel provides their banquet hall rent-free for the 

event, and Delta management and the hotel’s unionized staff 

take time to help coordinate the volunteers. 

 

Funds collected over and above those needed for the dinner are 

contributed to the Janice Bernier Endowment for Food Security 

fund, established in 2005 by the United Way. The endowment 

fund supports agencies and programs that offer those in need 

with the ability to regularly purchase affordable good food with 

dignity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join with me in 

recognizing the significant contributions made by working 

people, their families, and their unions in conjunction with the 

Delta Hotel this holiday season. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Regina Rotary Carol Festival 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had the 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

privilege and honour of attending the 68th Rotary Carol Festival 

at Regina Metropolitan United Church. It was a wonderful 

opportunity to celebrate the start of Advent by listening to the 

many talented voices. 

 

This Carol Festival began November 30 and continues until 

December 4, with 15 choirs performing each evening. It was 

truly a joy to observe the large number of youth involved in this 

event, especially from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Their diverse 

music selections and quality of singing definitely captured the 

holiday spirit. Congratulations to both Winston Knoll and Riffel 

High School choirs. 

 

It’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that this festival is 

sponsored by the Rotary Club of Regina, which is the oldest 

service club in the city. The holiday spirit is captured by the 

Rotarians who direct festival proceeds to various local charities 

— the Leader-Post Christmas Cheer Fund, Access 

Communications Children’s Fund, News 98 Santas 

Anonymous, and Rotary homeless initiative. This festival has a 

long tradition in our city, and I encourage everyone to either 

attend the remaining concerts or watch the broadcasts on cable 

TV. 

 

The enthusiasm of the choir is infectious. Their singing will 

ensure an uplifting, positive start to the holiday season. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

MyFiH Awards 

 

Mr. Broten: — On Friday, November 28, I had the pleasure of 

attending the MyFiH Awards Luncheon in Saskatoon. Mr. 

Speaker, MyFiH is the easy-to-remember abbreviation for My 

Future is Here — an initiative of Saskatchewan Rotary Youth 

Foundation. 

 

The MyFiH network, in addition to developing connections 

among talented young Saskatchewan residents, provides 

scholarships to assist post-secondary students with their studies 

as well as funding for young entrepreneurs to help transform 

their ideas into reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce this year’s recipients to 

this Assembly: the Saskatchewan Rotary Youth Foundation’s 

Business Capital Award to Curtis Sarafincian, The Red Shoe 

Tailor; the Rotary Clubs of Regina Eastview and Regina South 

Scholarship, Alyssa Smith; the Rotary Clubs of Saskatoon 

North and Riverside Scholarship, Scott Kimpton; the Rotary 

Club of Saskatoon Nutana Scholarship, Seema Grover; the 

Vaughn Wyant Automotive Group Scholarship, Alex Tilbert; 

the Saskatchewan Credit Union Scholarship, Erin Buck; the 

SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] Scholarship, Iyonia 

Rabayaa; the Rotary Club of Saskatoon Scholarship, Daniel 

Savage; the Rotaract of Saskatoon Scholarship, Chelsey 

Shewchuk; Airline Hotels and Resorts Scholarship, Kristine 

Kostyniuk; the Saskatchewan Research Council’s Scholarships, 

Elise Normand and Rylan Grant. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Business Capital winners are: the 

Scotiabank Awards go to Cassie Rosteski of Cassie Danielle 

Clothing; Bevin Bradley of Stall Gallery; Holly Dunlop of 

Eastwood Family Dental; Randi-Lee Loshack of Fitmom; and 

Ryan Bradshaw of Corby Cards. The Affinity Credit Union 

Award to Bruce McCannel of Nutrition Now; and 

Saskatchewan Credit Unions Award to Rylan Grant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating this 

year’s recipients and thank the many sponsors that make 

MyFiH such a success. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Poet Honoured at Saskatchewan Book Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, at the 16th annual 

Saskatchewan Book Awards held last Saturday, there were 

record numbers of entries with 113 titles and 50 authors and 

publishers competing. 

 

Of special note was Gary Hyland, a well-known Moose Jaw 

author who was awarded two of the 14 book awards. Gary 

Hyland won Book of the Year for his book entitled Love of 

Mirrors: Poems New and Selected. Mr. Hyland also won Poetry 

Award with this selection. 

 

Gary Hyland is an inspiration and has made many outstanding 

contributions to the city of Moose Jaw, to our province, and to 

Canada, with his dedication to writing and other fine arts. 

Gary’s been a leader in our community with his involvement in 

a number of volunteer positions. Along with numerous awards 

and accolades, Gary Hyland has been named Moose Jaw’s 

Citizen of the Year twice, received an honorary doctorate in 

literature from the University of Regina, and was named to the 

Order of Canada. 

 

In Moose Jaw, Gary is perhaps best known as being 

instrumental in starting Festival of the Word over a decade ago. 

Since being diagnosed with ALS [amyotrophic lateral sclerosis] 

or Lou Gehrig’s Disease, as it is more commonly known, he 

continues writing and being involved in his community. 

 

Congratulations to Gary Hyland on being awarded Book of the 

Year and the Poetry Awards at the Saskatchewan Book Awards. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Support for Northern Youth 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to preface my question to the Minister of Justice by saying that 

the vast majority of northern youth are bright, energetic, and 

hopeful people. However, like other regions of Saskatchewan 

and Canada, there are some along the fringes of our community 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

that lose hope. Some of those that lose hope turn to suicide, and 

some of the surviving young voices talk about the lack of 

services, the lack of help, family breakdown, and an increased 

prevalence of illicit drug use. 

 

These Saskatchewan families and these Saskatchewan young 

people need several support systems. One of the biggest 

requests from the northern leadership is that this government 

establish a northern-specific drug enforcement unit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all politics aside, will the minister today commit 

to put in place a northern-specific drug enforcement unit to help 

fight for these young people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the opportunity to answer the question. 

 

It’s always a tragedy when a young person of either sex, 

whether they live in the North or they live in the South part of 

our province, becomes involved with drugs. We have a number 

of programs that are in place already, and we certainly want to 

make sure that the programs that we have fulfill their mandate 

and are able to provide the best possible supports to our youth 

throughout the province. 

 

In the North we have a number of programs available through 

Justice, through community justice programs dealing with 

youth that have already come into contact with the law. 

 

We’re also looking at other programs that will provide supports 

for families and for young people before they’ve come into 

contact with the law. I think prevention is a far better course of 

action than waiting until after they’ve come in contact with the 

law. 

 

I appreciate the question, and we’re going through the budget 

process, and it’s certainly something we’ll consider. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it is very important to note that 

many police officers feel overwhelmed when trying to enforce 

the law of our land. We never try and diminish the importance 

of law throughout all parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

In northern Saskatchewan many times the police officers feel 

that they’re overwhelmed with crisis management and don’t 

have the time to work with young people in the schools, in 

different programs and recreation programs, and also promoting 

proactive, healthy programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many communities, families, youth, and children 

feel isolated, and many times they feel abandoned when it 

comes to police staffing and police protective services in our 

community. We know the prevalence of police officers — 

good, proactive police officers — are so very important towards 

finding solutions to helping our young people. 

Will the Minister of Justice at least ensure that every 

detachment is fully manned and to also look at increasing 

staffing to help communities protect our young families and 

help deal with our young people’s problems? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the member opposite for his question. And I too feel that there 

are needs to the North that have been left unaddressed for many 

years. 

 

I will tell the members today that the Saskatchewan Association 

of Chiefs of Police are compiling a list of where they want to 

have resources deployed. This government is going to put 120 

new police officers in our communities throughout 

Saskatchewan over the next four years, total — 30 this year, 90 

more to come. We also have a commitment of $11.7 million 

from the federal government that will allow for additional boots 

on the street. 

 

To the member from Athabasca: I’ve had inquiries made by 

members up there who wish to have more resources, and I will 

do what I can to make sure we have additional resources. The 

drug task forces that we have in this province know that there’s 

an issue up north, Mr. Speaker. They too want to go after those 

individuals up north — the suppliers — not the people who use 

the drugs who are victimized, but the suppliers. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, no community is immune to 

youth suicide, and many northern Saskatchewan communities 

struggle with this issue. Recently a number of young people 

chose to end their lives in some of these northern communities. 

And too often, Mr. Speaker, these young people find 

themselves caught in a world that leaves them feeling helpless 

and in despair. 

 

My question is to the Minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations and the minister responsible for Northern 

Saskatchewan. Why are we missing the opportunity to help 

these young people stay alive? And more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, what specific plans does she have to provide these 

young people with a sense of hope? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to the member opposite for bringing up an issue that’s of 

importance to everyone in this province, whether we’re in 

northern Saskatchewan or in this part of the province. 

 

As you can tell by my colleagues’ answers, this is an issue 

that’s going across ministry, across our government. We all 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

understand that Justice is involved, that the police workers are 

involved, but also is social workers and mental health workers. 

And right across our government we’ve been talking to teachers 

and the mayors in the North to make sure that it’s not just 

government that’s talking about it. We’ll get the input from the 

northerners as well. 

 

And that’s one of the jobs that we have been doing as 

government. We feel it’s very important. And it’s something 

that’s not on the back burner. It’s not something we’ve 

forgotten about. It’s something that we will be working on as a 

united government as we go forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The addictions, the 

lack of enforcement, the lack of services, will not stop attacking 

our families and our northern youth. And therefore the youth 

suicide problem will not stop itself. I urge the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations to sit down with her colleagues in 

Health and Justice and Education, along with the northern 

community leaders, to come up with some immediate solutions. 

 

They have to discuss additional funding, reopening addiction 

facilities, proper staffing at these facilities, mental health units, 

and wellness and recreation centres. Mr. Speaker, the northern 

communities feel isolated and abandoned at times. We need to 

send a proper message. 

 

In light of this crisis, will the Minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations gather immediately with her colleagues from 

Health, Education, and Justice and agree to engage northern 

community leaders on a quarterly basis to discuss the expansion 

and improvements of these services to fight for these young 

people, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for Indian 

and Métis relations. 
 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I agree with the member 

opposite. This is not a political issue. This is an issue that is 

dealing with all of our children. The members opposite had the 

opportunity for 16 years to deal with this issue. We as a 

government right now are trying also to deal with the issue. 

 

We’re talking to the teachers. We had an opportunity to speak 

to the Métis leaders. We’ve been speaking to the First Nations 

leaders. We’ve been speaking to the mayors. We’ve had the 

opportunity, when the northern mayors got together, they 

addressed this very issue. 

 

And then we have got all of my colleagues, not just in cabinet 

but all our caucus members, understand the importance of this 

issue, and we’re looking for solutions. We don’t want to just 

reinvent the wheel. We don’t want to just look at the issues and 

the problems that the previous government faced. Let’s say, 

how can we look outside the box and make a difference. 

We are really intent on doing this. This is a promise that we 

have made to the First Nations and Métis people and 

northerners, and it’s something that we intend to keep. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Sexually Exploited Youth 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday a report entitled Under 

the Radar: The Sexual Exploitation of Young Men, was released 

here in Regina. The report found that 83 per cent of young 

males in the sex trade entered the trade before they turned 18; 

75 per cent have been sexually abused prior to being on the 

street; 85 per cent of the young male sex-trade workers are 

Aboriginal, but their clients are usually middle-income to 

upper-income white men. 

 

The report makes 14 recommendations in a number of areas. It 

also underlines the fact that sexually exploited young men fly 

under the radar and their needs are very different from those of 

sexually exploited young women. To the Minister of Social 

Services: how does she plan to respond to the recommendations 

in this report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 

member opposite mentioned, this report has just been released. 

We’ll be looking at the recommendations, and as I’ve said 

before, we’ll be looking at the recommendations of a previous 

report that was done under the previous government that had to 

do with exploitation of children. And we’ll be looking at all of 

the recommendations that were never acted on by the previous 

government when that report was released. So we’ll be giving 

all of it consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it deeply regrettable. 

This is an opportunity for the minister to show some real 

leadership, but she instead decides to play the blame game. 

 

We know the sex trade is dangerous for both women and men, 

but the fear of gay bashing is a unique threat faced by young 

men in the trade despite the fact that many of them identify as 

heterosexual or bisexual. 

 

Kim Sutherland of Street Culture Kidz has worked with young 

people at risk for more than a decade, and in today’s 

Leader-Post he talks about the need for long-term housing 

options and solutions for the most vulnerable people in our 

society, including young men in the sex trade. 

 

Unfortunately the Sask Party so far has missed the opportunity 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

to deal with the crisis in housing. Hopefully this report will 

provide a new focus to the need to address this issue. To the 

minister: will she announce new funding for safe and affordable 

housing options, particularly for young people at risk? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, this 

report just came out yesterday. We’ll be looking at it. It 

involves more than just this ministry. There will be 

inter-ministerial discussions on the report. It’s unfortunate that 

the member opposite throws leadership, or lack of leadership, 

out there when it was his government that put out a report, as I 

said before, that they for the most part ignored after the report 

was done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Let’s talk a little bit about that report, Mr. 

Speaker. In the last election the Sask Party promised to 

reconvene the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 

Exploitation of Children through the Sex Trade. The Premier 

also instructed this Minister of Social Services to do so in her 

mandate letter. So far the minister has missed the opportunity to 

keep the Sask Party promise. But this new report certainly 

identifies further actions that can be taken. It covers new ground 

that was not addressed by the last committee. 

 

To the minister: does she plan to keep the Sask Party’s promise 

to reconvene the committee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Of course I do. Mr. Speaker, in answer 

to his question, of course we’ll be keeping that promise. It’s 

only one year since the election. We have kept a number of 

promises — 80 promises, I am being told. 

 

Within my own ministry, we have kept promises within the 

ministry. We’ve also gone beyond those promises. We had the 

housing task force; we did the CBO [community-based 

organization] summit; we have made a number of significant 

announcements and enhancements to programs. He has to 

remember the mandate letter is to cover the first term in office, 

which is four years. 

 

I said that we’ll be reviewing the recommendations that haven’t 

even been looked at by the previous government. The report 

came out in 2001. They had how many years before the election 

to take a look at it and to do something about it, and yet he’s 

demanding that I reconvene the committee and just get on it 

within 12 months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m just saying, demanding that 

she’s keeping her promise. That’s what we’re looking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are vulnerable children who are being 

sexually exploited, And the report makes it clear that sexually 

exploited young men have unique needs that are not being 

adequately addressed — including homophobia and the fear of 

gay bashing — and notes that males typically enter the trade 

younger and stay longer than young women. 

 

To the minister: how long will it take for this government to act 

on these very important issues raised by this report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve answered the 

question a number of times, but I’ll answer it yet again: that we 

will be reviewing it. It involves more than one ministry, and I 

think it’s important that we work collaboratively together, such 

as the minister before me said, that it’s important for the issues 

raised before, on suicide, that the ministries work 

collaboratively together. 

 

I think it’s important before we reconvene the committee that 

now we also bring that issue of young boys being involved in 

the sex trade into what they’re going to review. So it’s actually 

a good thing that I didn’t react quickly and ignore that issue. 

This will be all-encompassing looking when we reconvene this 

committee and go forward on what can be done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Nuclear Power in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following up on 

some of the discussion that happened yesterday in this House 

and in scrums of the press, I have some other questions for the 

Premier regarding the prospect of a nuclear reactor in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am told that the Darlington Nuclear Generating 

Station in Ontario was estimated at the beginning to cost 

somewhere between 4 and $5 billion, but that the actual cost of 

the Darlington reactor ended up being $14.3 billion — three 

times or more the original estimate. 

 

Now yesterday the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation, the 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], and the Premier himself indicated that they 

would be willing to see taxpayer money be invested in a private 

sector nuclear reactor. 

 

So my question today to the Premier is the following: will he 

guarantee today the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that they will 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

not be left on the hook for any cost overruns in the construction 

of a private sector nuclear reactor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on this particular issue 

it seems that the opposition and the government agree. 

Yesterday in the scrums outside of this Chamber, the Leader of 

the Opposition was point-blank asked by the media, do you 

support, as an option, public ownership of major generation 

facilities? And his answer of course was, yes. He said, my own 

bias is that large-scale projects are better in public hands. That 

way we can manage the costs for the consumers of the 

province. That way we have the security of supply. These too 

are the priorities of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously this government’s not going to move 

forward with any generation plan that doesn’t meet the test of 

environmental sustainability, that doesn’t meet the test of 

affordability for Saskatchewan people and for our economy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we do know that there will be upward 

pressures on all energy generation in our country and across 

North America as a result of environmental initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say the greatest threat to energy costs in 

the province today is the coalition agreement announced 

yesterday, and their cap and trade with 1990 levels imposed on 

the province of Saskatchewan. If he’s worried about the cost of 

power, he ought to pick up the phone to his federal counterparts 

and say, do not do a deal with the separatists of this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — It would appear, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

wants to talk about anything but cost overruns that might face 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in his proposal to build a nuclear 

reactor. 

 

Now this is a very interesting circumstance. Yes, we take the 

position that the major sources of generating capacity in this 

province ought to be publicly held. It is his government that has 

said future generation capacity in this province will not be 

publicly held, but we’ll buy it from the private sector. These 

therefore are very important questions that the people of 

Saskatchewan ought to have full knowledge of before we 

launch onto this nuclear reactor plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I read in the Bruce feasibility, quote, feasibility 

study that Bruce estimates that the cost of these reactors will be 

between 8 and $10 billion. Will the Premier today assure us that 

within that cost is the cost of decommissioning, the cost of 

waste disposal? Or as is the case in Ontario, will these be costs 

faced by the taxpayer of the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government 

seeks for this province affordable, safe, environmentally 

responsible sources of energy. That’s what we’re looking for, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve inherited this situation where the 

government has . . . the previous government had no plans for 

our province to attain that kind of generation capacity. 

 

Witness, Mr. Speaker, witness the example of their own clean 

coal project which ballooned in expenses. There were cost 

overruns forecast for that clean coal project up and around $4 

billion. What was the decision that they made? The decision 

that they made was to back away from that clean coal project; 

arguably, in and of itself, not a bad decision. But there was no 

plan B. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need a plan B in this province. We need to 

look at clean coal and solar and wind. We need to be open to 

nuclear power. We’re not going to do anything to counter the 

interests of our economy or consumers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is time that the Premier 

became very clear about the position he takes and the position 

of his government. Yesterday, it was abundantly clear to most 

of us that his government is now willing to put taxpayer dollars 

into a private sector nuclear reactor. But interestingly, the 

minister said quote, when the public learns of the risks, he said 

quote “. . . the support won’t be there for doing [it] with 

taxpayers’ money.” 

 

I ask the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is the option of taxpayer money 

still on the table when the minister says, when the public learn 

of this, the support simply won’t be there for it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is no more process more 

onerous or rigorous in our country, as the Minister of the 

Environment pointed out yesterday, than the environmental due 

diligence on a project like a nuclear reactor for the province. 

And obviously, the important element here . . . Well, if the 

member from Nutana could just wait a few seconds. 

 

The other issue, of course, is economics and the cost of this 

either for our economy or for our consumers. Our government’s 

not going to move forward with a plan that’s not comparatively 

affordable with other sources of energy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a three-year window for due diligence, 

then another three-year window. We’re talking, Mr. Speaker, 

well over five years of that kind of due diligence; the chance for 

input from the people of Saskatchewan. I think we ought to be 

open to the discussion. I do believe that Saskatchewan with 26 

per cent of the uranium production better be open to the 

opportunity and options of nuclear power, and we are. And 

we’ll have this discussion. 

 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

And in the bargain, Mr. Speaker, over the three years, the 

people of the province are going to be tasked with the very 

difficult challenge of trying to figure out what the position of 

that divided opposition is on nuclear power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier speaks of a period of 

due diligence. Well we would support that. But how is it that 

the due diligence that he speaks of begins with an invitation to 

Bruce Power to come to Saskatchewan to do a feasibility study 

that’s produced in a matter of weeks, Mr. Speaker — a matter 

of weeks — that then concludes that such a reactor is feasible? 

 

Let me ask the Premier this question: in his knowledge of the 

Bruce Power study — and I presume he knows a whole lot 

more detail then what was presented to the public — in his 

knowledge of the Bruce Power feasibility study which 

concludes, not surprisingly, that there is feasibility for a reactor 

in this province, does the Premier today agree with Bruce 

Power that a nuclear reactor in Saskatchewan is feasible? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the Leader of the 

Opposition and his gymnastics demonstration in these 

questions. Earlier on his question is what kind of due diligence 

are you going to do to make sure that this is affordable, or is 

there that due diligence there. And our answer, of course, is 

there’s a very public process laid out over three years which 

will determine these questions, which will answer these 

questions. 

 

But we need to go through that process. The public needs to be 

involved in that feasibility process. And when that process is 

completed, then we’ll be able to answer that member’s question 

about the feasibility of the project. We’re going to go forward 

with these projects for new energy sources if they meet our 

environmental standards, if they meet our standards with 

respect to cost, and if they are safe sources of energy for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I would say to that member while he’s 

on his feet, to stand up and explain to the people of the province 

how his support for the coalition government’s cap and trade 

plan coming in six months, reducing emissions to 1990 levels, 

how that will impact the consumers of energy in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Oh, Mr. Speaker, 

how the Premier today takes such great umbrage when not 

many, many years ago — in fact one could count it in months 

— the Prime Minister of Canada today signed a coalition deal 

with the separatists. And what umbrage he takes about it today. 

Not a peep then, Mr. Speaker. Not a peep then. 

 

Lookit, Mr. Speaker, the question I’m asking on behalf of 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan is very simple. Has this Premier 

now concluded that a reactor is feasible, based on Bruce Power? 

 

Will he today guarantee the taxpayers of Saskatchewan that 

they will not be on the hook for any cost overruns as a result of 

this private sector reactor he’s putting into the grid? Will the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan be on the hook for waste disposal 

throughout the process of this reactor? Will the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan be on the hook for decommissioning, or will his 

private sector . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the member to 

place his question so we all can hear the question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll ask the 

question again. 

 

Will the Premier today guarantee the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan that they will not be on the hook for his proposal 

for a private sector reactor in Saskatchewan — on the hook for 

cost overrun, on the hook for waste disposal, or on the hook 

ultimately for decommissioning? Will the Premier offer that 

simple guarantee as a principle, as a principle before he moves 

further in the diligence process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move forward 

with the feasibility study and certainly engage both the public 

and other stakeholders in the process of determining whether or 

not nuclear power makes sense for the province. We hope the 

opposition takes part in that process. We’re not going to 

prejudge it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this. He wants some assurances. I 

can give him these assurances. We’re not going to be, we’re not 

going to be going forward with a project that does not provide 

affordable energy for the people of the province that is not 

environmentally sustainable and that is not safe. We’re not 

going to go forward with any project that doesn’t meet those 

basic criteria. 

 

We will, Mr. Speaker, demonstrate considerably better 

leadership and decision making than that member did in 

approving SaskPower’s out-of-country deals in South America, 

or the SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company] deals, or dot-coms in Nashville, Tennessee, Mr. 

Speaker. We will put Saskatchewan first. We will put 

affordable energy first. 

 

And that hon. member still has answers to give to the people of 

Saskatchewan as to why he would support this coalition deal 

with separatists which will threaten energy costs because of that 

cap and trade proposal coming maybe in six months, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members will come to order. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Government Services. 

 

New Wine Franchises to Open 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, today is an exciting day for wine lovers in 

Saskatchewan. Earlier today our government announced the 

introduction of two independent specialty wine franchises for 

the province, one here in Saskatoon and one in Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — These independently owned 

franchises will cater to customers who are looking for specialty 

wines not listed at SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] liquor stores. This will greatly improve customer 

service to this niche market, both to the walk-up customers as 

well as to restaurants and bar owners who purchase specialty 

wines to serve in their businesses. 

 

With the current system, individuals and businesses who want 

wines not listed by SLGA have to place orders through SLGA’s 

special order desk. They have to order . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. I recognize the 

Minister of Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, these customers have to order a minimum of one case 

of product and could wait one to three months to receive the 

shipment, depending on the country of origin. So, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s quite a bit of advance planning necessary. Currently 

most restaurants are forced to store considerable inventories to 

ensure they have adequate stocks until the next special order 

arrives. 

 

Once these two specialty stores open, individual consumers as 

well as bars and restaurant owners will have more flexibility. 

Wine aficionados will be able to try new wines without buying 

an entire case. Restaurants will be able to adapt their menus 

more easily when they know they can switch wine selections 

fairly quickly. They won’t have to warehouse cases and cases of 

products between shipments. 

 

The onus will be on the owners of the wine stores to provide an 

appropriate level of product knowledge, do the ordering, and 

stock the stores to meet the demand of these customers. It’s a 

small change, Mr. Speaker, but we think it’s one that will be 

welcomed by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concept of liquor franchises is not a new one 

in Saskatchewan. We have approximately 185 small private 

businesses already licensed to sell alcohol on behalf of SLGA. 

These two wine stores will join the existing franchise system, 

receiving the same commission currently paid to rural 

franchises. 

 

These independently owned and operated wine stores will be 

awarded through an open RFP [request for proposal] process. 

And we expect to wrap up the process by early spring with the 

two franchises opening after that. An independent third party 

will be employed to select the winning proposals and to 

guarantee that the process is open and fair. 

 

Overall we are committed to Saskatchewan’s blended model of 

liquor retailing, with 79 publicly owned stores, 185 private 

franchises, and more than 450 private operators with off-sale 

outlets throughout the province. 

 

But as this announcement shows, Mr. Speaker, we will act to 

ensure that this system is responsive to the demands of the 

people of Saskatchewan. This is an initiative that increases 

consumer choice, helps restaurant owners grow their business, 

and creates a unique retail attraction for both Regina and 

Saskatoon. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although wine lovers will have to wait for a 

few more months before these wine stores are up and running, 

we think they’ll be very happy in the end. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

wanted to rise to make a few comments on the statement made 

by the minister. And first and foremost, I’d like to thank the 

minister for sending the statement across before the House 

opened today so I could have a chance to have a look at it. 

 

And I agree with the minister on some areas of the statement 

that was released today, that wine lovers across the province — 

well in Regina and Saskatoon anyway, Mr. Speaker — will be 

quite happy with the announcement today. 

 

I know that there are Saskatchewan government liquor stores in 

the province that do carry expanded selections of wine to try 

and meet the needs of the clientele that they have. So that’s 

always been a flexibility within SLGA that’s been there. 

 

So while the expanded selection I guess will be welcome, the 

statement does raise a number of questions about why would 

you go to the extra expense of creating an extra location for 

restaurant owners who I believe in the press release said that 

they will still purchase the majority of their order from the 

SLGA stores, but then go to another store where they will have 

to pick up their selection of wines. 

 

And also why they feel it necessary not to just expand the 

service within the stores that are currently there. One-stop 

shopping is a priority for many people and the convenience in 

today’s busy world is a convenience that’s offered in that 

customers in today’s lifestyle demand. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is something that we will keep an eye on. 

While it does have some good news attached to it, it also could 

be the first step on a very slippery slope. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

that it has considered certain estimates and to present its fifth 

report. I move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice now be concurred 

in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 42, The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister responsible 

for Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice that Bill No. 42, The 

Securities Amendment Act, 2008 be moved without amendment. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Bill is completed and it 

can now be read a third time . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Okay. Would request leave to waive consideration, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to waive 

consideration of the Bill in Committee of the Whole. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 42 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the Bill now be read a third 

time and passed under its title, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 42, The Securities Amendment Act, 2008, without 

amendment, be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 62, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 

with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave, that 

the Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title with 

amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, immediately. 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading of the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read and passed under its title with amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 62, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 

2008, with amendment, be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 64, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 

(No. 2) with amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 

leave, immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the Bill with amendments be read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may now move to third reading 

of the Bill. I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that 

the Bill be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 64, The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) with amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

fourth report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Committee on Human 

Services has moved: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Human Services Committee. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 53, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 

2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, with leave 

that this Bill pass Committee of the Whole. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? 

 

An Hon. Member: — There are no amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — Oh, this is the one. The minister may proceed 

to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 53, The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to question no. 136 through 158. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 136 to 158 tabled. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I lay on the Table the 

annual report of Saskatchewan Legislative Library. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present to the House for second reading Bill 71, The Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act. 

 

The innovation agenda is a priority of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. Our government’s October Speech from the 

Throne committed Saskatchewan to stimulate the development 

of an innovation economy. The way to do this is to create an 

ecosystem of innovation. 

 

This ecosystem is based on foresight, flexibility, creativity, and 

the freedom to act on these qualities. Innovation Saskatchewan 

will be a new, special operating agency. Similar to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, it will focus on building an innovation agenda 

for the province to enhance our sustained growth and 

international competitiveness. Our growth and competitiveness 

is already considerable, but it must be encouraged and 

sustained. 

 

Innovation Saskatchewan will be an arms-length agency — still 

acting as an agent of the Crown, but governed by a 

seven-person board. The board will consist of leaders in the 

Saskatchewan innovation and advanced technology community. 

 

Saskatchewan already has an export-driven economy, and we 

must expand it beyond primary resources. Our province has 

proven itself as a global competitor and a national economic 

leader, even in the face of ongoing financial turmoil in the 

world. 

 

The timing of the establishment of Innovation Saskatchewan is 

very appropriate and, I would say, urgent. As well as working 

to enhance our productivity and competitiveness, Innovation 

Saskatchewan represents our chance to partner and build on the 

excellent work in research and development happening at our 

academic facilities. We will support commercialization that 

enables us to compete in national and international markets. 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

This province has a vast reservoir of innovation and creativity 

to draw upon. This new agency is the means of not simply 

tapping deeper into that reservoir, but responsibly managing it, 

enhancing it, and applying it for maximum economic benefit. 

This is an excellent opportunity to move Saskatchewan into a 

future where the work of our innovation and knowledge 

infrastructure can extend to further economic benefits for our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has moved that Bill No. 71, The Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased today to rise and speak at second reading on Bill No. 

71, An Act respecting Innovation Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the explanation that was provided by 

the minister opposite just moments ago. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

couldn’t help thinking as the minister was drawing to a close in 

his remarks, I couldn’t help thinking of the remarks that we 

hear so often in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, from the member 

from Moose Jaw: what’s he talking about, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I listened closely, Mr. Speaker, for an explanation about why 

the agency is necessary, Mr. Speaker, about what the vision of 

this government is in creating the new agency, Mr. Speaker. 

The minister went so far as to say, this is a new special 

operating agency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

For those of us who read legislation on occasion, Mr. Speaker, 

and for those of us who try to interpret the language of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear that this legislation, Bill 

71, An Act respecting Innovation Saskatchewan is actually 

written, Mr. Speaker, in the standard form for the establishment 

of a new Crown corporation. Mr. Speaker, I know that we 

would never hear that from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

but I’m sure that the minister has had some advice from the 

member who sits directly behind him, Mr. Speaker, in why it’s 

necessary to create a new Crown corporation or an agency 

performing the functions of the Crown, Mr. Speaker, with a 

board of directors, Mr. Speaker, reporting to the minister and 

actually with funding, and, Mr. Speaker, with a mandate as to 

what to do. Mr. Speaker, it is most interesting to see this 

process being followed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of things to say about the 

legislation, say about the relationship between this agency and 

the other agency, Mr. Speaker, the Enterprise Saskatchewan — 

the two agencies that used to be the Department of Industry, 

Mr. Speaker. And let’s just think about that, Mr. Speaker, for 

one second before we take a look at the Act itself and the 

creation of the new agency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the past all the activities of government funded towards 

industry, Mr. Speaker, have been funded through the 

Department of Industry, previously called Industry and 

Resources, previously called Energy and Resources, previously 

called a number of different things, Mr. Speaker. But those who 

have sat on Treasury Board, those who like to review budgets, 

Mr. Speaker, know that all the provisions of government that 

went through the Department of Industry in the past, Mr. 

Speaker, were contained in budget documents. And those 

budget documents had a considerable number of lines attached 

to them, Mr. Speaker — so much funding for this, so much 

funding for that. Mr. Speaker, if we had a budget, it would take 

me about five minutes to run through all of the line items in the 

Department of Industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We no longer have a Department of Industry, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a Minister Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister has presided over the creation of the 

agency known as Enterprise Saskatchewan, and now the agency 

known as Innovation. I suspect next year’s budget will see an 

allocation of funds — one line Enterprise Saskatchewan, one 

other line that’s going to say Innovation Saskatchewan 

agencies, Mr. Speaker, and that’s it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the scrutiny that members of this legislature would 

provide for these types of activities of government, Mr. 

Speaker, disappears in our budget scrutiny, Mr. Speaker, with 

the creation of the agencies. 

 

[14:45] 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we now have a Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation who no longer has a 

ministry. Mr. Speaker, with the creation of Innovation 

Saskatchewan, we have a minister with no department, a 

minister with no ministry, a minister who’s looking after two 

agencies — both of which have boards of directors, have 

funding, and have the ability to follow their mandate, report to 

the minister. The only job the minister has now, Mr. Speaker, is 

to preside over the boards and to report back to cabinet the 

recommendations of the agency board of directors, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is starting to look like a pretty cozy job for the minister 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. A pretty cozy job. When he goes to 

estimates he’s going to have to defend two lines in the budget, 

Mr. Speaker. Enterprise and Innovation — a new, special 

operating agency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I listen to the member’s speech you can understand, 

Mr. Speaker, why I say, what’s he talking about? Because, Mr. 

Speaker, the explanation that the member opposite gave is not 

really clear about the vision of the Saskatchewan Party, the 

promises that were made nor, Mr. Speaker, how the end product 

actually fits into this vision that the members opposite may in 

fact have for the delivery of what’s called Enterprise and 

Innovation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to a few of the more specific parts of the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, because I think this is important. Mr. 

Speaker, I follow the media well, as members opposite who 

have listened to some of my comments in the past know, Mr. 

Speaker. I read the media who sometimes, Mr. Speaker — and 

more often than not — do some review of the legislation, ask 

some questions independent of the legislature about these Bills 

as they’re introduced. 

 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear in reading some of the reports 

of the media that in fact this Bill creates an agency that will take 

taxpayers’ money and invest it in research and development 

projects. Taxpayers’ money going into research and 

development projects. Mr. Speaker, no objection from this side 

of the House at all about utilizing the resources of the province 

to support research and development. Heaven knows, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve been doing it in this province for years — years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And some of the work that’s been done, for example at the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, Mr. Speaker, where we have 

been supporting research and development for years, some 

incredible success stories there, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I’ve had a 

tour of the Saskatchewan Research Council. I’ve sat in on the 

annual general meetings of SRC [Saskatchewan Research 

Council], Mr. Speaker. I’ve had the benefit of being able to talk 

to some of the principals at Saskatchewan Research Council. 

And, Mr. Speaker, thanks to support from the previous New 

Democrat government, Mr. Speaker, thanks to support that they 

received from other governments, federal government included, 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Research Council has done 

some incredible work. 

 

So I can’t argue with the ability of taxpayers’ resources or the 

provincial resources. Because let’s face it, Mr. Speaker: 

although taxpayers ultimately benefit from all the financial 

resources of the province, not all the financial resources of the 

province are from the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, because there are 

many line items in budget that are brought into the revenue side 

of government. And it’s from the revenue side, Mr. Speaker, 

that funding finds its way into the expenditure side — or, what 

would happen in this case, funding for Innovation 

Saskatchewan — and that money then turned around and 

invested in research and development projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from that perspective, we could also argue that 

this plan has some semblance of the old SOCO [Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation], Mr. Speaker, S-O-C-O program in 

which the province helped to develop some industrial parks 

around the province and provided funding for the development 

of what would consider to be innovation projects, Mr. Speaker, 

in the ’70s and ’80s, Mr. Speaker. And so governments do have 

a history of doing this sort of thing. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting to hear members of the 

government opposite who have said in the forestry sector, no 

money, Mr. Speaker, who have said in so many other areas, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no funding for developing the provincial 

economy. And in fact even here, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ll get to a 

quote in a minute talking about support for mature industries, 

Mr. Speaker. But innovation and development, Mr. Speaker, is 

the front end of development in total, Mr. Speaker, to a 

commercial product, to the marketing of a product and 

ultimately to the benefit of the consumer of that product, Mr. 

Speaker. And for an economy like Saskatchewan’s to continue 

to grow, having provincial government support for those types 

of research and development initiatives, the little more risky 

venture upfront, Mr. Speaker, there is always an appetite for 

provincial funding of those types of projects. But, Mr. Speaker, 

they don’t always work out. 

 

Members opposite have been very critical, Mr. Speaker, of 

previous government’s adventures in the field of supporting 

research and development. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because 

research and development is an area whereby you will 

ultimately see risk, having a downside as well as an up-side. 

 

The minister opposite, Mr. Speaker, obviously wants the public 

to believe that Innovation Saskatchewan would have nothing 

but winners, Mr. Speaker. Every investment made in what is 

considered in research and development terms, Mr. Speaker, of 

greater risk than a development project or whatever, Mr. 

Speaker, there are some successes and there are some failures, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that the members opposite will have a few words to say 

as I go into the next part of my speech, Mr. Speaker. And I just 

want to indicate that they have to listen carefully through the 

whole development of my argument before chirping in too 

much, Mr. Speaker. But I want to raise the subject of SPUDCO, 

Mr. Speaker, in relation to this type of development and 

thinking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite have been quite critical of a 

government’s intention to work with the province to develop a 

immature industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking 

about development in rural Saskatchewan, about an agriculture 

industry, an agriculture industry, Mr. Speaker, that is 

diversified, and we’re talking about potatoes, Mr. Speaker. So a 

number of things have happened over the years and the 

members opposite remind us of this on a regular occasion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But when we’re talking about innovation, the Government of 

Saskatchewan at the time made a decision that the 

diversification of agriculture into the field of potatoes, Mr. 

Speaker, field of potatoes — I understand there could be a pun 

there — but, Mr. Speaker, moving into the field of potatoes, 

there needed to be some investment. And, Mr. Speaker, there 

were some mistakes made along the way, as members point out 

to us on a regular basis. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the circumstances are that because the 

province was willing to provide investment into rural 

Saskatchewan into the potato industry, today, Mr. Speaker, the 

potato industry is better positioned than it’s ever been in the 

history of our province, and there is an infrastructure in place, 

Mr. Speaker, that is fully utilized, Mr. Speaker. That 

infrastructure, if it had been considered investment in rural 

Saskatchewan as opposed to a partnership with the private 

sector in actively engaging in investment in rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, the results of the evaluation would be much 

different. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about research and development 

and investing in immature industries, Mr. Speaker, this 

government is saying that they are now willing to go where they 

have been so critical of other governments going in the past, 

Mr. Speaker. There is a chance of failure, and any time we take 

steps in these directions we have to acknowledge the possibility 

of loss, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the fact is this government has recognized that there is also 

a need for that type of thinking, that type of thinking that leads 

to . . . 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order. I know that 

members have things to discuss with other members, but it 

would be greatly appreciated if we could calm ourselves a little 

bit, be a little quieter so we can hear the member respond that’s 

been recognized. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate that intervention and, Mr. Speaker, I carry on with 

my comments. 

 

The other thing is, Mr. Speaker, is that sometimes when we are 

reviewing innovation and recognizing the fact that of course 

there can be some difficulties, we need to take a look at where 

there has been significant failure, Mr. Speaker, of the approach 

to research and development in innovation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier told reporters Innovation 

Saskatchewan will have an investment component to it. So, Mr. 

Speaker, when we think about investments in immature 

industries, Mr. Speaker, and the comments of the Premier in 

this regard, we have to go back. We have to go back a ways, 

Mr. Speaker, to 1988-1989, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier was 

learning investment strategies at the foot at the chair of the then 

premier, Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. We have an adventure into 

innovation financing that I think a lot of the members opposite 

have either forgotten about or have tried to ignore, and that’s 

the story of GigaText, Mr. Speaker. We have a government who 

felt that using technology within government in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, they could benefit not only the province of 

Saskatchewan but others. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what was GigaText? Well, Mr. Speaker, in 

1988 dollars we’re talking about a five and a quarter million 

dollar investment in a company called GigaText Translation 

systems inc. And at that time, Mr. Speaker, they were pumping 

$50,000 a month into this company that had made a pitch, a 

sales pitch to them, Mr. Speaker, a sales pitch that said, I’m 

going to build a machine, a computer — but it’s really a 

machine in 1988 — that will take every law in the province of 

Saskatchewan and translate it into French. 

 

Well this government, Mr. Speaker, decided that makes a lot of 

sense. We need, we need to rush into this, Mr. Speaker, and 

therefore they signed a deal, they signed a deal with a fellow by 

the name of Mr. Montpetit — M-o-n-t-p-e-t-i-t — out of 

Montreal, Mr. Montpetit, Mr. Speaker. And what happened? 

 

Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation was 

brought in and, Mr. Speaker, they began to write the cheques. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, since that time, Mr. Montpetit has been 

described in many different ways, but first of all he was 

described as a fellow who brought in schemes and pipe dreams 

to the government of the day. The minister at the time was a 

fellow by the name Eric Berntson, who bought into this 

strategy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t long before Mr. Montpetit was 

sued by a Japanese investor who had also put some money into 

this project, Mr. Speaker, and all of a sudden the media and the 

government started to get some idea that this scheme, Mr. 

Speaker, was going to fall apart. 

 

One of the individuals who was working, Mr. Speaker, on this 

project was a fellow within the translation service of the 

province of Saskatchewan and he called Mr. Montpetit a snake 

oil salesman, as reported in The Edmonton Journal. So, Mr. 

Speaker, this is — referred to The Edmonton Journal — this 

little exercise in innovation that was taken on by the 

government of Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker, certainly was an 

embarrassment to the people of this province all over Western 

Canada as it was reported in the media from other provinces, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when I read Innovation Saskatchewan, the mandate that’s 

included in the legislation and the way in which the board will 

work to interpret the mandate, Mr. Speaker, I see a future that 

could include more GigaTexts, more opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

for government to distance itself from these decisions, but 

actually have to take responsibility at the end of the day for 

decisions that are made that are not subject to the review and 

transparency and accountability provisions of this Chamber. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, carrying on, carrying on with what’s in this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that the Premier said in 

response to the creation of Innovation Saskatchewan, and I 

quote him here, he says: 

 

We think there is a role for government on the research 

and development side, on the innovation side, especially 

as it relates to sustainable energy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the Premier speaking. And then he cites 

agriculture-based ethanol and clean coal as areas of interest, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Just earlier the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation talks 

about funding not being available for mature industries like 

forestry, but rather he talks about the immature developing 

industries. Mr. Speaker, the Premier says coal — development 

of coal-based industry — is something that Innovation 

Saskatchewan could get involved in. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are talking about a very mature industry 

in this country, Mr. Speaker — the coal-based industry. And 

although they are on the leading edge of some significant 

technology, we are talking about, Mr. Speaker, through 

Enterprise and Innovation Saskatchewan, a small amount of 

money compared to that which is going to be required to put the 

technology of clean coal into place, Mr. Speaker. Certainly not 

a reason — the Premier’s comments in this regard — not a 

reason, Mr. Speaker, to have confidence in the direction that the 

government is taking us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, also the minister in talking to the media — 

and I was listening for his explanation of this in his speech a 

few moments ago, Mr. Speaker, but I did not hear it — but to 

the media as early as Thursday of last week, Mr. Speaker, 

November 27, the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation said 

that there could be a component of political involvement in 

Innovation Saskatchewan’s decision-making. That’s what he 

said. The minister told the media there may be a component of 

political involvement in Innovation Saskatchewan’s 

decision-making. 

 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, what does that make you think? Oh great, oh 

great. Political involvement, says the minister. Now I’ve sat in 

this Chamber just for five years — four of them on government 

side, one in the opposition. But I’ve heard the members 

opposite say a gazillion times if I’ve heard them say it once, 

picking winners and losers, picking winners and losers, the 

Saskatchewan Party would never pick winners and losers, Mr. 

Speaker. And yet the minister says there may be a component 

of political involvement in our decision making. 

 

What does that mean, Mr. Speaker? The minister did not 

indicate anything in his comments today to this House, to those 

of us who are responsible for accountability and transparency 

and all these things, Mr. Speaker. Again I just say, oh great. 

Good for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now then the minister goes on and talks about whose 

interests are going to be represented inside Innovation 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we’re seeing him say that 

Innovation Saskatchewan would oversee and coordinate the 

province’s interest in Saskatchewan Research Council, the 

Canadian Light Source synchrotron, the Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre, and the prairie agricultural machine institute 

— Mr. Speaker, four organizations active in this province that 

are world-class. Four organizations, Mr. Speaker, that are 

renowned for the innovative actions that they have taken in the 

past, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And where does this paragraph appear, Mr. Speaker, this 

paragraph in this news report about Innovation Saskatchewan 

overseeing and coordinating the province’s interest in these four 

world-renowned organizations, Mr. Speaker? In the paragraph 

that follows the minister’s comments about there may be a 

component of political involvement in our decision making. Mr. 

Speaker, political involvement in Saskatchewan Research 

Council, the Canadian Light Source synchrotron, the Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre, the prairie agricultural machine 

institute? My goodness, Mr. Speaker, how — how — can we 

tolerate that sort of thing, Mr. Speaker? World-class, 

arm’s-length research and development organizations, Mr. 

Speaker. Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, unbelievable. 

 

And the public, Mr. Speaker, has to understand, one, the 

contradictions that the members opposite have brought forward 

with this, the lack of accountability and transparency that exists 

within this Act. And more importantly, more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, the direction and the almost certainty of failure, Mr. 

Speaker, of public funds in research and development that this 

government is heading on, Mr. Speaker — unbelievable. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, also the article indicates that, “The 

Premier also announced . . . that the creation of the new entity 

would coincide with the winding down of Investment 

Saskatchewan . . .” Mr. Speaker, and that this involves the 

“Victoria Park Capital . . . [that was] contracted to run the 

government investments until 2011.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see on the notice paper today that 

tomorrow there’s an Act relating to Victoria Park Capital being 

brought forward. I’m not aware of what’s in that Act, Mr. 

Speaker. But given that The Innovation Saskatchewan Act is 

here and that the Investment Saskatchewan is now going to be 

wound down, I have some expectations, Mr. Speaker, about 

what might be in the Victoria Park Capital Bill being brought in 

tomorrow. 

 

What the government is saying in this . . . And this goes back to 

some of the things that we’ve talked about from this side of the 

House in the past, Mr. Speaker. This goes back to this branding 

idea that nothing that’s been done before is any good, and that 

only things brought forward by the Saskatchewan Party are of 

any substance or significance, Mr. Speaker. So here we have 

this government about to tear apart quite a number of things that 

are of value in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is, what they’re saying is, let’s 

redo everything regardless of its cost. Regardless of its cost, Mr. 

Speaker. Wind down Investment Saskatchewan, do away with 

Victoria Park Capital, and, Mr. Speaker, let’s just start all over 

again and see what happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this is the type of thinking — 1980s 

thinking, Mr. Speaker — that leads to decisions like the one I 

described with Giga Text and so many other things. Even, Mr. 

Speaker, some of us remember the company known as Joytec, 

another great investment opportunity that this government 

decided to take taxpayers for a ride on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so here we have an Act creating Innovation 

Saskatchewan, a new agency of government. Mr. Speaker, it 

follows, it follows the creation of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

And only this week, Mr. Speaker, only this week we found out 

what Enterprise Saskatchewan really is all about. Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was to be brought forward within 

the first month of the new government. And here we are a year 

and a month later, Mr. Speaker, and what are we doing? We’re 

building this incredible team, Mr. Speaker, what some people 

call this incredible bureaucracy of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Membership in Enterprise Saskatchewan has now grown to 18 

different sector teams. Well remember, Mr. Speaker, when 

Enterprise Saskatchewan was first being considered by this 

government? It was going to be a board, a board of private 

sector interests that would advise the Saskatchewan Party 

government as to what to do with the provincial economy. They 

were looking for advice, Mr. Speaker, on what to do with the 

provincial economy. 

 

When Enterprise Saskatchewan was first discussed by members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, in opposition, it looked like, Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier now today, then Leader of the Opposition, 

was sensing that the people that were surrounding him — and 

he would have to appoint to cabinet — could not advise him on 

what to do with our economy. That he had no confidence in the 

elected; he had to seek advice from the unelected, Mr. Speaker. 

An unofficial senate, if you will. 

 

So Enterprise Saskatchewan was going to be a board of private 

sector people appointed by the Premier, by the government — 

sounds an awful lot like a senate to me, Mr. Speaker — and that 

the government would then seek the advice as to what to do 

with our economy. Well a year and a month later, Mr. Speaker, 

this board has now grown to 18 sector teams. Eighteen teams 

over and above the board itself, Mr. Speaker. And this group of 

advisors has now gone to 160 individuals, Mr. Speaker, and it 

may even be more. 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

What we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is also the fact that these 160 

people and the decision-making process that they’re engaged in 

is going to cost this province . . . I don’t see my notes here, Mr. 

Speaker, but we’ll say half a million dollars a year, maybe $1 

million a year, Mr. Speaker, for the advice to government. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, one wonders what the cabinet is 

supposed to be doing over there, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess we 

know, if you go back to the beginning of my remarks, we’ve 

now got a Minister of Enterprise and Innovation without a 

department or a ministry, Mr. Speaker. He has no responsibility 

over there, so he has only the ability of communicating advice 

from the boards to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, obviously, 

obviously there isn’t much faith by the Premier in his 

colleagues serving in cabinet around him. But we’re looking at, 

yes probably — I think I’ve just seen the number here — close 

to $1 million over a four-year period for these people to meet 

and discuss important issues and advise the government. 

 

The first issue of course, Mr. Speaker, on which the group met, 

discussed, and provided some advice has been completely 

ignored by the members opposite. I wonder how the board 

members at Enterprise Saskatchewan feel today that after their 

first meeting, their first review, and their first bit of advice to 

government on maintaining a moratorium on schools in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, to have that advice immediately rejected 

by the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I was sitting on a board, if I was asked to do 

work for a board and in fact my advice was subsequently 

rejected out of hand, I’d have second thoughts about serving on 

that board, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll wait and see how the 

individual members of Enterprise Saskatchewan feel about that. 

 

And now they’re also seeing the creation of the secondary set of 

board members, Mr. Speaker — those who will oversee the 

spending plans of Innovation Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the minister opposite, 

the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation had to say when he 

was asked earlier this week from the New Democratic Party 

member from Prince Albert, when he was asked about these 18 

sector teams and these 160 people, the minister answered with 

the following questions. He says, and he asks a question back to 

the New Democrats here. This is the minister speaking: 

 

I’d ask . . . [them] to try and understand . . . [our] new way 

of thinking where we actually engage the public in 

decisions that affect them. 

 

Mr. Speaker. Interesting comments from a minister who sits at a 

cabinet table where decisions have been made affecting the 

termination of the funding for Station 20, the creation of 

legislation that would impose an elected senate on the people of 

Saskatchewan despite its cost, a cabinet that has decided to 

pursue nuclear power generation, Mr. Speaker, without 

consultation with the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister was criticizing New Democrats about 

our questions relating to this growing bureaucracy about 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. He was criticizing New Democrats 

by saying that we did not believe in consultation. And yet he 

sits at a cabinet table where there has been no consultation on 

the majority of issues, Mr. Speaker, that have affected people of 

Saskatchewan directly and dramatically. 

 

Well again, Mr. Speaker, thank goodness that somebody is 

raising questions in this Chamber and in Saskatchewan about 

these issues, Mr. Speaker. We are seeing members opposite 

attending a news conference concerning Bruce Power’s 

decision that nuclear power is feasible in this province. 

Members opposite, including the minister himself, attending 

these news conferences in which they speak in glowing terms 

about the future of nuclear-generated power in this province. 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, not one of them when asked questions 

over two days could answer any questions about, what’s it 

going to cost? Who’s going to pay the bill? What impact is it 

going to have on the watersheds in the province? 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there was ever a time when consultation was 

critical, Mr. Speaker, it’s today. And the members opposite are 

having to create agencies of government taking away from 

transparency and accountability of government, taking away all 

of that which is very important to the people of Saskatchewan 

in the interests, quotation marks, Mr. Speaker, of consultation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a year and a half after Enterprise 

Saskatchewan was created, we haven’t seen much benefit of 

consultation. And, Mr. Speaker, now we know there is some 

consultation that will be taking place in innovation and the 

development, Mr. Speaker, but we know that this will be 

consultation that is politically driven — the minister’s words 

himself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the House that even 

though the Bill has only just been provided to us over the last 

few days to review, Mr. Speaker, there are a tremendous 

amount of issues that need to be addressed by this legislation. I 

think the public needs to be engaged in consultation, 

communication, understanding, Mr. Speaker, of what the 

government is intending to do with this legislation. And really 

how it is different from the simple statement that there is a role 

for public expenditure in research and development in this 

province. There is a role for public expenditure on research and 

development in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand the end product. Mr. Speaker, there 

are lots of things about this piece of legislation that are not easy 

to understand at all. So that having been said then, Mr. Speaker, 

I would take this opportunity to move that debate on Bill No. 

71, An Act respecting Innovation Saskatchewan be now 

adjourned. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It has been moved 

by the member for The Battlefords that debate on this Bill now 

be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Justice and the Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008. The purpose of this Act is to 

repeal obsolete statutes and provisions of statutes and to make 

minor amendments to other Acts. I will briefly describe the 

statutes being repealed and the amendments being made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Agri-Food Innovation Act is being repealed. 

This Act allowed the provincial government to enter into a 

particular agreement with the federal government. This 

agreement has now expired and all of its projects have been 

completed; therefore this Act is no longer required. 

 

The Community Cablecasters Act was passed in 1977, but never 

proclaimed. This Act is not needed and is now being repealed. 

The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2003 was 

passed as part of an unsuccessful effort to negotiate a solution 

to a trade dispute. It no longer has any application and is also 

being repealed. 

 

The Trust and Loan Corporations Amendment Act, 1996 was 

never proclaimed since its provisions were incorporated in The 

Trust and Loan Corporations Act, 1997. This Act is no longer 

required and is being repealed. 

 

Section 12.1 of The Agricultural Safety Net Act was never 

proclaimed. There is no need to proclaim it as the program to 

which it relates has been discontinued. It also is therefore being 

repealed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, certain provisions of The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, 1992 will also be repealed with passage of this 

Bill. These provisions were passed as a response to a 

compensation issue that later had a negotiated solution. 

Therefore we do not need this legislation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, subsection 4(5) of The Public Disclosure 

Act was never proclaimed. It would have vested the public 

disclosure committee with the powers of commissioners under 

The Public Inquiries Act. It has been determined that this 

provision is not needed and is therefore being repealed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the next one is clause 95(b) of The 

Regional Health Services Act, which purports to make 

consequential amendment to The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation Act, which itself has been repealed; 

therefore this provision in question is ineffectual and is also 

being repealed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, clauses 8(1)(a) and 8(2)(a) of The 

Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2004 are also being repealed. 

The provision they would amend has since been the subject of 

consequential amendments, so these clauses are no longer 

effective. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, certain provisions in The Trust and Loan 

Corporations Act, 1997 are being repealed. These provisions, 

which deal with market conduct, were never proclaimed and are 

now out of date. They could not proceed without significant 

consultation and change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of amendments correct errors in 

reference to section numbers or Acts. One such amendment 

corrects a spelling error. All of these amendments will help to 

clean up our statutes and make them more accurate and more 

user-friendly. Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move second 

reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment 

and Repeal Act. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The Minister of 

Justice has moved second reading of Bill No. 74, the 

miscellaneous statutes amendment and repeal Act, 2008. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. I recognize 

the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — I was rising to my feet. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s sometimes an interest on the other side to 

move through things as quickly as possible, Mr. Speaker, but 

despite the fact, despite the fact that the minister felt that these 

Acts being repealed are no longer necessary, Mr. Speaker, I 

think there is a need to provide some reference to them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m rising today at second reading on Bill No. 

74, miscellaneous statutes Act. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Justice indicated in his speech a number of Acts or sections of 

Acts, Mr. Speaker, that are being repealed in this piece of 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, while I realize that as Minister of 

Justice it is his responsibility to bring forward an Act like this, 

the legislation itself, Mr. Speaker, actually addresses Acts that 

would have previously been the responsibility of the Minister of 

Agriculture, the Minister of Energy and Resources, the minister 

of forestry, the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

So there’s a number of things to be discussed in this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, that perhaps are best addressed by representatives 

of the various departments. Because, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Justice says this was deemed not to be required any more or, 

Mr. Speaker, this was simply not required any longer. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, how are we to know that without an opportunity to 

review the legislation itself? 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, just right off the top, the Minister of 

Justice talks about The Agri-Food Innovation Act. It was an Act 

that came into effect on March 31, 1995, and it established the 

Agri-Food Innovation Fund as a Treasury Board Crown 

corporation. Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice does 

indicate that the fund is no longer required because the specific 

program that it was meant to fund, that it was meant to 

administer, no longer exists. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Act itself was designed in part to work as 

a financial partnership with federal initiatives. So, Mr. Speaker, 

are we led to believe that despite the fact that that particular 

program no longer exists, that in fact there is no financial 

partnership on federal initiatives any longer in agriculture? 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

Mr. Speaker, there are ongoing relationships with Ottawa, and 

there’s no indication whatsoever that we would not need 

legislation like this to allow us to continue to enter partnerships. 

But, Mr. Speaker, when simply presented as the program no 

longer exists so the legislation is no longer necessary, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to review this legislation to ensure that if 

there are federal-provincial initiatives in agriculture that indeed 

we can administer them from other means other than the 

legislation itself. 

 

I’m very interested, Mr. Speaker, in The Community 

Cablecasters Act. An Act that came into effect February 26, 

1979 and, Mr. Speaker, although there was no section of the 

Act that actually stated its objections or purposes, the Act 

contained provisions stating who was eligible to become a 

community cablecaster and stating that it would be illegal for 

persons other than community cablecasters, as defined under 

the Act, to provide programming. It allowed the subscribers of 

community cablecasters to establish program advisory councils. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Community Cablecasters Act essentially 

allowed for community-based consultation in the development 

of community programming within our communities, Mr. 

Speaker, something that we in Saskatchewan have actually seen 

developed in a number of our communities where there were 

community-based, co-operative cable systems. Now many of 

those community cable systems, Mr. Speaker, have been taken 

over by private sector operators. And perhaps the repeal of this 

legislation is meant to provide some benefit to the private sector 

cable operators who no longer see it necessary to have a 

program advisory council at the local level, or perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, there are other reasons behind this. But it’s necessary, 

Mr. Speaker, to have a look at the legislation that’s being 

repealed. 

 

Are there current needs that could be dealt with by amending 

these Acts rather than repealing them? Mr. Speaker, the one that 

caught my eye particularly was The Forest Resources 

Management Amendment Act of 2003: 

 

The purpose of this Act is to promote the sustainable use 

of forest land for the benefit of current and future 

generations by balancing the need for economic, social 

and cultural opportunities with the need to maintain and 

enhance the health of forest land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in today’s economic climate and the 

circumstances affecting the northern communities of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this Act sounds like it might be the 

ideal legislation to help guide this government to address 

forestry issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were elected on a platform of a forestry plan, 

Mr. Speaker. A year and a month later, there’s still no plan for 

forestry. There’s still no development of forestry. There’s still 

no understanding of the role that forestry must play in this 

province. We’ve seen government members talk about the 

development, Mr. Speaker, of sort of a biofuels industry in the 

North utilizing trees, Mr. Speaker, to create energy by burning 

them, Mr. Speaker. Well that isn’t a forestry plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act is deemed 

to be unnecessary, but the Act states, section 3: 

The purpose of this Act is to promote the sustainable use 

of forest land for the benefit of current and future 

generations by balancing the need for economic, social 

and cultural opportunities with the need to maintain and 

enhance the health of forest land. 

 

I like it, Mr. Speaker. I like that description. And I think 

members opposite should be reading that Act before they 

impose repeal upon us. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I know that time is moving along very 

rapidly here, Mr. Speaker, and there are a number of other 

pieces in this particular legislation that I would like to address. 

And I know that the next pieces of legislation are important to 

have on the order paper, Mr. Speaker, as we reach the end of 

this session. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So without addressing The Tobacco Control Amendment Act 

which I think we need to review because, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that the changes appear to be an effort to implement the recent 

announced intention to ban smoking in the workplaces through 

provisions other than The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, and 

I’m not certain how that process is going to unfold. I wish the 

minister had explained that in a little greater detail. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I will address that and other matters 

on another day, Mr. Speaker. Therefore, at this time I would 

move that debate on Bill No. 74 be now adjourned. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for The 

Battlefords has moved we adjourn debate on Bill No. 74. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 75 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) 

Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008/Loi corrective 

(lois bilingues) de 2008 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to rise today to move second reading of The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 

2008. The purpose of this Act is to repeal obsolete provisions of 

bilingual statutes and to make minor amendments to others. I 

will briefly describe the obsolete provisions and minor 

amendments. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, provisions in The Powers of Attorney Act, 

2002 that were never proclaimed are being repealed. During 

consultations on the regulations for this Act, it became apparent 

that the effect of proclaiming these provisions would be that 

some attorneys would be able to designate beneficiaries of the 

grantor’s property and in effect make testamentary dispositions. 

This would be an inadvertent change to the common law rule 

that attorneys’ authority does not extend to estate planning. This 

was never intended, so that provision is being repealed. The 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 2008 

other changes being made to the bilingual statutes are to correct 

reference, spelling, and grammatical errors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move second reading of The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 

2008. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The Minister of 

Justice has moved second reading of Bill No. 75, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 

2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly? I recognize the 

member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise at second reading on Bill No. 75, the 

miscellaneous statutes (bilingual) Bill. I listened carefully of 

course to the Minister of Justice explain the Bill. I thought he 

might use some bilingual language to explain the legislation, 

but he did a reasonable job, Mr. Speaker, in English. 

 

I don’t have a lot to say about this piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think that Bill No. 74 is the Bill that we have 

to spend our time on. And the response that we have on Bill No. 

74 will determine what we have to do with Bill No. 75. So at 

this point, Mr. Speaker, I would move that debate on Bill No. 

75, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and 

Repeal Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for The 

Battlefords has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 75. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After my brief 

remarks, I will be moving second reading of the wildlife habitat 

protection amendment. 

 

This government recognizes the ongoing need to conserve and 

protect areas that are significant for wildlife habitat. Today, this 

Act protects approximately 1.4 million hectares or three and a 

half million acres of Crown land and wetlands all over 

Saskatchewan while enabling compatible agricultural and other 

uses. 

 

Occasionally it is necessary to withdraw designated lands from 

the Act in order to accommodate other valid uses. In these 

cases, the government strives to continue to protect important 

conservation values. The amendments proposed today are true 

to this principle. They are relatively small in scale but 

significant for the parties who are involved. 

 

Two of the amendments are administrative in nature. They 

involve privately held land that was not specifically excluded 

when an adjacent parcel of Crown land was designated under 

the Act years ago. One of these is 53 acres in size; the other is a 

5-acre parcel. Both errors were discovered by government staff 

in the course of their work and were brought forward for 

correction. Given the millions of acres covered by the Act, it’s 

not surprising, although unfortunate, that such errors can go 

unnoticed for some time. The Ministry of Environment is 

committed to correcting them as soon as possible when they 

come to light, and the first two amendments will do just that. 

 

The third amendment involves the deregulation of 20 acres to 

allow its sale for the expansion of a farmyard site. Once 

removed from the Act, the land will be sold to the current lessee 

by the Ministry of Agriculture. Nearly twice this area — 37 

acres — of similar habitat located nearby will be designated 

under the Act to compensate for this withdrawal. 

 

The fourth amendment removes 160 acres from the register to 

allow the land sale to an agricultural producer for grazing. The 

land is subject to a conservation easement that is registered on 

the title, thus ensuring that important conservation values will 

be maintained into the future. 

 

The proposed amendments are consistent with the fundamental 

principle of continued habitat conservation. The amendments 

will also help us to ensure that records on the status of Crown 

lands are as accurate and up to date as possible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The Minister of the 

Environment has moved second reading of Bill No. 76, the 

wildlife habitat protection Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member for The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter second reading debate of Bill No. 76, An Act 

to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and to amend The 

Wildlife Habitat Land Designation Regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we all know the value of wildlife lands in 

our province. Mr. Speaker, we have organizations representing 

committed conservationists, hunters, farmers — committed 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, who are devoting hundreds of hours 

and thousands of dollars voluntarily, Mr. Speaker, to the 

preservation of wetlands and other matters relating to 

conservation, Mr. Speaker. So wildlife habitat protection is 

something that this province has taken seriously virtually since 

the establishment, creation, and development of this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is very important to a large number of 

people in this province to understand what it is that the province 

is doing when it withdraws land from the designated areas. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s an equal interest to ensure that when 

land is withdrawn, there is other land added to the designated 

areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We certainly recognize that mistakes may have been made in 

designations in the past. Certain corrections have been made at 

other times in the past, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes these 

corrections aren’t known as being necessary until such time as 

land is sold. Sometimes land is being prepared for sale and it is 



December 2, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

discovered on survey, Mr. Speaker, that some of these lands 

have been designated and the owner was not aware of such, Mr. 

Speaker. Errors are corrected as they are brought to the 

attention of the government, Mr. Speaker, and that is something 

that we have supported in the past and would continue to 

support. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is important for members of the public to 

fully understand what it is that the government is intending to 

do in a broad-based way and also in a very specific way. And 

this Bill does deal with some very specific pieces of land, Mr. 

Speaker. And I thank the minister responsible for her remarks in 

which she outlines clearly that the lands in question are being 

withdrawn for what she calls valid uses. And those valid uses 

include privately held lands that may have been incorrectly 

designated, the expansion of a yard site, and for grazing 

purposes, Mr. Speaker. And some local, some local individuals 

may in fact take some issue with a number of these. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what the minister did not do was outline very 

clearly what particular lands we’re talking about. The Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, clearly outlines, the Bill clearly outlines, Mr. Speaker, 

land designations. Not everyone in the province is familiar with 

land designations, although I would believe the majority of 

people are. But just for the interests of those who are paying 

attention to this debate, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add some 

comments about where this land is to the comments that were 

made by the minister a few minutes ago. 

 

For example, she talked about one situation where land was 

privately held, that the land grant, Mr. Speaker, has existed 

since 1915, and that these lands were designated as protected 

lands, Mr. Speaker. And this legislation will withdraw that. I 

don’t know the circumstances, but given the date, Mr. Speaker, 

this is likely a case where the land has remained inside one 

family, Mr. Speaker, for that period of time and there’s never 

been any need for continued surveys or land titles review, Mr. 

Speaker. But possibly this land is land that is now being put up 

for sale or has just transferred and the designation is required to 

be removed. Mr. Speaker, this land is in the area near the 

community of Kyle in the southwest part of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact the designated piece of land is situated just east 

of the community of Kyle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other piece of privately held land that is 

referred to in this legislation is land where the land grant was 

made in 1959 and that individual piece of land is being 

withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. This is land that is northeast of the 

city of North Battleford, just west of the town of Mayfair. Mr. 

Speaker, all of those who are in that part of the province would 

know the area of the province that I’m referring to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another piece referred to in this legislation, the 

minister referred to this as the need to withdraw this piece of 

land from protected status is because the owner wants to expand 

the yard site on that particular quarter, Mr. Speaker. This is not 

a full quarter of land. It’s a partial quarter of land, Mr. Speaker. 

This exists along the North Saskatchewan River, basically north 

of Lashburn and south of Paradise Hill, Mr. Speaker. Some 

individuals may know what we’re referring to. It’s directly west 

of the town of Turtleford, Mr. Speaker. And so this is important 

land in the province. That whole Paradise Hill, Frenchman 

Butte territory — this is just south of that, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a piece of land that’s to be sold for grazing, Mr. 

Speaker. This is subject to a conservation easement. Mr. 

Speaker, I think it is important when we get to committee that 

we review this process of getting to a conservation easement. 

But this particular piece of land again is east of North 

Battleford. In fact it is directly north of the town of Hafford and 

east of the town of Mayfair, Mr. Speaker, and it is an entire 

quarter of land that’s to be sold for grazing purposes. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, there is a piece of land that will be 

added, Mr. Speaker, in compensation for other land that has 

been withdrawn, Mr. Speaker. This particular piece of land is 

directly . . . Just a minute here. It’s on the North Saskatchewan 

River, directly west of the city of North Battleford. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it was important to identify for the 

public what lands we are talking about, invite the public’s 

comments as this legislation withdraws these pieces of land 

from protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that other members, including those who 

live in the areas being referred to in this legislation, may wish to 

speak. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would move that 

debate on Bill No. 76, An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for The 

Battlefords has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 76. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. I recognize 

the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. In order to permit the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies to do their work, I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The Government 

House Leader has moved this House do now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. This House 

stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:45.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1935 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1935 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1935 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1936 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1936 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1936 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1936 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1936 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1936 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1937 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1937 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1937 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Karate Gold Medal Winner from St. Louis 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1937 

 Reaching the Unreachable 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1937 

 Victoria Hospital Foundation Festival of Trees 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1938 

 Unions of Regina Christmas Dinner 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1938 

 Regina Rotary Carol Festival 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1938 

 MyFiH Awards 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1939 

 Moose Jaw Poet Honoured at Saskatchewan Book Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1939 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Northern Youth 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1939 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1940 

 Sexually Exploited Youth 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1941 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1941 

 Nuclear Power in Saskatchewan 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1942 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1942 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Wine Franchises to Open 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1945 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1946 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1947 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1946 

 Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1947 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 42 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1946 

 Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1947 

 Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1947 



 

 Bill No. 53 — The Medical Profession Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1948 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1948 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1948 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1949 

 Bill No. 74 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (English) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1954 

 Bill No. 75 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Bilingual) Amendment and Repeal Act, 2008 

 Loi corrective (lois bilingues) de 2008 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1955 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1956 

 Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1956 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1956 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


