




















































Hansard: November 19, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 15A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1733 

 November 19, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, this afternoon seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are 18 men from a group of 

stakeholders in this province to my ministry of the protective 

and emergency services branches, representatives of the 

Saskatchewan association of firefighters, Mr. Speaker. This 

group represents professional firefighters, sorry. This group 

represents about 700 firefighters in this province. And today 

with the 18 of them, I am pleased to say two of them are from 

Prince Albert — Lloyd Zwack and Alex Paul, if you want to 

stand up, you guys. Perfect; it‟s a privilege, I guess. 

 

Along with them though are their president, Gerry Huget; 

secretary treasurer, Brian Belitsky; and vice-president, Kirby 

Benning. I‟d like to welcome all to their Assembly today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Well 

again to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I 

have another honour today to introduce to you members from 

the policing community. Today we have class 57 from my 

alumni, my old police college, the Saskatchewan Police 

College. If you want to stand, please. Some of these men and 

women are being resourced by this government as part of our 

initiative of the 30 officers this year in the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you very much, you can sit down. 

 

With them today, Mr. Speaker, are Gary Morin, the director of 

the college, and the college‟s training officer, Basil Kuzyk. I‟m 

also very happy to say that today we have members of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police in the gallery, 

Mr. Speaker. Chief Dale McPhee, from my old police service, 

the Prince Albert Police Service, is the president of the 

Association of Chiefs of Police. We‟ve got Chief Clive 

Weighill, the chief of the Saskatoon Police Service; 

Superintendent Murray Roe representing the Regina Police 

Service; and Superintendent Jim Templeton of the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. 

 

If I can add, Mr. Speaker, before I close, is that for some reason 

we had a strange request to have these men and women from 

the firefighters and the police tour our offices for some reason. 

I‟m not quite sure why — something about calendars, I 

understand. But on a serious note, I also want to let people 

know here, and I‟ve said it before, that these two groups of men 

and women provide a very essential service to the citizens of 

this province. 

 

When men and women run away from problems and disasters 

and situations, it‟s this group right here — I‟m very proud to 

say — run into those problems, Mr. Speaker, deal with them 

head on, putting themselves into harm‟s way to protect every 

citizen in this province. And they do this without question. It‟s a 

matter of pride and dedicated service to this province and to the 

citizens. And welcome to your Assembly. Thank you very 

much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On 

behalf of the opposition, I‟d like to join with the minister in 

welcoming our many guests today to the House, the 18 

members of the Association of Professional Fire Fighters and 

their president, Gerry Huget, and the members of class 57 from 

the Saskatchewan Police College. Welcome to our Assembly, 

hope you enjoy your time here today, as well as your instructors 

and the members of the chiefs of police. We welcome you here 

today and join with the minister in hoping you have a good day. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my great 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of this Hon. Assembly, two fine young men, Mr. 

Dustin Bisson, a grade 12 student from Craik High School, who 

is very interested in politics and hopes to be sitting in a seat in 

these chambers one day. Dustin is on a work experience 

program through his school and is spending his time learning 

about running the legislature. He said he believes his greatest 

achievement in life so far is to be allowed to be here. 

 

Dustin is a busy young man who works for a lawn service in the 

summer, shovels snow during the winter months, and 

volunteers at the Craik library. He likes to curl and go biking. 

He‟s just a very busy young person. And we wish you well in 

your future career, Dustin, and hope to see you back here in 

these chambers some time in the future. 

 

Accompanying Dustin is Dylan Bossenberry, currently enrolled 

in grade 11 at Craik High School. A member of the senior boys‟ 

basketball team, Dylan is on the Craik School community 

council and also interested in politics. 

 

I ask all members to join in welcoming these two fine, young, 

high school students with aspirations of sitting here on the floor 

of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in your east gallery I would 

like to you and through you introduce to the legislature some 

health care workers who provide services in our health care 



1734 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

system, but these members are members of the Canadian Union 

of Public Employees bargaining committee. And a particular 

mention to Gord Campbell, president of that bargaining unit, 

and the health care workers, and chief negotiator, Mike Keith. 

 

I ask all members to welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature, and I‟m very proud to introduce 27 grade 10 

students from Melville Comprehensive School. I‟d also like to 

recognize their teachers, Mr. Speaker, and chaperones, Perry 

Ostapowich, Stuart Wilson, and Bob Simpson. 

 

Mr. Ostapowich is probably becoming a very familiar name in 

this legislature. He‟s been a faithful visitor with his classes here 

for many years; in fact almost as long as I‟ve been in this 

building. And I think all members probably really appreciate 

the interest that he takes in the legislative proceedings, but 

makes sure that he passes that on to his students. 

 

So I ask everyone to welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased 

again to stand and introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the House, 27 grade 6 students from W.F. Ready 

School in my constituency. Mr. Speaker, they‟re here today to 

see the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

But I have to say, Mr. Speaker, their teacher, Stephanie 

Wotherspoon, has informed me I‟m not her favourite MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, the 

member from Saskatoon Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to ask 

all members to join me in welcoming Michael Couros who‟s 

seated in the back row of the west gallery, who has moved from 

the backrooms of politics to now the back row. Mr. Couros is a 

long-time resident of Saskatoon, a financial planner, and I‟m 

pleased to see him in his legislature today. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I 

certainly would like to join in with the member from Regina 

Dewdney and welcome my wife Stephanie to the Assembly 

with her wonderful class of grade 6 students from W.F. Ready 

School. 

 

I certainly hope that I‟m her favourite MLA, but I‟ll clarify that 

maybe later. I know that those students sitting up there have 

incredibly bright futures before them. I know that my wife, their 

teacher, certainly appreciates teaching them and just appreciates 

her students. So I would like to welcome these students to our 

Assembly here today. I know they have report cards coming out 

on Friday; I wish them well with that. 

 

And tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, they‟re visiting the city of Regina 

landfill, and they‟re studying their recycling program and the 

composting program and the gasification program that‟s going 

on. I welcome them; I welcome the class. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to this Assembly, it‟s my pleasure to introduce 

a couple of constituents and friends of mine from the Beechy 

area: Ed Bothner who is also the president of the Saskatchewan 

Stock Growers Association. With him is Reg Schellenberg who 

is the second vice-president, I believe, with the stock growers, 

and joining them is Chad McPherson, the executive director. 

And I ask all members to please give them a warm welcome to 

their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 

families who are having difficulty accessing or/and affording 

quality child care spaces for their children which really limits 

their future in today‟s economy. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

rise today to present a petition regarding means testing in the 

seniors‟ drug plan. Many seniors in our province are finding it 

difficult to afford their drugs and their rent: 

 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1735 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to means test seniors 

and ensure that all seniors continue to have access to 

affordable prescription drugs. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Holbein, Duck 

Lake, and Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

indexing the minimum wage to protect Saskatchewan residents 

from the cost of living and sporadic wage increases. The 

petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan‟s 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Petitions are signed by residents of Saskatoon, Regina, and 

Churchbridge. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan seniors, a very critical issue as we approach 

winter. I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary education. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and to help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was presented to me through the 

Canadian Federation of Students, University of Regina 

Students‟ Union, and the University of Saskatchewan‟s 

Students‟ Union, and the First Nations University of Canada 

Student Association. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

in support of a property tax reduction. This is desired by 

Saskatchewan families and business people across our province. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide significant, 

sustainable, long-term property tax relief to property 

owners by 2009 through significantly increasing the 

provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Canadian Transplant Games 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to recognize 

the outstanding accomplishments of some very special athletes 

that have overcome challenges that not many of us face. This 

summer, a very special Team Saskatchewan headed off to 

Windsor, Ontario, to take part in the Canadian Transplant 

Games. 

 

The team was very successful and returned with some very 

impressive results including: Orest Saskiw, Saskatoon, silver 

medal in long jump, heart transplant; Larry Krekelwich, 

Melville, silver medal in golf, kidney transplant; Carol Epp 

from Langham, gold in 100 metre, 200 metre, 3 K road race, 

silver in ball throw, liver transplant; Sheryl Mamchur, 

Saskatoon, gold in ball throw, bronze in 100 and 200 metre, 

liver transplant; and Jamie Bourassa Vermeulen, Saskatoon, 

gold in the 3 K, 100 metre and 200 metre, and he had a liver 

transplant. And Norm Paproski, from Saskatoon, silver in golf, 

a double lung transplant. 

 

Now Norman says, and I quote, “The interaction with other 

transplant recipients across Canada and especially with donor 



1736 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

families created the best support group that one could ask for.” 

He goes on to say, “I feel very strongly that organ donation 

does work, and we need a greater awareness program.” 

 

In the past, athletes have been sent to world games as well. But 

more importantly, Mr. Speaker, they are involved in a 

movement that profiles a very important issue in health care — 

organ and tissue donation. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to 

join me in congratulating these athletes and we wish them the 

very best in the many years ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

National Addictions Awareness Week 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, November 16 to the 22 is both 

Saskatchewan and National Addictions Awareness Week. 

 

This year Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week will focus 

on examining the role alcohol plays in the lives of youth and 

adults. Communities across our province have worked hard to 

plan events to commemorate this week including family skates, 

poster contests, and sober walks. 

 

Our website, healthysask.ca, offers resources like fact sheets 

and games for communities to use when planning activities. 

This year we have also developed a series of posters for youth 

and adults. The message to youth is that you can have fun and 

fit in without drinking. To adults the message is to think about 

how they are modelling alcohol for the youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to remember that addictions work takes 

place year-round. In this year‟s budget, our government 

committed more than $47 million for alcohol and drug services 

alone. Alcohol and drug services are available in every health 

region. In Saskatchewan there is a variety of detox, in-patient, 

and outpatient services. We offer day treatment, community 

mobile treatment, and methadone maintenance therapy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, life with an addiction is not easy. People who 

want to recover need support not only from their families and 

friends but also from their communities. Join us in recognizing 

Saskatchewan and National Addictions Awareness Week. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Duke of Edinburgh Awards 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

honour to attend the Duke of Edinburgh Awards this past 

Saturday, November 15. The Duke of Edinburgh Awards were 

founded by His Royal Highness Prince Philip, Duke of 

Edinburgh. They are intended to promote and to foster the 

healthy development of our young citizens. The program 

focuses on setting and achieving personal goals in four areas: 

community service, skills, physical recreation, and adventurous 

journey. 

 

Awards were presented by His Honour the Hon. Dr. Gordon L. 

Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, to the 

following Saskatchewan youth: Zoe Parkinson of Unity; Kate 

Humphreys of Wilcox; James Howden, Edgeley; Terra Lynn 

Lekach, Kelliher; Kolby Kostyniuk, Imperial; Brandon 

Cressman and Trevor Paschke of Tisdale; Adam Kapeller of 

Crooked River; Dominique McKercher of Oxbow; Shayne 

Suchan of Estevan. 

 

Of Regina: Jennifer Smith, Graeme Andrews, Eva Rennie, 

Christina Leurer, Nolan Werry. 

 

Of Fort Qu‟Appelle: Max Cheers, Michael Head, Jylissa 

Hinton, Mercedes Hollerbaum, Wendy Li. 

 

I would like to thank all those who assisted these youth in 

achieving their goals and all of the supporters, volunteers, and 

staff of the Duke of Edinburgh Awards of Saskatchewan. I ask 

all members of this Assembly to join with me in extending to 

these youth our pride and our gratitude. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

50th Anniversary of Stem Cell 

Transplants in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fellow members of the 

Assembly, I am pleased to call your attention to a notable 

anniversary in health. Fifty years ago today the first stem cell 

transplant in Canada was performed right here in Saskatchewan. 

Two physicians conducted the procedure in Regina on a 

leukemia patient from Moose Jaw. This medical first in 

November 1958 helped pave the way for improved cancer 

treatment in Saskatchewan and across Canada. 

 

This anniversary is an excellent opportunity to renew our 

commitment to both patients and to our partners in 

Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and the Saskatoon Health 

Region. With their support we ensure viable, sustainable stem 

cell transplant services for our residents. Mr. Speaker, we 

believe it is vitally important to provide patients with 

specialized services close to home. 

 

We support a strengthened program that will increase our 

capacity to provide these services. Advocacy groups such as the 

Saskatchewan Stem Cell Transplant Advocacy Group play a 

major role as we develop plans for improved services. Patients 

and their families are a rich resource of information and insight. 

We need and appreciate their active participation. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1737 

Métis Korean War Veteran Honoured 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to speak of a man who was a friend to many in Moose 

Jaw and across the province. Mr. John Pederson passed away 

on Monday, November 12 at the age of 79. 

 

John, the eldest sibling of 12, was born in Ile-a-la-Crosse, then 

resided in Buffalo Narrows where his family fished, logged, and 

ran a mink farm. At the age of 13 years, he ventured to the 

Meadow Lake area looking for work. And at the age of 22, he 

joined the army and was sent overseas where he served from 

1951 to 1953 as a medic in the Korean War. After discharge, 

John eventually made Moose Jaw his home and began a 37-year 

career with the city. 

 

John involved himself in many organizations, and he was very 

proud of his Métis heritage and served as an elder to the 

Southern Plains Métis Local 160. John was also a tireless 

advocate for Korean veterans and sought justice and equal 

treatment for his fellow comrades. 

 

In 2005, the Year of the Veteran, John received a number of 

honours for his dedication and service. And just this past 

summer, he had the opportunity to travel to Korea to attend 

ceremonies in recognition of the 55th anniversary of Métis vets. 

He described the excursion as “the trip of a lifetime.” 

 

John was predeceased by his first wife, and he leaves to mourn 

his son, Rod, and family; his wife, Maxine; and a large 

extended family. John Pederson will be remembered by all who 

knew him for his kind words, his warm smile, a bit of a 

mischievous personality, and a strong support for community. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in expressing condolences 

to the family and join with me in celebrating a life well lived. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Education Portion of Property Taxes 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business is reporting 

Saskatchewan businesses are the most optimistic in the country. 

After an exhaustive survey, the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business] found most business owners in 

Saskatchewan are the most likely in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker, 

to say that they expect performance to be much stronger over 

the next 12 months. Why, Mr. Speaker? Here‟s what the CFIB‟s 

Marilyn Braun-Pollon had to say: 

 

The Premier‟s bold economic statement in October sent a 

very positive message to Saskatchewan‟s business 

community that the province is serious about putting the 

economy first in these uncertain economic times. The next 

step for the provincial government is to take the same 

vigilance towards providing long-term education property 

tax relief. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me read from our “A Stronger 

Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” Throne Speech: 

 

The Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Education 

continues to work diligently on this issue. 

 

He has conducted meetings with people and organizations 

in the education field and has also made a call for 

submissions from those who want to have a further 

opportunity to make their voices heard [on this very 

important issue]. 

 

A final report on this important issue will be delivered to 

the Minister of Education in early 2009 — a report that 

will . . . [form] the basis for reforming the education tax 

system and reducing the education portion of property tax. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Parkridge Centre Computer Program 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Parkridge Centre is a 

long-term care facility situated on the west side of the city of 

Saskatoon in the constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. Residents 

and clients have wide ranging medical conditions and diverse 

physical and psychological abilities. 

 

Since their opening in 1987, the Parkridge Centre has been 

considered one of the finest examples of barrier-free living for 

the physically challenged. The centre was designed with a 

strong emphasis on the quality of life for residents and their 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Parkridge Centre offers a number of programs 

that accommodate the diverse needs of residents who live there. 

The residents‟ computer program is one of those programs, and 

Parkridge Centre is the only facility in Saskatoon that is staffed 

with a coordinator and assisted by a group of volunteers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tammy Jackson, assistant technologist at the 

Parkridge Centre, works with over 50 active residents with the 

number of participants increasing every day. The residents‟ 

computer program provides cognitive stimulation as well as 

provides leisure needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in early October I attended an event to celebrate 

improvements made to the computer room that will assist 

residents in becoming more independent using computers. 

Improvements involved making the area more accessible as 

well as providing more equipment that would be accessible to 

the majority of the group‟s needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to see and participate in one 

of the programs offered in the residents‟ computer program. 

Skype has online chat capabilities with a webcam so residents 

can see who they are speaking to during their online chats. This 

important program has opened up communication for residents 

and their families as residents are now able to see and speak to 



1738 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

their families outside the Parkridge Centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in recognizing 

Tammy Jackson and the Parkridge Centre for their great 

enthusiasm and support for residents who call Parkridge Centre 

their home. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call question period I just want to 

remind members again of the rules that have been adopted 

through the years through the hard work of members from all 

sides of the House. Rule 19(3) indicates to us and more 

specifically to ministers that: 

 

Responses shall be relevant to the question, but a Minister 

may decline to answer or may take notice of a question. 

 

I just bring that to your attention. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Fire Protection Issues 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, firefighters regularly place 

themselves in danger, protecting the lives and property of 

Saskatchewan people. Currently these professionals can only 

receive entry-level training in Saskatchewan but have to 

complete their program in Alberta. To the Minister of 

Advanced Education and Labour: will he commit to providing 

additional funding so that a state of the art fire college can be 

created in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

opportunity to talk about the future needs of firefighters across 

the province. Mr. Speaker, again we‟ve had the opportunity to 

explore this. This conversation has come up in a number of 

communities. We‟ve had this discussion ranging right across 

the province starting in Lloydminster, areas in Swift Current as 

well as over in Yorkton. So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s certainly under 

consideration. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it has been determined that 

esophageal cancer is occupationally linked to the firefighting 

profession. Mr. Speaker, it has also been determined that 

firefighters contract testicular cancer at a rate higher than 

normal, and that this type of cancer is becoming more apparent 

in young males. Will the minister commit today to amend The 

Workers’ Compensation Act to include esophageal cancer as 

being linked to the occupation of firefighting and to amending 

the WCB [Workers‟ Compensation Board] regulations to 

reduce the latency period from 20 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the member to 

place his question. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to 

amending the WCB regulations to reduce the latency period 

from 20 to 5 years so young firefighters can receive the 

coverage and compensation they deserve if they contract 

testicular cancer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly members of our 

caucus were part of a meeting this morning. Those 

conversations are certainly under consideration. As far as the 

years of neglect, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

probably better positioned to look at those. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the insufficient staffing of fire 

departments not only reduces the level of service provided to 

the communities they serve but also increases the level of risk 

to those professionals. Will the minister agree to provide the 

funding needed to assure that professional fire departments 

throughout Saskatchewan are adequately staffed — a minimum 

of five initial responders — so that firefighters can meet the 

needs of the communities they serve, Mr. Speaker? And this 

will cost approximately $2.4 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for the question. 

 

I would like to say that it was for the last 16 years that this issue 

has never been addressed by that previous government. I will 

have the members of the Legislative Assembly know today that 

the great work done by the members of the local fire services in 

this province are putting forth a study — I‟ve asked my 

members from Prince Albert to do that in Prince Albert and take 

it to the executive — a study indicating what they actually 

want, where the services will be used, how many members are 

required. If they want to advance public safety, Mr. Speaker, 

this government and this side would love to help them, Mr. 

Speaker, in some way. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1739 

Support for Workers 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cost of living is 

rising in this province, partly due to the decisions that the Sask 

Party is making, for example the decision to increase home 

heating costs. Saskatchewan workers deserve the security of 

knowing that their wages will keep pace with these rising costs. 

 

The previous government set in motion a set of increases to the 

minimum wage, the last of which will take effect next year, but 

the Sask Party has done nothing to provide for further increases. 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does this government have any 

plans to increase the minimum wage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as I have told the 

member opposite on a number of occasions — I will continue to 

repeat it because I think it‟s a good news story — is that we 

increased the shelter rates for our clients. For any clients under 

Social Services, the utilities are fully paid. Even if they‟re 

increased, they will be fully paid. For the low-income earners, if 

the member from Moose Jaw would just listen, for low-income 

workers we significantly increased the Saskatchewan 

employment supplement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, over the last three days 

we‟ve heard how the Sask Party provides for its friends. In just 

one year they spent millions of dollars lining the pockets of 

Sask Party insiders and millions more to get rid of people who 

didn‟t want to share in the glory of the Sask Party . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, working families don‟t find life 

under the Sask Party quite so glorious. Workers earning 

minimum wage in particular are struggling to make ends meet, 

and many more wonder whether their income will keep pace 

with the cost of living here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Labour: will he index the 

minimum wage to inflation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to speak about the 520,000-plus people working in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 17,100 new jobs, October to 

October, Mr. Speaker. Youth employment up, Mr. Speaker. 

Aboriginal employment up, Mr. Speaker. Thirteen thousand 

new jobs for women, Mr. Speaker, year over year. A 10 per 

cent drop in EI [employment insurance] benefit recipients, Mr. 

Speaker, August to August; 3.3 per cent unemployment, the 

lowest unemployment in the country. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, regarding wages, a 4.9 per cent increase July 

to July, which is the largest year-over-year increase in wages in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. Our track record speaks for itself. The 

working people of this province are doing very well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this minister likes to talk about a 

track record, but if you‟re living from paycheque to paycheque, 

it doesn‟t mean an awful lot. What they really need is a 

paycheque that‟s a little bit larger — period. Not everyone is 

making $120,000 as a chief of staff to this, for example, some 

of the Sask Party ministers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Labour: why does this 

government have one standard for its friends and another for 

people trying to make ends meet on minimum wage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we could ask the 

80,000 people that have been taken off the tax roll that question, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Or we could also remind the member 

opposite that already in this year, we‟ve increased minimum 

wage already twice, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — As far as the broader question, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s still under review and I appreciate the opportunity 

to continue speaking about the working people of this province. 

In fact we can make reference to the population where over 

16,000-plus people have moved back to or to the province for 

the first time because they‟re so optimistic about the working 

conditions in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we have tried, we have tried, 

and we have tried to get simple answers out of the Minister of 

Labour, but between, Mr. Speaker, between his over-the-top 



1740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

rhetoric and his lack of knowledge on his file, we all know that 

hasn‟t been easy. We asked the question last year and we asked 

this question this week and still we have no answers. 

 

To the Minister of Labour: will he please just table a list of 

what public sector workers are affected by essential service 

legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate the 

opportunity to provide additional insight . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well regarding music therapy, I will respond 

over here. It seems like a fair question. You know, a few weeks 

back at the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour], there 

was a version of music therapy and I think a number of 

members opposite participated in that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we can talk about regarding essential 

service, Mr. Speaker, we can go back to the four criteria, Mr. 

Speaker. That is regarding human safety. We can look at 

property and the premises, equipment. We can look at 

environmental damage, Mr. Speaker, as well as disruption to 

the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key here is to ensure that the people of this 

province know that when snow falls, the highways will be 

plowed. If there‟s a strike like there was last year at the Royal 

University Hospital where towards the end of that strike over 

400 people per day were being turned away, Mr. Speaker, they 

have access to health care, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what the people 

of this province need to know and they know that as the Act 

stands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this week there were 

members of the public service here in the building and they 

seem to know — unlike the minister — who was affected. They 

said that 95 per cent of the public sector workforce was affected 

and this included musical therapists and librarians. And the 

minister was asked by the media, is this true? And of course the 

minister had no idea. So he got one of his officials to answer the 

questions. The official called these claims by the unions to be 

quote “unsubstantiated allegations.” To the minister: will he 

stand by his official‟s allegations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

you know, obviously the months that intervened, the member 

opposite really, he didn‟t work to enhance his understanding of 

essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker. He‟s got a lot of work 

to do, Mr. Speaker, and that is it‟s enabling legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That is there‟s a 90-day threshold. The parties are meant to 

ensure that they come to an agreement, Mr. Speaker. If they 

can‟t, there‟s a second threshold at 30 days, Mr. Speaker. Then 

the list is made available from the employer to the bargaining 

unit, Mr. Speaker. From there again there‟s an opportunity to 

resolve any outstanding conflicts. The reference point is not the 

minister, Mr. Speaker. It is the Labour Relations Board, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s a key and philosophical premise that that way the 

parties can be heard in a fair fashion, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think 

the member opposite comprehends that notion of what‟s 

included in essential services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s laughable about the 

minister talking about comprehension of services but, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s actually pretty simple. We have a list, and here‟s 

the list from one of the health regions — just one health region, 

Mr. Speaker. It is 10 pages long and has 200 types of 

occupations. And yes, it includes musical therapists and 

librarians. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these people do important work. But maybe 

the minister can answer: why are they considered essential. 

Simple question, Mr. Speaker. Do musical therapists affect 

public safety, or do they prevent damage to property? Which is 

it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, absolutely the 

government‟s number one priority is the safety and security of 

our Saskatchewan residents. If that means in a hospital setting, 

Mr. Speaker, our hospitals do have to remain open so that 

there‟s emergency care, so that there‟s urgent care. 

 

And in the case of for example a librarian, would that be classed 

as essential? Let‟s review the case. If a surgery is under way 

and a surgeon needs information from a research librarian, 

would that be essential? Because there have been deaths in the 

United States when those people were not made available to a 

surgeon, and that would be . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. If members want question 

period just to roll by without any questions, continue to 

interfere. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow to order. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in that situation, that 

would definitely be classed as an essential service. But this 

needs to be looked at by reasonable people. Is a music therapist 

an essential service? No, it isn‟t essential service. Is a librarian 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1741 

that will give research to a surgeon that has a very important 

case essential? You bet it is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, at least the Minister of Health 

knows yes or no, which obviously escapes the Minister of 

Labour. But, Mr. Speaker, let me remind you of what the 

minister‟s senior official told the media and the public on 

Monday, and I quote, “The fact that someone makes an 

unsubstantiated allegation that is not heard before the Labour 

Relations Board is not evidence of anything.” 

 

The minister was standing right there when his official made 

this commitment to the media. To the minister: why did he not 

correct that official? Was it because he wanted this false 

information out there, or did he just not know the answer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, once again we go to the 

fundamentals of essential service Act, Mr. Speaker, the four 

criteria. We can talk about the balance, Mr. Speaker, between 

the right to strike and helping to ensure the protection of the 

people of this province. 

 

But really what we see across the way, Mr. Speaker, is an attack 

on a public servant, Mr. Speaker, a witch hunt. So, Mr. Speaker, 

what we see is the opportunity for the people of this province 

through this legislation to be protected, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

shameful what that member opposite has just done. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll tell you about witch hunts. 

I‟ll tell you about the essential services legislation here in this 

province — that‟s a witch hunt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister and this government are just using 

essential services as a tool; they‟re using it as a tool to attack 

the entire public service in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when the Premier said he was going to war on labour, I 

guess we see that he wasn‟t kidding, Mr. Speaker. He wasn‟t 

kidding. But will the Minister of Labour admit that he and the 

rest of that cabinet over there are directing, giving instructions 

directly to the bargaining tables in this province? Will he admit 

that, and will the minister admit that they don‟t believe in 

collective bargaining, they don‟t understand collective 

bargaining, and they are just using essential services as a tool 

against the public servants in this province? That‟s what they‟re 

doing. And will the minister finally admit that he too has joined 

the Premier‟s war on labour in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I think what I‟ll do is join 

my colleagues in analyzing that as not a question but a 

soliloquy, and a sad one at that. Mr. Speaker, let‟s go back to 

the basics, the basics, Mr. Speaker. This is about ensuring 

public safety, Mr. Speaker. The criteria are spelled out. 

 

It relates to the safety of the people. It relates to protecting 

property. It protects the environment. Mr. Speaker, it ensures 

that the courts will continue to function. Really, in short order, 

Mr. Speaker, it ensures that when snow comes, the highways 

will be cleared, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what this means. It‟s 

consistent with the best practices from across Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. What‟s sad is that an opposition could be so out of 

touch with the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this morning in Saskatoon, the 

National Farmers Union issued the results of the year-long 

study into the cattle industry. The data, Mr. Speaker, is 

compelling. The cattle industry is facing prices that have 

collapsed, and in fact this year, prices are half of what they were 

in the ‟40s, the ‟50s, the ‟60s, the ‟70s, and the ‟80s. 

 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how is his government 

intending on responding to the collapsing prices in the cattle 

industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate the question from the member. Mr. Speaker, for the 

last year we‟ve been trying to clean up the mess left behind by 

an NDP [New Democratic Party] government that ignored rural 

Saskatchewan for 16 years, Mr. Speaker, and that takes a while 

to get the program starting to turn around and heading in the 

right direction. That doesn‟t happen overnight, Mr. Speaker. 

You can‟t totally ignore an area for 16 years and expect 

someone to come in and fix those programs in one year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are trying to start that to happen. We‟re 

putting more money into the programming. We‟re talking to the 

federal government, trying to improve the programming, and, 

Mr. Speaker, maybe a positive sign in the last couple of days is 

cattle prices have moved up just ever so much. And I think we 

all know the real answer is if the prices would improve, the 

dollar stayed down, we‟d all be better off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this report is crystal clear. 

Cattle producers in this province and in this country are facing 

prices half of what they were in the ‟40s, ‟50s, ‟60s, and ‟70s. 

And what does the do-nothing government in Ottawa, Regina, 

have to say? They have absolutely nothing to say. 

 

In fact former Sask Party director and now Conservative MP 

[Member of Parliament] Lukiwski is quoted today, talking 

about sector bailout from the federal government, and he says, 

and I quote, “I do believe that the Prime Minister and the 

federal Minister of Finance are aware of some of the problems 

in our sectors, particularly the auto industry and the 

manufacturing industry.” 

 

To the minister: can he get on the telephone and call up Mr. 

Lukiwski, his cousin in Ottawa, and tell them that the livestock 

producers are a sector that needs help? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, it just happens that the 

Premier did talk to the Prime Minister just last week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I might also add to that, that this afternoon at 4:30, 

I have a call coming from the Minister of Agriculture to talk 

about a number of things . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members will know we have a number 

of individuals who have joined us today, and I think many times 

they find it difficult to hear the questions and the responses. I‟d 

ask them to keep this in mind. Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also I 

might say to the member, Mr. Speaker, is that this afternoon at 

4:30, I have a call coming from the Minister of Agriculture 

federally. And that will be one of the issues that we will be 

talking about. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is totally unlike the opposition sitting 

over there. When they were here, they were confrontational. 

They wouldn‟t even talk to the federal government about 

anything reasonable, especially for agriculture in the province 

of Saskatchewan, because the last thing they wanted to do was 

put any money into rural Saskatchewan and to the agriculture 

industry in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I see that the Premier‟s 

telephone call to the Prime Minister worked so well that there 

isn‟t one reference in today‟s Throne Speech to the livestock 

industry, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, our favourite 

son, Tom Lukiwski, says the focus will be on sectors outside of 

Saskatchewan since the province is doing so well. 

 

Does the provincial Agriculture minister agree with his federal 

friend, his Conservative federal friend, that the cattle sector in 

Saskatchewan is doing well? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we all know the cattle industry is under stress, the hog 

industry is under stress. And, Mr. Speaker, the main reason it‟s 

under stress is because they don‟t have an adequate program to 

deal with downturns in the economy like we‟re seeing right 

now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we go back to 1992, the last time we had a 

program, the last time . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the last time we had an 

adequate program in the province of Saskatchewan that even 

come close to addressing problems when they arose was the 

GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program. Does 

anyone on that side of the House remember what happened to 

the GRIP program? It was ripped up by that government when 

they came to power. And I believe the premier of the day, Mr. 

Romanow said, we‟ll replace it with something even better. 

 

Well to this date, in fact as of November 7 last fall, there had 

been absolutely nothing put in place. In fact Mr. Wartman, the 

previous Agriculture minister, did everything in his power, 

confrontational with the federal government, but everything in 

his power to actually put in place a program that would deal 

with the problems in agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to repeat the 

comments by Kevin Hursch when he says: 

 

The Sask. Party government has been largely ineffectual 

in stemming the downturn in the cattle and hog 

industries. The new government [quote] has actually been 

less supportive than the previous administration. 

 

Now we have a federal Conservative government in Ottawa 

with an Agriculture minister from Saskatchewan. We have a 

Conservative Prime Minister in Ottawa with a conservative 

Premier in Saskatchewan. Now it seems to me that the Premier 

and the Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. 

Ritz, and the Minister of Agriculture in our province can get 

together and do something, Mr. Speaker. 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

The livestock industry is hemorrhaging. When are they going to 

get off of their seat and do something about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s very clear to us on this side of the House what 

the previous NDP government thought of rural Saskatchewan. 

In fact it goes on to say and talk about our rural, redneck base. 

Now that‟s quite a comment coming from someone that was in 

government for 16 years and really let on . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I call the members to order. 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I was always in wonderment at what they really 

thought of rural Saskatchewan and where their priorities were. 

And some of those priorities are starting to come to light, Mr. 

Speaker. And it comes through the Agri-Food Equity Fund. 

 

And I just want to remind the member, do you know where they 

put the dollars that were supposed to be designed for 

agriculture? They invested them into private business all over 

the province to the tune of $31 million over about a six-year 

period. 

 

You know how many dollars they actually lost on those 

ventures, Mr. Speaker? $19.5 million were lost because they got 

into private business out in rural Saskatchewan in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if their priorities were in order, and actually cared 

about farmers and ranchers . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

Expands Northern Service 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s with great pleasure that I rise today 

to inform the House about a very important and positive 

development for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Saskatchewan Transportation Company, STC, has been 

providing safe, reliable, and courteous bus passenger and 

freight services to Saskatchewan since 1946. Starting today, Mr. 

Speaker, under this new Saskatchewan Party government, STC 

will begin to serve four additional communities, over 8,700 

citizens, located in northeast region of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, this will be the company‟s most significant expansion 

of service in 30 years. These communities now being serviced 

will be La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and 

Beauval with connections through Prince Albert. 

Mr. Speaker, this new service shows STC‟s commitment to 

building a stronger Saskatchewan and a better life for 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to come . . . 

Order. The Minister of Health will come to order. I‟d ask 

members to allow the minister to make his ministerial 

statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes 

indeed, a better life for Saskatchewan citizens, a better life for 

Saskatchewan First Nations, Métis, and other northern citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, compared to 2001, the total population along this 

route has grown by some 6 per cent, as reported by Statistics 

Canada in the 2006 census. The size and growth of the total 

population in this area were significant factors in the decision to 

establish this service. 

 

The new service will be provided through joint business 

arrangements with the private sector in these communities. STC 

has contracted local entrepreneur Mr. Larry Young of Buffalo 

Narrows to operate this service. He will operate a 27-passenger 

coach with wheelchair accessibility. If volumes warrant, Mr. 

Speaker, this coach may be upgraded to a larger coach in the 

future, and we certainly hope that this does happen. 

 

STC has established agencies in partnership with the following 

private businesses: P R Service Ltd. in La Loche, Buffalo 

Narrows Esso in Buffalo Narrows, L & J Confectionery in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, and MDeez Confectionery in Beauval. 

 

In addition to the new passenger bus service, Mr. Speaker, 

citizens and businesses will also have access to STC‟s express 

service for their parcel and freight delivery needs. 

 

STC anticipates that these services will benefit the area‟s health 

and medical sector greatly. Regular scheduled service in these 

communities will occur four times a week — every Monday, 

Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday. Mr. Speaker, with this 

upgraded service, and this new service, STC now connects 282 

Saskatchewan communities, bringing Saskatchewan people 

closer together. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And first of all I 

want to thank the minister for making a copy of his comments 

available to me earlier this afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is truly good news for the people who live in 

La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Beauval, that 

they‟ll now be able to participate in the STC services and will, 

I‟m sure, muchly appreciate that. 

 

It‟s truly good news for those folks, and I had the opportunity of 

travelling through northern Saskatchewan, those communities 

as well as many others, a couple of summers ago on a different 

mission on behalf of the government. And I would encourage 

all members to take the opportunity to travel northern 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

Saskatchewan because you get a sense there that you don‟t 

really understand unless you‟ve been there, and that‟s the great, 

vast distances between communities. 

 

And STC will now connect these communities in a very 

positive way. I think it will serve the elders in the area well, 

allowing them the opportunity to travel to southern parts of the 

province for medical purposes or to visit families. It will meet 

the needs of the youth and the students who will be able to now 

travel not only to the institutions of learning, but be able to 

travel home to visit their families on a regular basis in a much 

easier fashion. 

 

This is truly a service that will be utilized, and I think warranted 

by the strong growth of the economy in northern Saskatchewan 

that continues on. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate 

Mr. Young, the successful bidder and the entrepreneur, and 

congratulate him on the good service that he will provide. I 

know that he as an individual has a good reputation in that area. 

 

I also want to wonder why it took so long for STC to finally get 

around to doing this because I understand from my colleague, 

the current member from Athabasca, when he was the minister 

the deal had already been made at that time. It took nearly a 

year before the government finally got around to implementing 

it. But it is here. It is truly good news, Mr. Speaker, and I want 

to thank the minister for continuing doing the good work that 

was set out before him. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 65, 

The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 65, The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 be 

now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 66, The Witness Protection Act be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved that Bill No. 66, The 

Witness Protection Act be now be read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report that it has 

considered certain estimates and presents its fourth report. I 

move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 64, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to present an amendment to The Northern 

Municipalities Act that completes the legislative groundwork to 

provide an updated property assessment and taxation system to 

Saskatchewan‟s northern communities. 

 

This amendment, which is being introduced in time for the 

upcoming 2009 provincial reassessment of properties, matches 

legislative changes that were passed in 2006 for southern, rural, 

and urban municipalities. More specifically it ensures that the 

economic realities of property values in the real estate market 

can be reflected in a more understandable and transparent 

system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the property assessment process is a complicated 

and technical one, as was acknowledged in committee debate on 

April 20, 2006 when the Legislative Assembly agreed to update 

the assessment and taxation systems for southern 

municipalities. Since that was over two years ago and involved 

a few different elected members than are present today, I would 

like to mention a few points that were key to the discussions 

then and remain relevant today. 

 

[14:30] 

 

First, under the new system, property assessors will be able to 

employ any of the three internationally recognized 

methodologies for determining assessments: the sales 

comparison approach, the replacement cost approach, and the 

rental income approach. This will help to ensure that the system 

becomes more results driven, and as a result property owners 

will get more understandable assessments. 

 

Secondly, because of the realities of Saskatchewan‟s real estate 

market and the many different sorts of property that exist, some 

types of property will continue to be assessed using the 

formulas, rules, and guidelines established by the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency and set out in its manual. 

These properties include agricultural land, heavy industrial 

property, railways, oil and gas well equipment, and mines. 

 

Third, Saskatchewan is the last jurisdiction in Canada to move 

to a market-value-based system. This is a significant step for 

economic development and the attraction of new business to our 

province. Mr. Speaker, both The Cities Act and The 

Municipalities Act which guide Saskatchewan‟s towns, villages, 

and rural municipalities, are organized very differently from the 

present northern municipalities Act. The assessment and 

taxation amendments being considered today are largely 

modelled on those Acts. We are updating these parts of the 

NMA [The Northern Municipalities Act] now in order to meet 

immediate requirements. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the ministry for 

the work to advance changes to The Northern Municipalities 

Act. Further, I thank the members of the NMA review 

committee for their time and commitment to the review process. 

The committee‟s contribution is extremely valuable and will be 

reflected in the Bill we have before us today. I appreciate the 

patience of our committee members and northern partners. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 64, The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2). 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved second reading of Bill No. 64, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2). Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s a pleasure for me to rise to speak at second reading 

on Bill No. 64, the Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act and to make consequential amendments to The Local 

Improvements Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I listened carefully to the minister moments ago who introduced 

this Bill. Mr. Speaker, it is quite an extensive Bill, as anyone 

who has had the opportunity to have a look at it today, Mr. 

Speaker . . . It‟s quite extensive. I was listening carefully, Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister‟s comments in introducing the Bill, and 

I was listening, Mr. Speaker, specifically for the words 

consultation, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t recall the minister opposite, 

in his introduction of the Bill, referring to the consultation with 

northern mayors and community leaders, Mr. Speaker, although 

I know that some consultation has taken place. And I believe 

very seriously, Mr. Speaker, that consultation with northern 

communities is absolutely critical in legislation like this. 

 

I say that, Mr. Speaker, because I also heard the minister 

opposite talk about this legislation coming after the consultation 

had occurred and legislation passed with regards to the 

municipal Act and The Cities Act, Mr. Speaker, that are the first 

two of three steps in developing the province-wide assessment 

system in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was there for a lot of the consultations on The 

Municipalities Act, a lot of the consultations on The Cities Act. 

Mr. Speaker, we worked very closely with those communities at 

that time and reached a general consensus, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that we had the beginnings of an assessment system that 

would in fact, Mr. Speaker, be able to apply right across the 

entire province. 

 

At that time, Mr. Speaker, we were engaged in discussions, that 

is the Government of Saskatchewan was engaged in discussions 

with northern mayors, communities and community leaders — 

especially through the organization that represents them in this 

manner, Mr. Speaker, the organization known as New North. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was some concern back when The 

Cities Act and The Municipalities Act were passed, or were 

being brought forward, before they were passed, Mr. Speaker, 

there was some concern by northern leaders that in fact the 

consultation process had not concluded. There were matters 

affecting northern communities that do not affect southern 

communities, that the community leaders had not yet felt had 

been taken into account in preparing the language for 

developing the province-wide assessment system. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they talked to us about a number of issues 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

including property that exists, property being interpreted as a 

cabin or a residence, Mr. Speaker, on a lakeshore that‟s used 

primarily for the trapping season or the fishing season or those 

types of things. Also, development authorities in the North, Mr. 

Speaker, as we know, some of the communities are seeing 

subdivisions develop at a very fast pace, Mr. Speaker, because 

of the development of the resource sector in the North. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, community leaders told us at that time to 

make sure that we had our i‟s dotted, our t‟s crossed, that there 

was an understanding generally. So, Mr. Speaker, listening 

carefully to those community leaders, the government at the 

time chose — and it was very much a choice, Mr. Speaker — 

chose to listen and did not bring forward The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act dealing with the assessment 

processes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now the new government is bringing forward the Act and, 

Mr. Speaker, that was why I was listening carefully for the 

words, consultation, in the minister‟s speech because, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s what was promised and I believe that‟s what 

was to take place with regards to the finalization of The 

Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

Now that having been said, Mr. Speaker, we all know and share 

the support for a province-wide assessment system. That‟s the 

goal, Mr. Speaker. It was of the previous government and it 

apparently appears to be, with the introduction of this Act, it 

appears to be the goal of the current government — a 

province-wide assessment system. So Bill 64 is aimed at doing 

exactly that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact part of the explanation, the explanatory notes that 

accompany the Bill, Mr. Speaker, actually refer to parts of the 

Acts are meant to replace assessment and taxation provisions 

for consistency, Mr. Speaker, with The Municipalities Act. We 

all believe in consistency, Mr. Speaker, but we also recognize 

that being consistent, one can also recognize the unique 

circumstances of the people who live, work, and build their 

lives in northern communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the explanation note carries on to talk about the 

introduction of a province-wide, market-value-based property 

assessment system. So, Mr. Speaker, I realize and recognize 

that‟s the goal and the intention of the government. It‟s a goal 

and intention that New Democrats, while in government and 

now in opposition, support, Mr. Speaker. It‟s just a matter of, 

has this Bill done what is expected this Bill to do? That is from 

the perspective of our northern communities, who we assume 

have been consulted in this way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are going to take a little bit of time to . . . 

maybe not a lot of time, Mr. Speaker, because I want this put on 

the record, I guess. I should make sure I put this on the record, 

Mr. Speaker. New Democrats in opposition are certainly aware 

of the need to proceed expeditiously with this Bill if there has 

been general consensus achieved amongst northern leaders. The 

expediency, Mr. Speaker, is quite simple: that if this Bill were 

to move forward quickly, the assessment process can be in 

place for 2009, which is a goal again that we all share. Mr. 

Speaker, we would like to see if at all possible the 

implementation of a province-wide assessment system to be in 

effect for 2009. It is for communities. It is for cities. It is for 

towns. It is for villages. It is throughout central and southern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But for northern communities, Mr. Speaker, to be a part of this, 

we need to have this legislation passed, and I‟m certainly aware 

of the need to proceed expeditiously. So, Mr. Speaker, we have 

begun the process of consulting with northern community 

leaders to ensure that there has been consultation, that there is a 

general consensus to proceed, and should that be the case, Mr. 

Speaker, we will assist the government in moving forward 

quickly. 

 

If there remain questions, if there remain concerns, we will raise 

those and bring them forward through the committee process. 

So we will take a couple of days, Mr. Speaker, to complete our 

consultation process that began when the government gave us 

notice that they were going to proceed with this legislation. And 

we should be able to report to the House, to the public in 

Saskatchewan what our intention is on this Bill in the very near 

future. 

 

So that having been said, Mr. Speaker, I want to move that 

debate on Bill No. 64, An Act to amend The Northern 

Municipalities Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 64, The Northern 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my privilege to rise in 

the House today to move second reading of The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008. The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2008 has been developed to address many 

issues concerning the evolving rental housing environment in 

our province. 

 

First, the report of the task force on housing affordability 

delivered in June of this year by former MLAs Ted Merriman 

and Bob Pringle recommended that our current legislation be 

amended to provide for six months notice of rent increases for 

month-to-month leases. This legislation achieves that. 

 

This legislation also clarifies that in the case of fixed term lease, 

any rent increases must be specified in the lease document or 

those rent increases will not be allowed. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, our government has recognized the 

need to make some changes respecting security deposits. 

Currently if a landlord wishes to retain any or all of the security 

deposit to cover repairs, the landlord must apply to the Office of 

Residential Tenancies for an order permitting the retention of 

the security deposit. Mr. Speaker, these amendments reverse the 

process in the case of security deposits. When this legislation is 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

passed, if a landlord wishes to retain a security deposit, the 

landlord will notify the tenant of this intention. The tenant will 

then have 120 days to apply to the Office of Residential 

Tenancies to oppose the landlord keeping the security deposit. 

No fee will be charged to the tenant. 

 

This is a practical solution since most landlord‟s applications to 

retain a security deposit are not opposed. They will also 

decrease the workload for the Office of Residential Tenancies. 

 

Third, this legislation will streamline the process for 

applications to terminate a lease in cases of tenant misconduct. 

In the event of egregious behaviour by a tenant, the Act allows 

landlords to apply to the Office of Residential Tenancies for an 

immediate order of possession. The Act also allows a landlord 

to apply for an order to end a tenancy early for cause, such as 

chronic failure to pay rent on time. These orders for cause 

become effective no earlier than one month from the date of the 

order and at the end of the rent period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with these amendments an application by a 

landlord for immediate possession order will now be considered 

an application for an order to end the tenancy early if the 

evidence shows that immediate eviction is not warranted but an 

order to end the tenancy is appropriate. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, consequential amendments are necessary 

to The Saskatchewan Assistance Act to reflect the changes to 

the procedure for security deposits in The Residential Tenancies 

Act. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 62, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister‟s 

second reading speech received some applause and that‟s 

probably all that it deserved, Mr. Speaker. It deserves some 

applause. 

 

And I know that the minister has expressed a desire that this 

matter move to committee in a fairly rapid order so that the 

work can be done on the Bill, and the opposition sees the need 

for some work to be done on that Bill that can only be done in 

committee and not here. So I think at least some of my remarks 

will please the minister; maybe not all my remarks will. 

 

The minister made some interesting comments when speaking 

to the press about this Bill before he gave his second reading 

speech in this legislature. And one of the things he said was that 

what we might call over here a housing crisis, or at least a 

housing problem, was in his view a period of significant rental 

adjustments. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I will probably refrain from passing on to my constituents 

who find their rent increased by 40 per cent or 50 per cent or 

doubled over a relatively short period of time that that‟s not a 

crisis or a problem, perhaps forcing them even out of the city of 

Saskatoon, certainly forcing them out of the home in which 

they‟ve lived for some period of time. It is, in the view of the 

minister responsible for residential tenancies, a significant 

rental adjustment and that in his view the period is over, and we 

can now start to relax. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure that that is the case. But if it is 

the case, Mr. Speaker, it‟s an interesting admission on the part 

of the government. Here‟s a party that said, housing crisis, what 

housing crisis, before the campaign, before the election 

campaign of 2007. They said, why is the NDP raising this 

issue? We have nothing to say. We have nothing to say about 

housing. We have nothing to say at all. There‟ll be nothing in 

our platform about it. There‟ll be nothing in our policy about it, 

and we will say nothing about housing during the campaign, 

before the campaign, immediately following the campaign 

because for us it is not an issue. 

 

It is what the minister, who is wishing to join debate from her 

seat, said, a void in their policy after the election was over. It 

was a void in their policy. That was her admission, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I think some of the editorial writers and some of the pundits 

who were questioning the New Democratic Party at the time, 

summer of 2007, about the housing crisis have probably 

rethought their position. I mean, some commentators, radio and 

newspaper, said, there‟s no housing crisis. What is the current 

minister of Justice — which was then me — what are they 

talking about? I think they‟ve all rethought that. And this 

government, this government rethought it after they formed 

government, but they didn‟t have a policy. 

 

What they did for themselves is buy time. Not for renters, Mr. 

Speaker — they didn‟t buy any time for renters until today, a 

year later. What they did is they bought time for themselves, 

Mr. Speaker, by asking, well is there a problem and what might 

we do about it? And then they‟ve got a year‟s time for 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, to do this, this that deserves, as I said, 

a little applause, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This doesn‟t the address the issues of the cost of living for 

people who‟ve had their rent increased and who still will have 

their rent increased. It doesn‟t assist them at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I, Mr. Speaker, unlike the member who wants to join the debate, 

I‟m speaking to the Bill at this moment. This Bill doesn‟t do 

anything for those who have incurred rental increases, will 

continue to incur rental increases. This does nothing to assist 

them with their rent, as would rental rebates which we have 

called upon the government to consider and to which there was 

resounding silence, Mr. Speaker. Resounding silence. 

 

This doesn‟t address the issue of cost of living for renters the 

way natural gas rebates would, Mr. Speaker — which again, our 

call for that was met by resounding silence by the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. Resounding silence. 

 

So what we have, Mr. Speaker, now is some proposals that will 

benefit renters and some proposals that will take away their 

rights, Mr. Speaker. And I guess the removal of some of the 

rights of renters and making it easier to do things on the part of 

landlords who can afford the lawyers, unlike the renters, is all 

being sugar-coated in the one provision — the one provision to 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

extend the notice period from three months to six months, Mr. 

Speaker. Now again that deserves some applause, and it 

received very little applause but some applause from the 

government side. And I join in that mixed enthusiasm, Mr. 

Speaker. But this Bill could be better. More could be done. 

 

In a similar situation, Mr. Speaker, in a similar situation when 

there was a boom in Alberta and there was a crisis in rental 

accommodation in Alberta, in Conservative Alberta, Mr. 

Speaker, the government brought in a provision that there could 

not be more than one rent increase in a year, Mr. Speaker. If 

that‟s good enough for Conservative Alberta in a very similar 

situation to what people are experiencing today, it should be 

good enough in Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are other improvements that can be made to this Bill. 

They can‟t be made here. They can be made in committee. We 

are willing to improve this Bill — improve and pass an 

improved form of this Bill to benefit renters. The minister wants 

this done expeditiously. We want it done expeditiously. He has 

our co-operation if we have his, Mr. Speaker, in making this a 

better Bill for renters. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

62, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. To which committee shall 

this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Intergovernmental Affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to Intergovernmental 

Affairs. 

 

Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise today 

to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government believes that available and 

affordable housing is necessary for sustained economic growth 

in this province. In March 2008, I appointed a task force on 

housing affordability to provide recommendations for 

improving housing affordability, increasing housing capacity, 

and ensuring long-term monitoring of affordability in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The task force spent more than two months meeting with the 

stakeholders across the province. In total, 85 individuals, 

groups, and organizations were consulted in 16 Saskatchewan 

communities, and 53 written proposals were received. 

 

In June 2008, the task force presented their report which 

outlines 36 recommendations on how to address affordable 

housing challenges in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

that our government has acted quickly to deliver on several of 

those recommendations. These include increases to the 

Saskatchewan rental housing supplement and the income 

threshold for Saskatchewan Housing Corporation‟s social 

housing rental program, enabling more accessibility for seniors 

renters. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, we are taking steps to implement another 

task force recommendation which requires a change to the 

corporate structure of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 

Throughout its consultations, the task force on housing 

affordability heard that the current corporate structure and 

mandate of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation should be 

revised to better reflect the needs of the communities it serves. 

 

Concerns were raised that there were no representation from 

housing stakeholders or municipalities in the corporation‟s 

governance. The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act 

amendment that we are requesting, Mr. Speaker, will deal with 

that concern. 

 

By expanding the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation board to 

include a minimum of five persons appointed by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, the corporation will benefit from broader, 

ongoing stakeholder participation, greater public and region 

input, and diverse expert feedback on important housing 

decisions. 

 

In short, a larger board will incorporate more than just the 

opinion of management, Mr. Speaker. It will further our 

government‟s commitment to accountability and transparency, 

and ensure that the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will 

better reflect the needs of the clients and communities it serves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current structure of the board consists of one 

person, typically the deputy minister of Social Services 

appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. Under this 

structure, the sole board member is responsible to the minister. 

The president of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation acts as 

the chief executive officer of the corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this structure has not changed since 1995. The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation cannot implement a new 

and improved board without the said amendment because they 

cannot legally deviate from the Act. Mr. Speaker, once the 

amendment has been approved, I can assure you that the 

government will begin the recruitment process and implement 

the new board early in 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have stated earlier, the amendment I am 

introducing today is a significant step forward in improving 

coordination between the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, 

housing authorities, the clients, and the communities it serves in 

this province. Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has moved 

that Bill No. 63, The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise today to speak at second reading of Bill No. 63, 

An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the minister explaining the Bill correctly 

outlines — or as I would expect, correctly outlines — that the 

legislation in front of us basically increases the size of the board 

of directors and modernizes provisions basically in accordance 

with current drafting standards. Mr. Speaker, some would say 

it‟s a housekeeping Bill. Others would say it‟s a major step 

forward. And I think, Mr. Speaker, it is a piece of legislation 

whose time is certainly due. Changes were necessary to increase 

the size of the board to enhance the ability of the board to 

respond to the community needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this regard just let me say a couple of things 

about the housing authorities around the province and the work 

that they are doing, Mr. Speaker. I watch very closely what‟s 

taking place in our housing authorities around the province. A 

number of years ago, just before I was elected in 2003 and 

shortly thereafter, Mr. Speaker, the housing authorities were 

renovating properties across the province, were expending a 

number of dollars for those renovations to upgrade properties 

again throughout the province. They have worked diligently, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that individuals within our communities 

who needed affordable housing were able to obtain that 

housing. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to the Minister 

Responsible for Housing that those housing authorities have 

certainly served the people in our community extraordinarily 

well, and Sask Housing Corporation provides a very valuable 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. And I‟m pleased to see 

that in a number of ways the Minister Responsible for Housing 

is addressing some of these structural matters. And certainly 

increasing the size of the board, Mr. Speaker, is a step in the 

right direction. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, the minister informs us that the 

Bill itself was one of the recommendations on the task force on 

housing affordability that reported earlier this year, Mr. 

Speaker. Indeed the proposed amendment to the Bill is a 

recommendation of the task force. Mr. Speaker, one could very 

well argue that in fact the minister responding to the task 

force‟s recommendation is picking what they call the 

low-hanging fruit from that report, Mr. Speaker. There‟s quite a 

number of recommendations in that report — some of them 

extraordinarily innovative, Mr. Speaker, that have yet to be 

addressed by the government opposite. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the housing stock in this province 

is under stress. There is a greater need for living 

accommodations, rental accommodations in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, than there are units available. Mr. Speaker, there‟s 

never been — except maybe back way in our earlier history, 

Mr. Speaker — there‟s never been a more stressful time for 

people seeking shelter than there is today in our so-called boom 

times, Mr. Speaker. And so it‟s very important that when — as 

has happened in this case — a task force has been struck and 

that task force reviews the circumstances of housing in the 

province and makes recommendations, that the government 

reviews those recommendations seriously and moves in the 

direction of some of the things that are most needed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know there are a lot of vulnerable people 

in our communities. And one of the task force 

recommendations, Mr. Speaker, that could be addressed by the 

minister and the Saskatchewan Party government, is a 

recommendation to help those vulnerable people who don‟t 

always have cash to deal with the security deposits or first and 

last month‟s rent. The recommendation in the report, Mr. 

Speaker — a recommendation that‟s very close to the 

recommendation for increasing the size of the board, Mr. 

Speaker; the recommendation for the creation of a rent bank or 

the ability of the government to help provide vulnerable people 

with access to loans to assist them with security deposits or first 

and last month‟s rent, or actually getting into a shelter unit, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure that they are able to protect themselves and 

their families. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that piece of fruit is a little higher up on the tree, 

and the government has to start taking steps to move — not just 

from picking the fruit that‟s close at hand, but take a step up the 

ladder, Mr. Speaker. View the innovation that was contained in 

some of the recommendations and, Mr. Speaker, start to take 

some action. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also remind the minister, while I‟m on my 

feet, that in committee last spring she answered a number of 

questions from me regarding money that had been allocated to 

various communities that has not yet been spent — money 

allocated for housing. Mr. Speaker, the minister will be aware 

that in that committee I asked her specifically about $3 million 

set aside for the city of North Battleford for new housing 

projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the department or the ministry had advertised, had 

received applications, and that was in the spring, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟ve gone through the building, the summer months, the 

construction months. We‟re now going into winter, and not a 

single announcement has been made in the community, Mr. 

Speaker, about the approval of funding for new units, Mr. 

Speaker, new units in The Battlefords where housing is a 

critical issue — an issue, Mr. Speaker, that affects seniors and 

students and immigrants and First Nations people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister may in fact be trying to answer 

my question right now, but I must say that I can‟t hear and 

neither can the people in my community, Mr. Speaker. But I 

would hope that in addition to addressing matters like 

increasing the size of the board, she‟s also interested in 

increasing the number of units available for vulnerable people 

within our communities, and especially in communities where 

monies were allocated a year and a half ago, Mr. Speaker, but 

has not yet been spent by this government. 

 

And I remind the minister opposite that after a year in 

government we have yet to see her announce one new project 

that was not funded, Mr. Speaker, by the previous government. 

Mr. Speaker, we have yet to see a single new project 

announced. So, Mr. Speaker, we are anxious, we are anxious for 

the minister to be in our communities, to be announcing new 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

projects, to be adding to the housing stock in our communities. 

We are anxious to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I simply say to the minister 

here on the floor of the Chamber that while we support the 

increase in the number of members of the board, we also 

support the increase in the number of housing units in the 

province. And we look forward to her announcements in that 

regard. 

 

I know that I have other members in the New Democratic Party 

opposition caucus who wish to speak to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

so therefore I today would move that debate on Bill No. 63, An 

Act to Amend the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act be 

now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment on Bill No. 63, The Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have this 

opportunity to move second reading of Bill 73, An Act to 

Amend the University of Saskatchewan Act, 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to building a 

stronger Saskatchewan through higher education, research, and 

innovation. And, Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes that 

the University of Saskatchewan along with other institutions 

remains an important partner in building a stronger 

Saskatchewan. That‟s why I am proud to bring Bill 73 forward 

for second reading today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan approached our 

ministry to request some much-needed updates to the legislation 

regulating the university. As we are focusing on balancing the 

public interest with the needs of a modern, dynamic university, 

we were able to come forward with the changes that are 

reflected in Bill 73. These amendments provide for both 

continuity and change that will help to strengthen the University 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The university noted that the existing legislation locked the 

institution into a process for selecting a chancellor that simply 

is not effective in today‟s environment. The university posited 

that the two-term limit set out in existing legislation means that 

all too often government-appointed board members have to 

leave just as they have gained valuable experience within the 

university milieu. 

 

And it explained that the traditional position of Visitor as an 

avenue of appeal was a holdover from the earliest days of 

university governance in the United Kingdom. Today the 

university‟s robust internal mechanisms are balanced by a 

number of external avenues of appeal, and the university has 

asked that the Visitor position be removed. Mr. Speaker, Bill 73 

addresses these important concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 73 also establishes an easier, more 

cost-effective selection regarding the position of chancellor. 

Bill 73 also expands the term limit for government appointed 

board members to three terms. And Bill 73 will also remove the 

position of Visitor, reflecting a more modern governance 

approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 73 is a common sense solution that meets the 

needs of the University of Saskatchewan while being mindful of 

the importance of modern, effective legislation that is good for 

the public interest and good for the public institutions of our 

province. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 

Bill 73, An Act to Amend the University of Saskatchewan Act, 

1995. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

moved that Bill No. 73, The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure for me today to speak at second reading on Bill No. 73, 

An Act to Amend the University of Saskatchewan Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had the opportunity to review this Bill quite 

extensively, listened carefully to the remarks of the minister in 

his explanation as to why the Bill is necessary, and I have a few 

remarks to put on the record here, Mr. Speaker, before 

proceeding further with this legislation. 

 

For all intents and purposes, Mr. Speaker, The University of 

Saskatchewan Act certainly appears to be very practical. It 

appears — and the minister confirms this in his remarks — it 

appears that the provisions contained in here have been 

requested by the University of Saskatchewan community itself. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have to assume that indeed the 

direction that‟s being taken in this legislation is direction that 

has been deemed appropriate by those in the university 

community. And I think, Mr. Speaker, we will confirm that in 

fact what the university community has requested is indeed 

reflected in this Act before we are able to conclude our debate 

and questions on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we are all aware that the University of 

Saskatchewan is indeed a first-class university not only in 

Canada but, Mr. Speaker, in North America and around the 

world. I graduated from the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, in the early- to mid-‟70s. Mr. Speaker, I graduated 

from the University of Saskatchewan with a Bachelor of Arts 

degree. I had a major in English and art. Some people would 

wonder on occasion how I could possibly be in this place with a 

university education, Mr. Speaker, but it sometimes happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I enjoyed my time there, but that was quite a few 

years ago, and I‟ve watched carefully, Mr. Speaker, as the 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

University of Saskatchewan has evolved over the years. And, 

Mr. Speaker, today when we look at the university campus, it is 

a far cry from what it was when I was there in the 1970s. Mr. 

Speaker, we were proud of the university in those days, and of 

course every graduate felt that the world was theirs for the 

taking, Mr. Speaker, and by and large, graduates from the 

University of Saskatchewan have indeed gone on to many 

different lofty, renowned careers around the world. 

 

But you look, Mr. Speaker, at the university campus today, and 

it is not just an academic institution. The campus now is a 

research facility, and it has commercial development 

opportunities, and it‟s a disease control facility. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the work that is being done in the scientific 

community is benefiting people all around the world and 

attracts people from all around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this university campus has evolved dramatically. 

And over the last — let‟s say — 20 years, Mr. Speaker, that 

institution, thanks to the governance of the university itself and, 

Mr. Speaker, the support of the government in place over the 

last 20 years, Mr. Speaker, has helped to make that university 

what it is today. And we‟re all very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the community itself comes to the government and 

makes requests to ensure that they‟re able to be the 

administration, the administrative facility, Mr. Speaker, for all 

that is taking place there, we have to listen. We have to listen 

carefully, Mr. Speaker, because, for all intents and purposes, 

these are the people who best know the direction that they are to 

take. And within the power that government has to balance its 

resources, Mr. Speaker, the government has to ensure that there 

is adequate funding to meet the needs of that university 

community. 

 

So by and large, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen some incredible 

increases in facilities, in teaching, in development of extension 

that exists within the university, Mr. Speaker. And therefore, I 

think that we are likely to support the legislation in front of us 

with some consultation with the university community to ensure 

that the legislation is written as they have requested. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this legislation would be able to 

move forward fairly quickly. So as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, 

this appears to be practical in its application. And with some 

consultation and with some additional comments from my 

colleagues on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, or knowing 

that there will be some comments from other members of the 

New Democratic opposition on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, I would therefore move that debate on Bill No. 73, An 

Act to amend The University of Saskatchewan Act be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 73, The University of 

Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 58 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 58 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to speak to this income tax amendment Act 

which is Bill No. 58. And what I essentially want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, is that Saskatchewan is enjoying a great boom. The 

economy is very hot; I‟ve said this numerous times from this 

very place in the legislature. And it is a real joy that my 

constituents and the people of Saskatchewan are witnessing a 

boom in the economy. 

 

But the joy is tempered with the knowledge that with a hot 

economy, it gives the government of the day huge, tremendous 

choices in what they can do with the revenue that comes in 

from that. They could, as is the case here in Bill No. 58, 

introduce some income tax cuts. And I want to for the record 

say, Mr. Speaker, that I am, like most of my neighbours and 

like most of my constituents and I think like most people that I 

know everywhere . . . we kind of wish we didn‟t have to pay 

any income tax. But with this caveat: we wish we could 

maintain a relatively high level of income and not have to pay 

any income tax. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But I come at it with a different tack, and it‟s one that my 

parents taught me, and it‟s stood me well through the course of 

my life. And it is, it is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And that‟s a long time too. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Yes, it is a long time as my seatmate, colleague 

has pointed out. My life has been a long time. Not long enough 

yet, I don‟t think. 

 

But what my parents taught me as I was growing up, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we can‟t afford not to pay income taxes and 

taxes in a general situation. We work together in an organized 

society, and our taxes pay for the services that, as an individual, 

I couldn‟t even begin to afford — the services, you know, to 

have a doctor at my call or a hospital at my call. But by paying 

my taxes, and collectively we work this together, I have a very 

good health care system at my beck and call and at the beck and 

call of my family. That‟s because I pay taxes. And we all do our 

little bit, and we pool it. And we put that money together, and it 

can do some amazing things. 

 

The same thing can be said about our education system. We pay 

taxes, and that supports our education system — be it 

preschool, K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12], post-secondary. 

It supports the whole gamut. Of course, we have tuition fees, 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

and I want to speak a little bit about that a little bit later. But our 

highways are funded through taxes. 

 

And the premise of my speech today, Mr. Speaker, is to clearly 

acknowledge that I wish we didn‟t have to pay taxes. But the 

premise is that every dollar that a government gives away in tax 

cuts is a dollar that‟s not available for that government to spend 

on hospital services or health care, nursing homes, on 

education. Certainly we have a tuition freeze that has been lifted 

this year. And it‟s all about choices. Every dollar that a 

government gives away in tax cuts is a dollar that they don‟t 

have at their disposal for providing services that, in our society, 

we have come to really appreciate. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, 

this is something that I very much support is that government is 

about choices. And it‟s all about choices. We can either have 

income tax cuts as is proposed under Bill 58, and they‟re 

welcome, but at what price? 

 

One of the choices that was made by members opposite, the 

government, was they means-tested the seniors‟ drug plan. 

They means-tested a drug plan where seniors have to prove that 

they‟re poor before they can get the help that‟s available under 

the seniors‟ drug plan. And that‟s a change, Mr. Speaker, 

because a year ago there was no means test. If you were a 

senior, you‟re 65 or older, you qualified for a prescription drug 

plan. 

 

And the Deputy Premier is saying, whoa; he‟s saying, $63,000 

is poor. The fact is that you have to prove that you‟re poor; 

that‟s the offence. The offence . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

And, Mr. Speaker, I invite the Deputy Premier to speak to this 

Bill. I‟m not filibustering the Bill. We all have an opportunity to 

speak to the Bill. He‟s had an opportunity to speak to it in 

cabinet. I didn‟t have that opportunity, and I‟m taking my 

opportunity to state on behalf of my constituents what I believe 

the majority of my constituents would feel. 

 

My constituents do not like means-testing a seniors‟ drug plan. 

My constituents believe that wealthier seniors — that is, seniors 

with a big income — will get it taxed back. We pay income tax. 

That‟s the principle of income tax: the more you make, the 

more you pay income tax. It‟s just a straight-up function of that. 

And I‟ve had, over my lifetime, I‟ve had people complain about 

the amount of income tax they‟ve had to pay, Mr. Speaker, and 

I‟ve said, well I wish I had that problem because I wish I had 

that income. 

 

So we can have income tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, or we can make 

choices. We can make choices like means-testing the drug plan, 

or we can make a choice to . . . Well let me put it another way. 

A little over a year ago when we were in government, we lump 

summed a significant . . . more than $70 million into housing, 

low-cost housing, to provide adequate, affordable, safe housing 

for people of limited income. 

 

The reason we did that is not because we think we‟re Santa 

Claus with the taxpayers‟ money, Mr. Speaker. The reason we 

did it is because all of the studies that we had access to were 

virtually unanimous saying that the most important indicator of 

wellness and of health is having a stable, secure, safe house, a 

safe home that you can build your family out from. But you 

have to have affordable, safe, and decent housing. That‟s the 

first thing. And so we chunked over $70 million into it last year, 

prepaid it; was one of the first years we actually had money that 

enabled us to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what did this government do in their budget? They cut 5 

million, clawed back 5 million out of that this year and that at a 

time when it was done, the surplus was $1.9 billion — billion 

with a “b” — and that surplus continues to grow today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the choices have been clear. We had started 

low-cost housing programs. We had announced programs. The 

construction of many of them had started. Some of them are 

starting now even yet. But the proof of the pudding is not one 

single new housing initiative has been announced by this 

government. And I say that‟s a shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Tax cuts are one thing, but governing is all about choices. It‟s 

all about choices. Never, ever in the history of Saskatchewan 

has a government had so much resources, so many dollars to do 

so much with and yet done so little. 

 

Mr. Speaker, tax cuts are not the panacea. They‟re not the be-all 

and end-all. They don‟t cure everything that‟s wrong with our 

society. Tax cuts in itself don‟t help a single parent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m touching some chords and I really look 

forward to government members speaking to this Bill. And I 

know it is their right to do so, having served in this Assembly 

for over 20 years now. I know that every one of us in this 

Chamber have the ability to speak to this Bill. And I look 

forward to some government members talking on this very one. 

 

The choices that are made, Mr. Speaker, are we can have an 

income tax cut, Bill 58, or we could continue to have the lowest 

cost utility bundle guarantee that Saskatchewan people have 

enjoyed for four years — a low-cost utility bundle guarantee 

that guaranteed all of the people of Saskatchewan would pay in 

total the lowest utility bundle cost of any province in Canada. 

So if you lived in Saskatchewan, that was your right, and we 

were proud to introduce that program, Mr. Speaker. We fought 

an election on it, won that election. We didn‟t do so well in the 

last election although we‟ve got a fairly decent smattering of 

members on this side of the legislature. And I predict, as long as 

the do-nothing government continues to think that income tax 

cuts are everything — as long as that‟s the mindset — then I 

predict that there‟s going to be more New Democrats elected 

after the next election than there are today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I keep hearing heckles about, not if we‟re going to 

raise the taxes. And I want to remind all members that our 

history was one of balance. Early on in our administration, early 

on in our administration we said . . . It‟s as simple as this: we 

were never dealing with $2 billion surpluses. We struggled and 

fought and sometimes we‟d get $40 million surplus in a year, 

sometimes more than that, but always the tightest of surpluses. 

And we said in simple terms, one-third of our surpluses, Mr. 

Speaker, would go to paying down the debt; one-third would go 

to programs; and one-third to tax cuts, one-third to tax cuts — 

so thirty-three and a third roughly. 

 

So we did. Every time we had extra money we‟d introduce a 

portion of tax cuts, a portion of new income programming like 

the children‟s dental program where we provided a 

fluoride-type treatment to them. That program incidentally was 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

chosen to be eliminated by this government. It was a very basic 

children‟s dental program that we had. 

 

But you can‟t be everything to all people. If it‟s just tax cuts, 

there is a price to pay. There is service cuts, and these service 

cuts that I‟ve outlined are cuts that affect my constituents — 

people that I‟m proud to represent, people that feel there is 

something different than mere tax cuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we‟ve got here under Bill 58 

is under Bill 58 we have a promise for income tax cuts for 

seniors, you know. And seniors, like the rest of us, welcome tax 

cuts. But what‟s the hard reality for seniors? The hard reality 

for seniors today is they‟ve seen . . . And the member for 

Moose Jaw North will have an opportunity to speak here. I 

really wish that he would get off his seat and speak to this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hard reality for seniors today, the hard reality 

for seniors today is that they have an income tax cut promised 

in Bill 58. And when they file their income tax in the spring, 

some of them will get some money back or reduced income tax 

payment, and that‟ll be welcome. But October 1 their cost of 

their natural gas for heating their residence has gone up 20 per 

cent — 20 per cent. And on top of that, they got that approved 

by the rate review panel, Mr. Speaker, and then just for good 

measure, they threw in another $2 a month just for the pleasure 

of getting the gas delivered. That‟s an additional charge on top 

of the 20 per cent increase in the cost of the gas itself. 

 

So seniors are paying the additional cost of home heating 

thanks to members opposite. Seniors are paying additional 

money for their groceries. Seniors are paying — in all too many 

instances, Mr. Speaker — are paying rent increases. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Choices and options. 

 

Mr. Trew: — And as my colleague says, it‟s all about choices 

and options. We could do income tax cuts, or we could‟ve not 

taken the $5 million out of the low-cost housing program. That 

would have been a good start. Or we could have not tried to 

means test the seniors‟ drug plan. That would have been a good 

place to start. Or we could have continued with the lowest cost 

utility bundle. That would have been a good place to start. 

 

Or we could roll back the gas increase that at one point looked 

like it might actually have been justified because the price of 

natural gas was skyrocketing. It actually looked like it might 

have been a reasonable thing. That‟s not the reality today, and I 

would urge the government to apply for and to reduce the cost 

of natural gas for our homeowners because the price of natural 

gas on the world market has come down. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is something that I very much would welcome of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province deserve to participate in 

the benefits, and it is true that we do welcome some income tax 

relief. But what about the cattle producers? And we had the 

head of the Stock Growers Association in the visitor‟s gallery 

here during question period. I know that these very same cattle 

producers have written to the Minister of Agriculture asking for 

relief. You can provide broad income tax relief, Mr. Speaker, or 

you can provide . . . Another one of the choices is you could 

provide some support to an industry like the livestock industry, 

that as our critic for Agriculture pointed out, livestock prices are 

at a historic low, lower than they were in the ‟40s, ‟50s, ‟60s, 

and ‟70s — historic low. 

 

[15:30] 

 

My seatmate keeps reminding me that I was raised in Beechy 

and indeed I was. And we had livestock producers . . . Well we 

had livestock on our farm and our neighbours all had livestock 

as well. So it‟s an industry that while I won‟t claim to be an 

expert in, I won‟t claim to be a total stranger in that industry 

either. I understand some of the economics of raising cattle, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But for the purpose of Bill 58, it‟s about choices. The 

government has a choice. They can support cattle producers in 

this dire time of need, or they can provide income tax relief. 

 

I want to say this, Mr. Speaker. In this Bill 58, the income tax 

breaks are much larger for families than they are for an 

individual living alone. And the only reason I . . . It‟s probably 

appropriate that it‟s that way. I‟m not attacking the Act for that. 

But if you are a single senior or a single person of any age, your 

heating bill is going up. Your groceries are going up. Your rent 

is going up. I know this. I have family that‟s living alone and in 

this very situation that I‟m describing — rising costs and no 

help from this government other than some promise of, well 

maybe next spring. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is about choices that a 

government can make. They can choose to spend money on 

people directly, on programs that benefit people, or they can 

choose to provide what Bill 58 provides and that is a promise of 

some income tax relief in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end where I began, and that is by saying 

that clearly all of us wish that we could pay less taxes. Broadly 

speaking that‟s a pretty universal view, but I want to remind 

everyone in this House and even beyond that none of us can 

afford not to pay taxes. 

 

All of us benefit from the programs and the hospitals and the 

health care services that are provided in part through our tax 

payments. All of us benefit from an education system that is the 

envy of most of the world. All of us benefit from a highway and 

road system that is literally the envy of the world. We like to 

complain about potholes, and I‟m no different than anyone else 

in that, but the hard truth is we‟ve got more kilometres of 

pavement per capita, per person, than anywhere in the universe. 

That‟s one of the things Saskatchewan enjoys, and I‟m proud 

that we do enjoy it, but it comes at a cost, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it comes at a cost. And as a taxpayer, I‟m proud to support that 

infrastructure and the standard of living, the things that we all 

enjoy here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Bill itself is okay, but there‟s so many other choices that 

this government should be making on behalf of my constituents 

and my people. Mr. Speaker, I think there will be more to be 

said on this Bill by some of my colleagues and in the interest of 

preserving their place, I move that debate on Bill No. 58 be 

adjourned. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

Regina Coronation Park has moved adjournment of debate. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to talk about Bill No. 43, The Trespass to 

Property Act. And I want to do what some of my colleagues 

have done in their speeches, and that is to ask what is the 

overwhelming issue or the problem or the concern that has 

brought about this legislation. I confess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that there‟s not a long list. In fact the list is zero of people that 

have ever asked me to deal with the trespass Act in 

Saskatchewan. It just has never come up. In my travels it‟s not 

come up. 

 

I know that from time to time there will be a dispute between 

neighbours over where a fence should go. Or in rural 

Saskatchewan it might even be a dispute over, can I cross your 

land to get to my land so I can seed it and plant it. For the most 

part, for the most part those things are easily resolved, although 

it‟s never easy when one‟s neighbours start feuding. But there 

are mechanisms, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to deal with that. 

 

So then the question is, well is this to deal with maybe 

snowmobilers or all-terrain vehicles, that sort of thing, and to 

put it bluntly, urban people going out onto farms and driving 

our snowmobiles and our all-terrain vehicles? And I wondered 

if that might be part of it. But lo and behold in the minister‟s 

first paragraph of his speech, he says, and I quote, “We do have 

. . .” and this is in the very first paragraph, and I‟m quoting 

from November 5 Hansard on 1594, where the minister 

introducing the legislation said, and I quote: 

 

We do have legislation dealing with specific 

circumstances like snowmobiling and operation of 

all-terrain vehicles. The new legislation is not meant to 

replace these pieces of legislation and they will continue to 

apply. 

 

So in the very first paragraph of his second reading speech, the 

minister made it quite clear, it‟s not to deal with snowmobiles 

or all-terrain vehicles. So what is this casual trespass Act about, 

Mr. Speaker? What is it? So I read it very carefully. And one of 

the little pieces that kind of caught my fancy was that in the 

definitions it says that . . . I‟m just looking for that. Here we go, 

here we go. In the definitions, Mr. Speaker, it talks about 

premises and the definition in the Bill: 

 

“premises” means lands or structures and includes the 

following: 

(i) water; 

(ii) ships and vessels; 

(iii) trailers and portable structures designed or used for a 

residence, business or shelter; [and] 

(iv) trains, railway cars, vehicles and aircraft, except while 

in operation. 

 

So ships and vessels are covered under this Act. And then I 

headed off to the penalties, offences and penalties, found on 

page 5 of this Act, and it‟s clause 14. The offences and penalty 

is: “Every person who contravenes any provision of this Act or 

the regulations is guilty of an offence and liable on summary 

conviction to a fine of not more than $2,000.” 

 

So I kind of chuckled as I thought about the supertanker that 

was just hijacked off the coast of Somalia with $1 billion‟s 

worth of oil in it, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out, if that 

had been the case in Saskatchewan waters, there‟d have been a 

$2,000 fine on summary offence to those hijackers. Clearly 

that‟s not what this is designed for, but as I read it that struck 

me. 

 

But what is this legislation about, Mr. Speaker? It‟s not to deal 

with the hijacking of supertankers of oil. It‟s not to deal with 

problems like a snowmobile or an all-terrain vehicle 

trespassing. There is legislation around hunting and the posting 

of lands right now. And I believe the minister pointed out that 

this doesn‟t prevent lawful hunting. This legislation doesn‟t 

prevent lawful hunting in any way, shape, or form. So what 

really, what is the driving force of this? 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have come to this conclusion. What 

this is about is restricting individuals‟ ability to peacefully 

protest or peacefully let elected officials at all levels know of 

our displeasure. What I mean by that, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take 

some time to develop. 

 

There are a number of . . . sorry, I got ahead of myself here. 

There is a definition of Crown land and there‟s a number of 

exclusions of Crown land where this is covered. And they say 

that:  

 

vacant Crown agriculture land [is one of the items 

covered];  

Crown resource land;  

park land as defined in The Parks Act;  

any other Crown land or any category of other Crown land 

that is prescribed in the regulations. 

 

Prescribed in the regulations, Mr. Speaker, would be covered 

under this. So that‟s the hook. 

 

We can get into the regulations and you could have wide, wide 

Crown lands prescribed as an area where you could prohibit 

people from trespassing. And then the question is, then the 

question is, what about peaceful protest like a strike, you know. 

 

Let me use an example that came to my mind. We‟ve recently 

had the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a publicly traded 

company, and its United Steelworkers locals were striking. 

Well by definition the potash mine shaft is going to be on 

property owned by the Potash Corporation. So let‟s get it 

straight then. 

 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

If there‟s a strike that we recently had, these potash workers 

would carry their pickets on land owned by the Potash 

Corporation? I don‟t think so. I think the Potash Corporation 

might invite them off their land and say they‟re trespassing. 

You‟re not on the payroll; you‟re trespassing; away you go. 

They might just do that. 

 

And it‟s just not Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I just 

bring that up simply because that was recently in the news. It 

could be any company, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Anyone can do 

that when it‟s on their land under this Act. Is that what it‟s 

really all about? 

 

Have we come to be that shallow that we . . . I mean earlier 

today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Fairview 

in question period was raising questions around essential 

services. And one of the things that I learned earlier today is 

that one of the health districts named . . . And I want to point 

out that musical therapists are valued employees, librarians do 

valuable work. And when the member from Saskatoon Fairview 

asked the Minister of Health, are these two examples essential? 

Should they be covered under essential services legislation, that 

is not allowed to strike? And the Minister of Health said that 

absolutely the musical therapist, not, but the librarian who 

might do research for a doctor who‟s about to do surgery, that 

that would be an essential service, and that would be a 

lifesaving effort. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want, for the record, I want a 

doctor that doesn‟t need to have somebody doing some research 

in the middle of an operation. I want my doctor to get it 

first-hand out of a medical somewhere. I don‟t want, I don‟t 

want the member for Moose Jaw North to be doing the 

research. I want the doctor to do their own research, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So we see that the government opposite is very, very nervous 

about working people. They seem to be portraying, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the view that working people are the enemy — and 

particularly if these working people happen to be unionized or 

organized, then they‟re doubly the enemy. And I can‟t believe 

that attitude, but that‟s what this Bill seems to be portraying. 

Because I read the minister‟s second reading speech from cover 

to cover, and I couldn‟t find a reason for this legislation. He 

actually gave reasons not to have the legislation, and that I can 

accept. 

 

We‟ve already got The Snowmobile Act and we‟ve got the 

all-terrain vehicle situation covered. We‟ve got trespass 

covered. But this Bill will allow all kinds of powers under 

regulations. And one of the things I have to wonder is, are roads 

Crown land? I believe they are. Sidewalks, Crown land? I 

believe they are. This legislature and the steps and the rotunda, 

the steps outside the legislature here? Crown land. 

 

So the Crown can then say you‟re trespassing, and restrict you 

and push you away. So we could have a situation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where my constituents or yours or anyone else‟s can‟t 

even come for a peaceful protest to say with respect, my 

government, I think you‟ve got this wrong. With respect, I think 

you‟ve got this wrong. You know, what kind of a society are we 

coming to where we can‟t even accept constructive criticism? 

What kind of a society is it where we put up barriers and 

protection so that nobody can get at us? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, yesterday from this very place I said what 

we need is to engage people. We need to involve people. And 

the way to do that is to reduce the barriers, the restrictions that 

stop them from getting at us. And I would want people of 

Saskatchewan to have reasonable access to their elected 

government at any reasonable time. Clearly middle of the night 

is not a reasonable time, but at any reasonable time — business 

hours — people should have the right to peacefully picket in 

front of the legislature, or even come into the legislature and 

have an opportunity to talk to the minister or opposition 

member about whatever it is that concerns them. 

 

We fight our battles in Saskatchewan and in Canada almost . . . 

By and large, we fight our battles at the ballot box. That‟s 

where we take up arms so to speak — at the ballot box. And it‟s 

a wonderful system. You know, we don‟t always win, but we 

have our opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to go there. We 

have our opportunity to put our case forward to the electorate to 

the best of our ability, and the electorate will choose. And I‟ve 

said before, the electorate is always right. And they choose, and 

they choose wisely. In this case I‟m glad they‟ve at least saw fit 

to include me in Her Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition where I can 

point out problems like this, like these problems, for working 

people, for organized people. 

 

The problems under Bill 43, The Trespass to Property Act are 

legion. And I just, I just don‟t get it. As I pointed out early, 

nobody‟s ever asked me to introduce legislation around 

trespassing. We have . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now, now, 

now I hear some rejoinder from members opposite. I invite the 

minister opposite who‟s heckling to stand on her feet and join 

this and say it because that‟s not what the person sitting on your 

immediate left, the minister responsible for it, said anywhere — 

anywhere — nowhere in his second reading speech. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are. And this is the great standoff, 

isn‟t it? We‟re concerned about this legislation. There‟s not a 

big hue and cry. We‟ve had neighbours having disputes with 

neighbours for decades. Certainly longer than I‟ve been alive 

neighbours have had disputes with neighbours around 

fencelines. For the most part, those disputes get amicably 

resolved. For the most part, it gets resolved one way or another. 

 

Snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle, we have legislation that 

deals with that. Theft, we certainly have lots of laws dealing 

with theft, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with theft. One of the 

government members was heckling that farmers are having a 

problem with theft. Well I mean, we have laws dealing with 

theft. We have laws dealing with theft, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

trespass Act. It‟s not an Act about theft. This is an Act about 

people coming onto your property . . . or not your property but 

someone else‟s legal property. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know that some of my colleagues will 

have more to say on this. I‟m just raising the problems that I see 

with this legislation. It‟s not about theft. It‟s not about 

snowmobiling. It‟s not about all-terrain vehicles. It‟s certainly 

not about supertankers full of $1 billion worth of oil being 

hijacked. It‟s not about theft because we have legislation 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

dealing with theft. 

 

It has to be about peaceful assembly and it has to be about 

preventing that very peaceful assembly. It has to be about 

stopping picketers and having picketers . . . In my earlier 

example, the potash workers couldn‟t picket on the potash 

property, couldn‟t picket on the public road. Where would they 

be restricted to picket? Perhaps in their living room, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Well I‟m sure that‟s going to have a great deal of 

effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said what I want to for now on Bill No. 43, 

An Act respecting Trespass to Property. I beg leave to adjourn 

this debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Regina Coronation Park has moved adjourn debate. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. I would also 

like to remind the Assembly that any debate coming from 

behind the bar will be ruled out of order. I encourage all 

members to take their seats if they would like to enter debate. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 59 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Despite 

some encouragement to talk about what the Speaker meant by 

the bar, I‟ll try to limit myself to the Bill that‟s subject to 

debate. 

 

It‟s a pleasure to rise and speak to Bill No. 59 — albeit I think 

briefly, Mr. Speaker —recognize the intent or at least the 

perception that the government wishes to cast in respect to the 

legislation. I only wish to mention a few little caveats about 

why people might not want to be as enthused as the minister 

was when he presented the Bill in second reading. The Election 

Amendment Act is built around the assumption that the fixed 

election Act is actually the fixed election Act and not the 

no-later-than Act. 

 

The fixed election legislation, Mr. Speaker, both in parliament, 

in the national parliament and here in the provincial province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, provides that — and in the case of 

the federal legislation provided that — the election would be 

held on a certain date unless the parliament was earlier 

dissolved. And our legislation that the government is quite 

proud of, I think, that provides the same — that the election will 

be on a certain date unless the legislature is dissolved. 

 

Now we found out what exactly the federal legislation meant, 

Mr. Speaker. It didn‟t mean very much. The Prime Minister 

made the argument, publicly made the argument that he didn‟t 

have the confidence of parliament. Although it may have been a 

specious argument, it‟s the argument he made. Parliament was 

dissolved. There was a federal election. And it‟s rather recent 

memory, Mr. Speaker, that we had a federal election in the 

hopes that the government would be re-elected before the 

economic crisis struck in fall. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s indeed what happened. 

 

So we have provincial legislation that has the same provisions, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟ll be a little harder for the Premier to say, I 

don‟t have the confidence of the legislature, given that he has a 

majority here. And so it would be a little harder to make the 

argument that the Prime Minister makes. At least to now he 

seems to have the confidence of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we‟ve had majority governments in the past — the last 

couple years of the Devine government where they couldn‟t 

pass a budget — where having a majority didn‟t mean you had 

the confidence of the legislature. You can lose the confidence of 

your own members. And previous Conservative governments 

have done that, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s possible that that might 

happen. I don‟t expect that will happen — at least not this term, 

Mr. Speaker, of this government — but it could happen. But it 

would be a harder argument to make. 

 

But it‟s conceivable that there might be, two years from now or 

two and a half years from now, some motivation for the Premier 

to treat the fixed election Act as the, indeed it is, 

not-any-later-than Act and call a election, say, in the spring of 

2011 instead of fall 2011. I don‟t expect that will happen, Mr. 

Speaker. But to paraphrase an old expression, what I would say 

to party members, NDP members is, trust in the government‟s 

intent to keep the law but keep your powder dry. 

 

Anyways assuming that the election is in November 2011, you 

will know after this becomes legislation, this Bill becomes 

legislation, when various spending limits — if that‟s not too 

strong a word — will take effect. And I say limits because there 

aren‟t set amounts here. And what can be spent under this 

legislation in the period immediately preceding election 

depends on what was spent in the year preceding that, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s based on an average. 

 

And you can‟t spend, under this legislation as it‟s proposed, 

spend more in the period immediately preceding the election, 

assuming we know when that‟s going to be with certainty, than 

you spent in a period preceding that, Mr. Speaker, which I think 

has the unintended consequence — I‟ll give the government the 

benefit of the doubt — I think it has the unintended 

consequence, not the intended consequence, of encouraging 

increased spending by the government earlier so as to raise the 

bar. So that the average is raised so that you can spend more in 

the period immediately preceding an election than you spent, 

say, now, Mr. Speaker, because now it‟s not going to be 

working to the average. Now is too far away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if we don‟t like spending going up six months before a 

possible election, Mr. Speaker, what are the people of 

Saskatchewan going to think when spending goes up 18 months 

before and stays up? Eighteen months before a near certain date 

for an election, Mr. Speaker, in order to raise the averages. 

 

Now members opposite may take offence, and I‟ll remind those 

who weren‟t listening earlier that I think this is an unintended 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

consequence, not an intended consequence. But it‟s an 

unintended consequence, and I don‟t think it‟ll take very long 

for a political party, perhaps the governing political party, to 

realize that unintentionally they left an enormous loophole in 

this legislation, Mr. Speaker. And so that‟s our concern. 

 

I think that‟s one of our concerns over here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

this won‟t have its intended consequence. It will have the 

unintended consequence of actually increasing government 

spending on communications prior to an election and for a 

longer period prior to the election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know a lot of Canadians were excited following the 

primaries in the United States and for a long period of time 

before either the Republican or Democratic Party picked their 

nominees, Mr. Speaker. But I think a lot of people, a lot of 

Americans — maybe not so much this time — often find that 

excruciatingly long, and I expect the candidates do for sure. 

 

The fixed election date legislation itself and this Bill in 

particular even more so I think have the unintended 

consequences of sort of extending the campaign period here in 

Saskatchewan. If we think we know when the election date is 

and we know when the spending limits are going to click in, I 

think we‟re going to have longer unofficial campaigns than we 

do now and not necessarily less government money spent on 

communications, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The other issue that I will raise here is that like some other Bills 

that we‟ve seen in the first session of this legislature and in this 

session of the legislature, they‟re really for show, Mr. Speaker, 

and they actually have no force and effect, Mr. Speaker. As a 

matter of fact, I think I was just commenting on a Bill 

downstairs, or two, that are for the most part unnecessary and 

primarily for the reasons of calling a press conference. And this 

has in fact no force and effect. 

 

You can look through this entire rather short Bill and try to find 

the penalty and the sanction, and who would it be imposed 

against if the government decides to ignore this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker? What is the sanction, Mr. Speaker? What is the 

consequence to the government? What is the consequence to 

any minister of the Crown? What is the consequence to the 

Premier? What is the consequence to anyone if they ignore this 

legislation? There is none. 

 

They have — and I‟m not so sure in this case unintentionally, 

Mr. Speaker — left out any penalty provisions whatsoever. Mr. 

Speaker, they can crow; they can be as proud as they like, but if 

by inadvertence or otherwise, if just by local blindness or just 

by carelessness they fail to follow the legislation, do they need 

to lose any sleep about whether they‟re actually following it or 

not? Does anybody need to be carefully scrutinizing whether 

they‟re actually following the legislation or not? Well no they 

don‟t, Mr. Speaker, because there‟s no consequence. There‟s no 

penalty in not following it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, a nice little showpiece. We‟ll see, we‟ll see, 

Mr. Speaker. And I know other members have other concerns 

and share those concerns, and so I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan) — The member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin has made a motion to adjourn debate. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 60 — The Senate 

Nominee Election Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The Bill that I am speaking on is the election of Saskatchewan 

Senate nominees. It‟s a not insubstantial Bill that deals with 

questions of a list of Senate nominees being provided through 

elections in Saskatchewan. It deals with who the election 

officers and how to commence elections for Senate nominees. It 

deals with the questions of candidates and nominations. It deals 

with the questions of elections and voting. There are other 

sections dealing with controverted elections and the like. 

 

This is an issue that certainly has seen a great deal of debate 

over the years. I think most people in Saskatchewan will have 

some opinion as to the efficacy and the need for elections for 

senators, certainly will have some thoughts on whether or not 

there should even be a Senate in Canada. We‟ve seen lots of 

discussion over the years. In fact a former law clerk called the 

Senate, one Russell Hopkins wrote in 1962: “The volcano of 

„Senate Reform‟, never extinct but for sometime dormant, may 

erupt once more.” And of course it has on numerous occasions 

since that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what he‟s saying in a very nice way, that this is an issue 

that‟s always with us, sometimes lies dormant, sometimes 

erupts, whether it‟s because of voices on the right who have 

their own take on Senate reform in this country or whether it‟s 

other members of parliament — and notably members of 

parliament from my party, the New Democratic Party — who 

have advocated abolition of the Senate over the years. I well 

remember the former member for Yorkton-Melville, Mr. 

Nystrom, having very strong views on that subject and has 

certainly espoused those over the years. 

 

And again I think most people in Canada are kind of aware that 

there is a Senate and are aware that there are lots of different 

takes on how to reform the Senate or whether in fact there 

should even be a Senate, Mr. Speaker. So there‟s been lots of 

discussion over the years. Lots of — how shall I say? — entrees 

into the question of Senate reform over the years. 

 

There are lots of references that if people want to go to it — and 

I don‟t want to belabour the point today — and start to go 

through a list of punitive reforms to the Senate of Canada that 

have taken place over time, but as early as 1874 a Member of 

Parliament, one David Mills, states in the House that quote “. . . 

our Constitution ought to be reformed . . . to confer upon each 

Province the power of selecting its own Senators.” 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

And that was followed by proposals to fix a senator‟s term of 

life. And the list goes on. Every few years there‟s some . . . 

whether it‟s some report or such as the Pépin-Robarts task force 

on Canadian unity in 1979 recommending a council of the 

federation as opposed to a Senate. The Alberta government in 

1982 supporting reform along the lines of the House of the 

provinces. So this just goes on and on and on, whether we need 

it or not, every few years. 

 

And most lately again the federal government now proposing to 

limit the number of terms for senators. That in itself has 

engendered a debate whether the federal government can in fact 

be doing that, because the Senate was constructed to form the 

role of regional balance to popularly elected members of 

parliament. And therefore, if it‟s to represent the regions, then is 

that really a role for the federal government to move unilaterally 

without having the advice of the provincial governments in 

reforming the Senate by, in this case, seeking to limit the terms 

of senators? 

 

I‟m speaking, Mr. Speaker, to oppose the Bill and I oppose the 

Bill because this surely is one of the most frivolous pieces of 

legislation that we‟ve ever seen before this Legislative 

Assembly. I‟ve been in this Legislative Assembly now for some 

22 years and I can‟t really think of a more frivolous piece of 

legislation and, by inference, a more frivolous suggested waste 

of money that I‟ve ever seen in this Legislative Assembly that‟s 

inherent in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve never seen the likes of 

this where a government would concern themselves with such a 

frivolity because somewhere in their past they took a position 

that there should be an election of senators without having 

really considered all of the ramifications of that — never mind 

what the reality might be. Never mind. They seem determined 

to press ahead and to push this election of the Senate although, 

again, it makes very little sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why spend money to elect a senator when that 

senator has no effective role? And that‟s one of the issues I will 

be discussing. Why spend money to elect a senator when that 

senator would reinforce an unequal representation in Canada‟s 

Senate? And I will be speaking on that subject as well, Mr. 

Speaker. Why spend money to elect a senator when that will not 

provide for the fundamental changes in our constitution when 

that is in fact the only way in which the Senate can be reformed 

in our country, Mr. Speaker? And I would like to deal with that 

as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking to the question of an effective role, you 

know, the question really is, why spend money to do something 

when it really doesn‟t provide for a more effective Senate, 

recognizing that the Senate really doesn‟t perform any effective 

role any more in our federation. The Senate, for example, has 

no authority — unlike parliament — has no authority to spend 

money, has no authority to vote on taxes, to raise or to lower 

taxes. And it‟s largely been held that, you know, the Senate 

because it really can‟t deal with issues of money can‟t for 

example veto any money Bills that come from parliament. 

Because it‟s held that the Senate would act as some kind of 

check and balance for a parliament where all the members had 

been elected at large in constituencies that more or less conform 

to population across the country, a Senate would provide for 

some kind of balance and therefore some kind of check on 

members from one part of the country or another. Because 

there‟s so many seats, who then could push through an agenda 

for the country that really doesn‟t meet the needs of the whole 

country? Therefore you have a Senate that then provides some 

regional balance. 

 

But I tell you on the very important aspect of money, there is 

absolutely no opportunity for the Senate to second-guess what it 

is that parliament is doing. There‟s no opportunity for them 

even in the, you know, the few things that a Senate could do 

and is anticipated they could do, money is not one of those 

things. They have absolutely zero ability to veto money Bills or 

to deal with the question of money. In fact it‟s patterned after 

the British House of Lords and section 53 of the Constitution 

Act of Canada denied Canada‟s Senate the power to introduce 

Bills quote “. . . for appropriating any Part of the Public 

Revenue, or for imposing any Tax or Impost . . .” 

 

And of course that section has been subject to various 

interpretations over the years, but it‟s generally held that the 

Senate absolutely has no ability to, certainly to introduce money 

bills, as I say, to deal with the question of spending or the 

question of taxation. And it‟s also largely held that the Senate 

really has no authority to veto money bills. 

 

There‟s also a real question as to whether or not the Senate of 

Canada has the ability to veto any other forms of legislation. 

And even if that is something that the senators might be in a 

position to do given, you know, any reading of the Constitution 

Act — and some would argue that it doesn‟t — the fact of the 

matter is that senators who are now appointed are reluctant to 

veto any legislation or to weigh in on any legislation that comes 

from the House of Commons. And that might be an argument, 

some would say, then for electing senators because if you elect 

the senators then they might weigh in on legislation. But as I 

will point out later, that‟s not really very effective either. 

 

I might say that one of the functions that the Senate has 

performed over the years, and I guess it‟s one of those things 

where a group or body finding that it really has no effective role 

in terms of what upper chambers are for, which is to provide 

some check and balance for the other chamber — in this case 

the House of Commons — then seeks to find other roles in 

which it can be useful and productive. And I must say that the 

senate has performed a very positive role in Canada when it 

comes to inquiries. 

 

There had been over time many Senate inquiries into issues that 

faced Canadians and senators have issued a great number of 

reports on various issues that confront Canadians. Some I think 

are still part of popular history, such as the contribution made 

by Senator David Croll in the 1970s to look into the issue of 

poverty. And there have been other reports by senate 

committees looking at various issues that, again as I say, that 

confront Canadians, and I think those senators have done a 

terrific job. 

 

[16:15] 

 

That‟s not to say that that‟s not a job that couldn‟t be done by 

royal commissions or for that matter, couldn‟t be done by 

members of parliament themselves, and raises the question of, if 

that is a useful role for the Senate and all the senators now 

elected, will they continue in that role because they might say, 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

well like members of parliament we have other roles now that 

we need to concentrate on. 

 

But I‟d be the first to admit that the Senate of Canada has 

performed a very useful role in this country when it comes to 

the question of inquiries, looking at complicated items. We 

have to recognize that the senators in Canada are appointed 

people, and I would recognize that many of those senators have 

been appointed because of the contributions that they‟ve been 

able to make in public life. And therefore, they bring something 

to the table in terms of experience, knowledge, understanding of 

issues that stands Canadians, I think, in good stead when it 

comes to looking at issues. 

 

Also because the upper chamber, the Senate, is less political, 

less partisan in many ways, again because of the nature of the 

appointment, sometimes there has been less — how shall I say 

— divisiveness in the inquiries and in the committees that the 

Senate has employed to conduct inquiries. And therefore, you 

see far more informed discussion and debate in Senate 

committees. 

 

I would also point out that Saskatchewan has benefited from 

appearances before Senate committees. I was privileged to be 

able to represent Canada . . . or to represent Saskatchewan 

before the standing committee on national finance of the 

Senate, to speak to senators about equalization provided to 

Saskatchewan people at that time, with a forum to speak about 

equalization at a time that there was very little understanding in 

the rest of the country about equalization. 

 

We were able to appear before those Senate committees. We 

were able to make our points. There was informed discussion 

about our position. Not to say that every senator agreed with 

our position — in fact some didn‟t — but the dialogue was a 

respectful dialogue and I think at the end of the day was an 

informative dialogue for Canadians who are seeking to 

understand complicated issues such as that. 

 

So I would say, and again I would agree, that that has been a 

very useful and important role for the Senate. But again it‟s a 

role that I think that they‟ve defined for themselves over time 

because there‟s very little other useful role that can be 

performed by the senators in Canada, given the restrictions that 

are there in our constitution. 

 

And again the restriction too, the fact that these are appointed 

members as opposed to elected. And, you know, members 

opposite would be saying, well isn‟t that then an argument for 

electing them? But as I will show later on, that‟s not really a 

good argument. 

 

It‟s interesting to note that the legislation completely ignores 

the question of effectiveness. And if I might, Mr. Speaker, just 

parenthetically point out that there has been lots of discussion 

over time about the three Es of the Senate. When people speak 

of Senate reform, they speak of three Es. People might 

remember that. 

 

Well one of those Es is elected, but another one of those Es is 

effective. And that‟s getting then at the topic that I‟m dealing 

with now is, well okay, you can have elected senators, but it 

also has to be an effective Senate. So that Senate then needs to 

have some described powers to in fact do its role. 

 

And that is an issue that I find that minister, when he was 

explaining to the Legislative Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan, didn‟t really deal with the question of how it is 

that Senate nominees from Saskatchewan who might be elected 

would in fact deal with the question of an effective Senate. 

Because what is the point actually of electing someone that 

really can‟t perform an effective role? 

 

If the role of the Senate is simply to rubber-stamp parliament, 

what is the exact point of electing someone to act as a rubber 

stamp? This is something that defies understanding, and the 

minister made no effort to deal with this major shortcoming in 

the logic of the government when they said, well we need to 

elect senators. 

 

I mean again, if the role of the Senate is to rubber-stamp, if you 

elect them — that‟s one of the three Es; elect them — what is 

the point? Why elect someone to that station to rubber-stamp 

parliament? What is the point? I‟m not sure I understand it, and 

I‟m not sure anyone in Saskatchewan understands it. And I 

think the minister should be faulted in this case for not outlining 

clearly how it is that electing senators would in fact help result 

in a more effective role for senators. And that was not dealt 

with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is an effective Senate really required? That‟s another question, I 

think, that can also be raised. You know, if you think that 

electing a senator might result in a more effective Senate 

somehow, is an effective Senate still something that is required 

in this country? And I think that‟s a legitimate question. 

 

When you look at what it is that the Fathers of Confederation, 

who spent an inordinate amount of time talking about a Senate 

as part of this new country called Canada, spent a lot of time 

discussing a Senate, the thing that they landed on was that a 

Senate would help achieve some kind of regional balance in 

Canada. That you had a situation where you had one or two 

jurisdictions that had very large populations versus other 

jurisdictions — say, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New 

Brunswick — that had very small populations, that if the only 

chamber you had in this country was a parliament which is 

more or less elected on the basis of population, then the interest 

of those large jurisdictions would surely prevail over all of the 

rest of the country — would surely prevail over the rest of the 

country. 

 

And therefore as a check on that kind of power being inherent 

in that particular chamber, the House of Commons, it would be 

helpful to this future country of Canada to have a Senate to act 

as a check on those powers. And therefore, as opposed to 

having senators elected or based on population, you might have 

a relaxation of that rule to provide some check and balance 

against the powers of parliament. 

 

But one of the other things that‟s happened in this country since 

that time is that there has been a further refinement of the 

powers over the provinces that constitute Canada. And it‟s 

largely been held that Canada now is one of the most 

decentralized — if not the most decentralized — country in the 

world. 

 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

And therefore there‟s a question here. If the country is so 

decentralized because of the division of powers between the 

federal government and the provinces and the province has 

taken on their own roles . . . We just discussed the question of 

income tax. We discussed the question of tenancy. These are all 

issues that are within the control of the provinces. The 

provinces have the right to raise taxes. In fact there‟s a question 

as to whether the federal parliament has the right to raise 

income taxes, and there have been some court cases on that. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that the provinces are very 

powerful, have a lot of power and authority to govern. And 

therefore the question is, well given that power, do you still 

need to have then a so-called effective Senate that can 

effectively act as a check on the actions of the House of 

Commons? 

 

And there‟s a real argument here as to whether or not you 

would need some further check on the powers of parliament, 

given the effective powers that the provinces have and the 

powers that the provinces bring to the table when it comes to 

governing this country, because it‟s not just the federal 

government by itself unilaterally. Certainly it does in many 

areas, whether it‟s the post office or the questions of foreign 

affairs, the question of our military. Those are areas in which 

the federal government can act unilaterally. But there‟s many 

other issues that the federal government becomes involved in 

that the provinces are also involved in. And so the federal 

government cannot act unilaterally in many areas without 

consulting the provinces. 

 

So if that‟s the case and if that‟s how we have evolved in our 

country, probably to a far greater degree than was ever 

anticipated by those who framed our constitution — and they 

did it on a large part on England and England is a unitary state, 

doesn‟t have provinces — there‟s a question now whether we 

would, in terms of an effective Senate, really need that to act as 

a check and balance on Central Canada or wherever the major 

bases of population are in this country. So that‟s an argument 

that people will have in academic circles, but that‟s an argument 

that we shouldn‟t lose sight of, Mr. Speaker, if we speak on the 

question of an effective Senate. 

 

So the question is, is an election really required? And even if 

electing all of the senators, if we should ever get to the point of 

where all the provinces follow the lead of Saskatchewan and 

Alberta . . . And we‟re not taking the lead here. We‟re just 

simply doing what Alberta has done in the past, and that‟s not 

uncommon for this government to take their lead from Alberta. 

But if all the provinces were to take the lead of Alberta and now 

Saskatchewan and elect their senators, is this an arrangement 

then that we would be satisfied with? That we have an elected 

Senate and that elected Senate were to be able to accrue unto 

itself some more effective powers for the Senate in terms of 

reviewing legislation from the federal government. Certainly 

not in a position to weigh in in terms of financial issues as I‟ve 

indicated. The Senate would have no power. That‟s clearly 

prescribed in our constitution. 

 

But even if through all of that, through all of that electing all the 

senators, that Senate would have some effective powers then, 

why would we for one moment be satisfied with that, given the 

present inequities that are there when it comes to where it is that 

senators come from? And if we all elect them, why would some 

province that has now far greater representation in the Senate 

and therefore those senators would be performing an effective 

role, why would they give up any of that? 

 

Why would they then go back and say, well now that we‟ve all 

elected senators and we have X number of senators from our 

province — say 24 from Ontario versus 6 in Saskatchewan 

versus 10 in Nova Scotia — why would Nova Scotia for a 

second want to give up any of those powers if they thought 

those senators were performing some effective role? What 

would be the incentive? Why would you do that? What sense 

would it make for the people of Nova Scotia to give up that 

power? Why would you do that? Why for a second would you 

try to put into practice something that would disadvantage the 

people of Saskatchewan vis-à-vis other jurisdictions in Canada? 

What sense does that make? Why would you do that? 

 

And those are not questions that the government answered 

when it moved its second reading of this debate. 

 

And that brings me to another one of the Es that I talked about. 

Again the three Es that people have talked about is, one is the 

question of election, another E is the question of effective role, 

and the other E is one of equal representation. Okay, so that‟s 

the third E. 

 

And typically upper chambers, so-called, — and the Senate is 

referred to as an upper chamber — upper chambers in other 

countries in the world, whether it‟s our neighbour to the south, 

United States; whether it‟s Australia, which has a system that is 

more similar to ours, in those particular jurisdictions their 

division of power is very much based on an effective role for a 

Senate, but that Senate then also providing a check and balance 

in the sense that there‟s equal representation from each of the 

states or each of the . . . Yes, also the Australian states. So that 

each state in the United States is eligible to elect two senators, 

and whether you come from California which has a population 

of probably close to 40 million people or whether it‟s from the 

state of North Dakota which might have 6, 700,000 people, 

each state is eligible to elect two senators. 

 

[16:30] 

 

In fact we have the oddity in the state of North Dakota where 

North Dakota, because of population and the way districts are 

set up for their House of Representatives based largely on 

population, North Dakota‟s able to elect one member of 

Congress but is able to elect two senators. Of course in 

California they would be electing many, many representatives 

to their Congress, but still only two senators. 

 

And again because the role that they foresaw for the Senate, 

they ensured that there is equal representation from each of the 

states in that Senate to act as a balance to the House of 

Representatives, which was based on, again like our House of 

Commons, based on population and therefore certain populated 

areas having more power because of the seats being relatively 

— how shall I say? — based on population. 

 

Australia similarly has an upper chamber that has an equal 

number of representatives for each of their states, whether it‟s 

New South Wales or Queensland. It doesn‟t really matter how 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

many members they might have in their parliament; each of the 

states has an equal number of senators. I believe in their case 

it‟s six members. 

 

Now the Fathers of Confederation, when they were grappling 

with this issue . . . And maybe that‟s why of the 14 days or so 

they spent discussing our constitution, they spent six of it 

dealing with the Senate. And we‟re still dealing with it today, 

Mr. Speaker. Well you know, maybe that‟s our curse as a 

country that we‟re forever . . . You know, other countries might 

have earthquakes and they may have volcanoes, but our curse as 

a country is to forever be discussing Senate reform in Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Fathers of Confederation had a great deal of debate about 

the principle of equal representation but decided to not apply 

the principle as such. There were great concerns at that time if 

the principle were applied that, for reasons that one can go into 

in some considerable detail, the province of Quebec — and in 

particular the francophone population in Quebec — might then 

become isolated within Canada. 

 

And also recognizing that there was a huge disparity, a huge 

disparity between those colonies, British colonies — Upper 

Canada, Lower Canada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and 

Prince Edward Island — was also part of the discussion. Don‟t 

forget that it was the Charlottetown Accord I think that . . . or at 

least the Fathers of Confederation met at one point in 

Charlottetown. Prince Edward Island was very much an active 

participant in discussions on the future of this country. There 

were such huge disparities between Upper Canada, Lower 

Canada, and colonies such as Prince Edward Island, they took 

the point of view that strictly to have equal representation for 

each of the colonies that were to constitute this country would 

not be appropriate. 

 

And therefore they took the point of view that, in this Senate for 

Canada, that Ontario should have 24 senators. Quebec should 

have 24 senators. New Brunswick would have 10 senators. 

Nova Scotia would have 10 senators. And then later when PEI 

[Prince Edward Island] did become a part of the federation — 

and PEI was not one of the four original colonies that became 

part of Canada; I think PEI signed on a little bit later — PEI 

was given four seats. So you had a regional balance certainly in 

the Senate of 24 from Ontario, 24 from Quebec, and then 24 

from the Atlantic provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, 

and Prince Edward Island, so that there was a rough regional 

balance in the Senate. 

 

But when the federation moved west, they then assigned 

arbitrarily six Senate seats to Manitoba and British Columbia, 

and then to Saskatchewan and to Canada. So the present 

alignment in Canada is that Ontario has 24 Senate seats, 

although that‟s 24 out of 100 senators which is what the Senate 

was originally designed for — about a quarter of the Senate 

seats although they have probably about a third of the 

population. Quebec, which had a population that might have 

been about the same as Ontario in those days, now having 

substantially less in population but the same number of Senate 

seats. New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, 10 Senate seats each. Oh 

yes, Newfoundland was added, so now the Atlantic region has 

30 Senate seats where Saskatchewan has six. 

 

And so you have to ask yourself, how satisfied are we as a 

province to in effect enshrine that kind of imbalance in a future 

Senate? If you take the point of view again, if you take the point 

of view again that electing senators — even though they have 

no effective role, or should they — if you elect them and 

because of the fact that they now have a greater authority 

because they‟re elected and therefore are able to carve out for 

themselves a more effective role, why would we take the 

position that that‟s okay and we should continue to be 

disadvantaged in terms of lower representation because, again, 

what is the possible incentive? 

 

What is the possible incentive, possible incentive for any 

jurisdiction to give up power in Ottawa through reducing their 

members of a then elected Senate? What possible reason is 

there, and why is it that the provincial government, the Minister 

of Justice, hasn‟t dealt with these issues? Why is it that they‟ve 

been silent on that? Why is that they‟ve been silent on the 

question of an effective Senate? Why is it that they‟re silent on 

the question of an equal Senate that had provided for some 

greater equality in Canada? 

 

And is this the formula, is this the formula that we seek to 

enshrine in our Senate, Mr. Speaker? And I don‟t think for a 

moment we do. And I don‟t think that this is an issue that has 

been thought through by the provincial government. I think this 

is one of these things where they‟ve got some, you know, 

political bee under their bonnet about electing senators. And 

therefore we‟ll just elect them and don‟t really analyze and deal 

with what that means for the people of Saskatchewan, what it is 

that we might be giving up by electing Senate nominees. No 

thought had been given to this. This is strictly — how shall I 

say — slavish adherence to political thinking that comes from 

the right wing in Saskatchewan and comes from the right wing 

in Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. No real thought had been 

given to the consequences of this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would submit that the only real way, the only 

real way to deal with this question of election and the question 

of the effective role of the Senate, the question of the equal 

representation for Canadians in the Senate or equal 

representation for the regions in that Senate or equal 

representation for the provinces in that Senate — none of which 

is really clear, a lot of which is confused — but that the only 

real effective way to deal with that is through constitutional 

reform, that you can‟t do constitutional reform somehow 

through the back door. 

 

Constitutional reform needs to be dealt head-on as such. 

Constitutional reform needs to recognize that if there‟s some 

improvement in the Senate, as an example, that benefits my 

province, that benefits my region, that there might be other 

things that I would be prepared to have in the constitution that I 

wouldn‟t necessarily agree to. But if that‟s a trade-off for 

increased power for the Senate, which I value, then that‟s the 

only real way that you can deal with it, and that‟s through 

constitutional reform. 

 

And that kind of in-depth discussion needs to be undertaken by 

the Government of Canada with the provinces, and you need to 

get agreement then from . . . and I forget the exact formula, Mr. 

Speaker, but certainly any agreement for a constitutional change 

in Canada would surely have to have the support of the majority 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

of the population from those provinces that agree and/or a 

majority of the provinces agreeing and probably would need 

some regional agreement as well. 

 

You can‟t have a situation where Western Canada, Ontario 

agree to a change in the constitution, be damned what it is that 

Quebec or the Atlantic provinces say because they don‟t have 

the majority of the population; they don‟t necessarily have a 

majority of the provinces. Those are the kinds of things that 

need to be taken into account when we‟re talking about 

changing the constitution. 

 

And of course each province will have their own process for 

dealing with any changes to the constitution. Some provinces 

have mandated that there needs to be a public discussion before 

a provincial legislature can agree to changes in the constitution 

on their part. Other provinces may not go that far, but take the 

point of view . . . And of course you can‟t have a provincial 

government, you just can‟t have a provincial government on its 

own saying, oh okay we agree to a change in the constitution. 

And we will on behalf of the people of the province sign on to 

this constitutional change. No. Any constitutional change at a 

bare minimum would need to see dialogue, discussion, debate 

in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And as I indicated, many provinces also take the position that if 

you have a constitutional change and that constitutional change, 

those amendments, those changes that you would make to this 

country we call Canada and the implication that has for children 

in the future in this country, that‟s important enough to subject 

it to also public dialogue and to invite the public to weigh in on 

the changes in our constitution. And I think that‟s fair ball, Mr. 

Speaker. This is not a thing that can simply be dealt with behind 

closed doors. 

 

This is an issue that at some point, even if there‟s agreement 

among the premiers and the Prime Minister as to what needs to 

be done, at some point Canadians need to weigh in. And that 

has happened before in this country where the premiers dealt 

with the question of Meech Lake, the Meech Lake Accord, on 

how to change our constitution. 

 

And this is one of the ironies that I see in the Bill before us, that 

recognizing the genesis of where this proposal for electing 

senators comes from . . . and it comes from the right wing of 

this country, and it comes from the right wing in Western 

Canada. This is a group prides itself on belief that senators 

should be elected, although there haven‟t been any real 

announcements. Well what the heck that might mean, as I‟ve 

indicated in my remarks, in terms of effective role and equal 

representation? But never mind, they strongly believe that. 

 

It is a great irony that, I think, the last major attempt to change 

the constitution in Canada through something called the Meech 

Lake Accord because the accord was agreed to by the premiers 

of the day in Meech Lake, Ontario . . . I think it‟s Ontario. It‟s 

not Meech Lake, Quebec. I don‟t know, one or the other, but 

Meech Lake, Canada, Mr. Speaker. That the prime minister and 

the premiers agreed at that time to changes in Canada‟s 

constitution. 

 

And that was a constitutional accord that again had trade-offs in 

it. This was a constitutional accord where Quebec, after our 

constitution having been patriated by the former Trudeau 

government, the Quebec government at that point — Premier 

Bourassa and Prime Minister Mulroney — had discussions, the 

Quebec government signalling that perhaps it might be prepared 

to sign on as a signatory to the patriation of the Canadian 

Constitution, then saying that, but if we do that, there‟s some 

trade-offs that we would like. And one of the trade-offs would 

then be recognition of Quebec as a distinct society, I believe it 

was. 

 

[16:45] 

 

But that constitutional accord then also provided for changes to 

our Senate — to provide for an elected senate, to provide for an 

effective Senate, and to provide for a different distribution of 

Senate seats — one that might not be perfect but would perhaps 

. . . [inaudible] . . . greater comfort for the people in various 

regions of the country. And so part of the constitutional accord 

was an agreement that they would debate this. And if they 

failed to resolve it, here was a bottom line that would be 

implemented if the premiers could not agree on the specifics of 

the changes to the constitution with respect to Senate reform. 

 

Well now here is a real irony, that the group in Canada that was 

the loudest, the most vociferous, the most demonstrative, the 

most . . . Well there‟s some words I can‟t use in this Legislative 

Assembly. But the group that without a doubt voiced the 

greatest opposition to the Meech Lake Accord was the very 

right wing that is today advocating an elected Senate. And this a 

great puzzlement to me, that the right wing and especially the 

right wing in Canada would take the position that they should 

oppose this — the one real chance that we‟ve seen in our 

lifetime for changes to the constitution to provide for a more 

effective Senate and to provide for elected senators would be 

opposed by them. 

 

But I guess that would because in those days the folks opposite 

were thinking regionally as opposed to having regard for the 

country as a whole. Now of course they morph themselves into 

a Conservative Party, and I‟m speaking of the former Reform 

Party, that was very insistent in terms of the change that should 

or should not be made to the Constitution of Canada, and you 

know in some ways not acting any differently than the groups 

that — say the Bloc Québécois that represents Quebec — 

having a narrow regional view of Canada and how it should be 

constructed and as long as I get what I want, then the rest of the 

country really doesn‟t matter. The question of Senate reform is 

secondary to what I want for my region, recognizing that when 

you have regional interest, then you need to begin to trade off 

interests and concerns, one for the other, to get what it is that 

you really want. But that‟s something that never crossed their 

minds and something that Preston Manning was dead set 

against. And you know, when you look at it, you wonder like 

what were their real interests in terms of Canada as a whole, 

because all they could see it through was through the blinkers of 

their narrow regional viewpoint. 

 

So I find it‟s ironic that the right wing continues to champion 

the issue of representation or election of senators as somehow 

being the way to reform the Senate when there‟s very little 

credible opinion in the country that would agree with that. 

 

Again, like why would any jurisdiction having achieved a 



November 19, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

certain level of power in Ottawa . . . Because you decided to all 

elect senators and because those senators are largely successful 

in carving out a more effective role, although may not be that 

effective for reasons that I mention and may not be that 

effective because there hasn‟t really been any changes over the 

years . . . In fact the senators have retracted from exercising the 

bit of leeway and flexibility that might be in the Constitution 

Act. Why would any region in this country, why would any 

province in this country give up something that they have in 

terms of power in Ottawa? And I have never been able to get an 

answer to that question from the right wing what might compel 

them to do that. 

 

Once they‟ve got it, what incentive is there to enter into Senate 

reform as part of some other constitutional package? My sense 

is then that constitutional reform might become even more 

difficult for Canadians to become involved in, or for our leaders 

to become involved in or Canadians, Mr. Speaker. Again it is 

just a source of complete puzzlement to me as to why they 

continue to push this point of view, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a Bill that is not going to change the Senate for the 

better. This is a Bill that will do absolutely sweet tweet in terms 

of improving the Senate. This is a Bill that will do absolutely 

sweet tweet in terms of making the Senate a more effective 

institution in dealing with the needs and the wants of Canadian 

citizens. This is a Bill that will do nothing, nada, not a thing, 

Mr. Speaker. And, you know, in so many words, or not in so 

many words, it‟s a sham Bill. It‟s a real sham. 

 

And again here‟s where the other puzzlement comes in that if 

there is to be a Senate election, we‟re not really clear when we 

would have those elections. Now the Minister of Justice mused 

that well, you know, maybe we can elect senators at the same 

time we have a provincial election to save money. But if there‟s 

no vacancy, then what kind of election would you have? Would 

you anticipate vacancies? You know that senators have to 

resign when they reach age 75, and maybe if the federal 

government is successful in terms of pushing through changes 

to limit the terms of senators, you might have some greater 

clarity about when it is that you should have an election for 

senators. But it‟s anything less than clear. 

 

And now here‟s the other thing that is really a puzzler. Here we 

put forward a Bill to finally get what the right wing wants, 

right? And especially Stephen Harper, the Prime Minister of 

Canada — who comes from this Reform base in Calgary and 

comes from this base of electing senators — here we have now 

the Prime Minister indicating through his responsible minister, 

Steven Fletcher, saying, well hold on here, we may not want to 

do that. Say what? Say what, Mr. Speaker? You may not want 

to do that? 

 

Well now they‟re expressing concerns that, well we want to 

make sure that we get our agenda — that is the Conservative 

Party agenda — through the Parliament of Canada. And we 

certainly don‟t want any obstructionism or what have you from 

the Senate to slow us down in the package that we have for 

Canadians, although I‟m not really clear if there‟s been a lot of 

obstructionism over the years. And some of the obstructionism 

they‟ve probably agreed with; and some of the obstructionism 

the right wing has probably been an author of. But never mind. 

What obstructionism? 

But now he‟s saying that because of potential obstructionism, 

we‟re not sure we want to take an elected nominee from 

Saskatchewan. We may want to appoint our own people. We 

might want to appoint partisans who will unfailingly and 

without any second-guessing carry out the agenda of the 

Conservative government. Well to me it sounds more like the 

Prime Minister needs ways, like Conservative and Liberal 

parties have over the years, to reward their friends by 

appointing them to the Senate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But so, I tell you, electing them for what? Why would we elect 

them if he‟s going to go ahead and appoint senators anyway? 

You know, these are questions that the ordinary guy might have 

about what‟s taking place here. But you know, do we get any 

answers from the government on this? Has the Minister of 

Justice been clear in terms of articulating what it is that this 

election of senators really means? No, he‟s provided us with a 

Bill on process and how we might do it, but has not weighed in 

on the question of what this really means for Canada, what this 

really means for the federation of Canada. Hasn‟t done that, 

hasn‟t talked about what impact this might have potentially on 

Saskatchewan. He has done nothing of that. 

 

And so again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all in all considered, when I 

look at this Bill I say the Bill is again probably the best example 

of a frivolous piece of legislation that I‟ve ever seen in this 

Assembly. The best example of a money-wasting Bill in this 

Assembly, the best example of how to take a Bill to waste the 

taxpayers‟ money in Saskatchewan. And I could tell you, I‟ve 

been here a few years, Mr. Speaker, so I‟ve got a bit of 

experience in terms of judging legislation here over the years. 

And no doubt they‟ll have lots of examples too. But as long as 

you‟re providing a list of examples of frivolous Bills, this one 

goes number one. This one goes through the top, Mr. Speaker. 

So I really wonder what the purpose is of the Bill, what it‟s 

going to resolve. You know, I just don‟t know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of the things that we‟ve looked at to enable the people of 

Saskatchewan to call into sharper focus as to whether or not 

they even agree with the concept of elected senators . . . And it 

sounds good. Like on the surface of it, it sounded like a great 

thing. 

 

I mean who could oppose elections? Everybody loves an 

election. We love an election. Never mind that you‟re electing 

somebody to rubber stamp something. Never mind, we love an 

election. I mean do you ever go to a meeting, Mr. Speaker, and 

there‟s not necessarily any motions before the meetings? You 

get any group of people together, and they all want to raise their 

hands for something. They all want to vote for something. They 

think it‟s like part of your civic duty to vote for something. 

 

But I tell you in this particular case this is a sham. This is an 

election that will result in nothing. This is an election that if you 

carry it through to its logical conclusion means a diminution of 

the power of the people of Saskatchewan relative to the rest of 

the country. And there has been no clear talk about this by the 

provincial government. None whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I think we need to call this into sharper focus for the 

people of Saskatchewan. And that is why we are advocating 

that maybe the central question that the people of Saskatchewan 

should be discussing is, should we elect a senator? Given all the 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2008 

warts, given all the faults, given all the restrictions, given all the 

limitations that I‟ve talked about, given all the potential 

outcomes which means a lessening of the powers of 

Saskatchewan in the overall context of the Canadian federation, 

do we still want to carry on with an election of senators? Or 

should we have another alternative to propose to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and that is the complete abolition of the Senate 

of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — That is the question I think that the 

people of Saskatchewan need to be discussing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So one of the recommendations that we are making is that at an 

appropriate time that we alter this Bill, amend this Bill, improve 

this Bill so that we provide the people of Saskatchewan with a 

more reasoned choice about going forward when it comes to the 

Senate of Canada, that we ask the people of Saskatchewan 

whether they approve this Bill or that we abolish the Senate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 10 o‟clock 

tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1733 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1733 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1733 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1733 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1734 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1734 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1734 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1734 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1734 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1734 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1734 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1735 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1735 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1735 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1735 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Canadian Transplant Games 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1735 

 National Addictions Awareness Week 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1736 

 Duke of Edinburgh Awards 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1736 

 50th Anniversary of Stem Cell Transplants in Saskatchewan 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1736 

 Métis Korean War Veteran Honoured 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1737 

 Education Portion of Property Taxes 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1737 

 Parkridge Centre Computer Program 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1737 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Fire Protection Issues 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1738 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1738 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1738 

 Support for Workers 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1739 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1739 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1739 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1739 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1740 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1740 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1741 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1741 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatchewan Transportation Company Expands Northern Service 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1743 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1743 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 65 — The Seizure of Criminal Property Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 

 Bill No. 66 — The Witness Protection Act 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1744 

 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1745 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1745 

 Bill No. 62 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1746 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1747 

  Morgan (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................. 1748 

 Bill No. 63 — The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1748 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1749 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1750 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 58 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1751 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1754 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1756 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1757 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


