




















































Hansard: December 01, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 21A  MONDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1921 

 December 1, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you 

today, as Minister Responsible for the Public Service 

Commission, I’m pleased to welcome three students who are in 

your gallery this afternoon. All of these individuals are serving 

internships in government ministries. With us today are Jason 

Rumancik with Corrections, Public Safety and Policing; David 

Howland with Justice; and Sean Burnett with the Ministry of 

Health. 

 

Now Jason, David, and Sean are in the Master of Public 

Administration internship program. That’s a partnership 

between the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy. This 

program, Mr. Speaker, provides MPA [Master of Public 

Administration] interns with an opportunity to gain practical 

knowledge about the provincial public service by working 

directly with deputy ministers and other senior officials. 

 

Accompanying them today are two people with the Public 

Service Commission, Mr. Speaker. We have Brent Young and 

Colleen Hawkesford. Please join me in giving these individuals 

a warm welcome to their Assembly this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 

moment to introduce to you and through you to the rest of this 

House, a very special constituent of mine, Pam Bustin. Pam was 

in Regina this past weekend for the Saskatchewan Book 

Awards, and she was nominated for her novel Mostly Happy. 

 

And she was nominated in three categories, won in two of them 

— First Book and in Fiction. Fiction was particularly a tough 

category. Her work was up against the novels of established and 

excellent writers like Gail Bowen and Art Slade. 

 

She’s in Regina. She thought she’d come by, check out . . . 

She’s curious about the proceedings in the House, as writers 

tend to be. 

 

I’d also like to note that she’s joined by her good friend Lenni 

Frohman. I’d ask all members to join in welcoming Pam to the 

House. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly, 

the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my honour today to introduce two people 

seated in the west gallery. I’ve introduced both of them before. 

The first person of course is Carol Sleeva who is my 

constituency assistant and ministerial assistant who comes from 

the constituency of Canora-Pelly. 

 

But the second individual comes from the constituency of 

Kelvington-Wadena. And I’ve introduced her before, but every 

time I’ve introduced her in this Assembly, she’s been here as 

either a teacher or principal chaperoning a group of students. 

Today I want to introduce someone who is no longer a teacher, 

who superannuated after 36 years, and now has the ability to 

watch sometimes what I do — sometimes quite critical, Mr. 

Speaker, I might add. I’d like all the members opposite to join 

me in welcoming my wife, Gail, to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

and through you someone who has also been in the gallery 

many days. It is my wife, Ali, and my two daughters, Reilly and 

Gracie. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce someone as well through you and to you. In the 

Speaker’s gallery, my constituency assistant, Danielle Vasques. 

Danielle has a B.A. [Bachelor of Arts] and speaks Spanish and 

French. She is very helpful and caring to the constituents. She 

spent a year in Mexico teaching English in an orphanage and 

has some very interesting stories about that. Welcome to your 

Assembly. Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens, and it 

speaks to the utilization and value of the full range of 

professional skills offered by health care providers, and how 

that can be promoted through adequate staffing levels and 

adequate funding. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens signing this are from Herbert, Morse, 

Swift Current, Kindersley, Rosetown, Shaunavon, Swift 

Current again, sir, and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of new child care spaces. Mr. Speaker, it is 

well known that inadequate access to quality, affordable child 

care is a major roadblock for parents who want to access the 

labour market. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are presented by people of Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise as 

well to present a petition. This one is in support of affordable 

housing for Saskatchewan seniors. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary education. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Regina Students’ 

Union, University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union, and the 

First Nations University of Canada Students’ Association. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 

behalf of the residents of Cumberland constituency. The 

petition reads as follows: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan asks the government to take note of the 

condition of Highway 123 and the need for substantial 

improvements to this highway. This petition asks that the 

government commit to maintaining and repairing Highway 

123 which services the communities of Cumberland 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first of several petitions that I will 

present on this important subject. It is signed by the residents of 

Cumberland constituency and is supported by the leadership of 

these communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

World AIDS Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World AIDS 

[acquired immune deficiency syndrome] Day. This day is set 

aside to continue to raise public awareness of the incidence of 

AIDS  in our world. There still is no cure for AIDS, but 

successful treatment with virus-suppressing drugs is allowing 

many people who are HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] 

positive or have been diagnosed with AIDS to live longer and 

more normal lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I went to Africa a few years ago on an AIDS 

policy dialogue between Canada and eight African countries. In 

Senegal I saw first-hand hospitals that focused on treatment of 

people with HIV/AIDS and visited support groups for people 

living with the disease. The horror of the African experience 

with this epidemic is stunning to see first-hand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the effect on the African people has been 

described by Stephen Lewis in his book Race Against Time as 

the feminization of AIDS, as so many women and girls are 

being infected for reasons I cannot compress into this short 

statement. Mr. Speaker, many children orphaned by AIDS are 

the fodder for terrorist groups, as this is the only home they are 

given. Terrorism is touching us all. To fight this disease is truly 

a worldwide responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, closer to home we are not immune to HIV/AIDS. 

The incidence keeps rising in Saskatchewan and is particularly 

disturbing to see an increase in the HIV infection rates in young 

girls ages 15 to 19. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we remember those who have died from 

AIDS and those who are living with the disease. We thank the 

various agencies that support those living with AIDS and daily 



December 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

fight the stigma and discrimination side by side with them. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks the 

20th anniversary of World AIDS Day. December 1 is dedicated 

to raising the awareness of AIDS and HIV. Mr. Speaker, 

according to the World AIDS campaign, AIDS has killed more 

than 20 million people in the world with an estimated 38.6 

million people currently living with the HIV virus. 

 

In 2005 the AIDS epidemic claimed an estimated 3.1 million 

lives, more than half of which were children. This year the 

focus of World AIDS Day is on raising the awareness of impact 

of AIDS on children. 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, is working to improve the 

delivery of primary care health services to help Saskatchewan 

people with HIV to get the care they need to protect and 

maintain their health. HIV virus eventually turns into AIDS 

disease. 

 

Other services available to those living with HIV and AIDS 

include HIV counselling and testing in all Saskatchewan health 

regions; nurse specialists in infectious disease clinics in Regina, 

Qu’Appelle, and Saskatoon health regions; five 

community-based AIDS organizations to provide support to 

those affected by or living with AIDS. As members of this 

Assembly, we can contribute by supporting initiatives that raise 

awareness about this terrible disease. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Canada 55 Plus Games 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, every two years senior participants 

representing their respective province or territory gather to 

compete in a national competition known as the Canada 55 Plus 

Games. Competing in a wide range of events from Scrabble to 

hockey, the Canada 55 Plus Games provide an excellent 

opportunity for older adults to pursue and maintain an active 

and healthy lifestyle. 

 

The 2008 games were hosted in Dieppe, New Brunswick, where 

the Saskatchewan team won 28 gold medals, 24 silver medals, 

and 10 bronze medals for a grand total medal count of 62, 

thereby coming in fourth place in all. 

 

I would like to take a moment and recognize the medal winners, 

including members of the Regina Walsh Acres constituency. In 

golf, Adele Obrigewitsch; curling, Doug Barss, Alice Barss, 

Roland Bachelu, Mary Ann Bachelu; ice hockey, Murray 

Gleim, Terry Keith, Kirk Rondeau; slow-pitch, Gary Tataryn, 

Laura Davies, Maureen Kwasnicki, Alice Mac Cormack, Doug 

Bouck, Gary Hayden, Bruce Hern, Bob Kreutzer, Lon Martinac, 

Lloyd Myers, Terry Salter, Richard Smith and Gero Winkler; 

and finally, long jump and triple jump, gold medallist Robert 

Grocholski. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all of my colleagues to join me 

in congratulating Saskatchewan’s 55 Plus athletes for 

representing the province and providing leadership in living an 

active and healthy lifestyle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Medal of Courage Awarded to Bengough Resident 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to read into the record a letter to the editor which 

appeared last week in the Deep South Star. The original letter 

was sent to Mr. Keith Whyte of Bengough, dated November 12, 

and I quote: 

 

Dear Mr. Whyte: 

 

It is my pleasure to congratulate you on the decision of the 

National Council of the Canadian Cancer Society to award 

you the Medal of Courage. 

 

This is a very special award granted to an outstanding 

individual who in his or her personal battle with cancer 

has exhibited outstanding and unusual courage and has 

significantly helped to further the mission of the Canadian 

Cancer Society or that of the cancer control community. 

 

Your generosity and dedication to the cancer cause, 

demonstrated through extensive and successful advocacy 

efforts have assisted the Society greatly in our mission to 

eradicate cancer and enhanced the quality of life of people 

living with cancer. Through your efforts, drugs like 

Avastin are now covered by Saskatchewan Medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter closes by saying: 

 

Perhaps most inspiring is your willingness to help others, 

even through your own struggles with cancer. Your efforts 

are greatly appreciated by the volunteers and staff of the 

Canadian Cancer Society and all those who benefit from 

your work. 

 

I understand that the Saskatchewan Division will be in 

touch regarding a formal presentation. In the meantime, I 

am pleased to once again extend my personal 

congratulations. 

 

Yours sincerely, 

 

Jimm Simon 

President, Canadian Cancer Society 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2008 

2008 Saskatchewan Book Awards 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Saturday 

night the Annual Saskatchewan Book Awards were held, and 

this year’s competition had a record number of entries with 113 

titles. 

 

Gary Hyland’s book Love of Mirrors: Poems New and Selected 

won both the 2008 Book of the Year and Poetry Award 

 

Pam Bustin of Saskatoon, my constituent, won both the Fiction 

Award and the First Book Award for her stirring debut novel 

Mostly Happy, a story of a young girl who carries everything 

that is important to her in a red Samsonite suitcase as her 

troubled family moves from town to town. 

 

David McLennan’s book Our Town, Saskatchewan 

Communities from Abbey to Zenon Park received both the 

Regina Book Award and the Publishing in Education Award. 

Louise Bernice Halfe was also a double winner for her book of 

poetry The Crooked Good which received both the Saskatoon 

and the First People’s Publishing Awards. 

 

Coteau Books also received the Publishing Award for 

Passchendaele: Canada’s Triumph and Tragedy on the Fields 

of Flanders by Norman Leach. The Reader’s Choice Award 

went to Janita Van de Velde for Postcards Never Written. 

 

Alison Lohans, winner of the Young Adult Literature Award 

for This Land We Call Home. David Baudemont received the 

Prix du livre français for the children’s book Olga, and James 

Youngblood Henderson received the Scholarly Award for 

Treaty Rights in the Constitution of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 

the Saskatchewan Book Award nominees and winners for the 

recognition is truly well deserved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Maidstone Group Home Society 

Nominated for Donner Award 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As this 

government values and appreciates the hard work and 

dedication provided by community-based organizations, I 

would like to draw special attention to a local CBO 

[community-based organization] in my constituency. The 

Maidstone Group Home Society Incorporated was recently 

nominated for a Donner Canadian Foundation Award in the 

category of Service for People with Disabilities. What is 

especially notable, Mr. Speaker, is this rural Saskatchewan 

CBO was recognized and nominated to run against other urban 

groups representing the cities of Winnipeg, Calgary, and 

Burnaby. 

 

These national awards are administered by the Fraser Institute 

and according to their website, the Donner Awards program is 

Canada’s largest and most prestigious, non-profit recognition 

program with a total of $70,000 available to be won. It is not 

only an honour to be nominated for this award, but it provides 

public awareness of the high quality service of the Maidstone 

Group Home Society. 

 

Martin Luther King, Jr. once said, “All labor that uplifts 

humanity has dignity and importance and should be undertaken 

with painstaking excellence.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to publicly acknowledge 

the board of directors and staff for their invaluable and excellent 

service through the Maidstone Group Home Society. Well 

done, you’ve made us all proud. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

School Closures 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are 

families and people across this province dismayed by this 

government’s actions on school closures. Their reactions have 

not met their promises and commitments that the Sask Party 

campaigned on.  

 

Over this session, over 1,000 signatures have been presented to 

this Assembly on a petition that challenges this government on 

their failed actions. The petition has been signed by residents 

from more than 80 communities across Saskatchewan. These 

communities include Biggar, Moose Jaw, Melville, Prince 

Albert, Carlyle, Estevan, Kennedy, Yorkton, Manor, Swift 

Current, Gull Lake, Weyburn, Hudson Bay, Kindersley, 

Creighton, Fort Qu’Appelle, St. Brieux, Regina, Rosetown, 

Shaunavon, Saskatoon, La Ronge, Lloydminster, Wadena, 

Kelvington, Grayson, Redvers, Canora, and Assiniboia. This is 

a mere sample, Mr. Speaker, of the over 80 communities who 

have spoken out with extreme concern over the broken 

promises delivered by the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to thank and recognize the 

contribution of these concerned citizens to our political process. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Nuclear Power in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bruce 

Power has started its sales pitch. It’s proposing a nuclear power 

plant somewhere on the North Saskatchewan River. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there are hundreds of questions to be asked. And 

Saskatchewan people have the right to expect straight answers 

from their government, not a hard sell. 

 

We know that nuclear power has a history of being very 

expensive. On Thursday the Minister of Crown Corporations 



December 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

told reporters that there may be a role for SaskPower in this 

project saying, and I quote, “We’re looking at P3s and things 

like that going forward.” 

 

To the minister: what role does the Sask Party plan to play in 

this project? How much public money is the Sask Party 

prepared to spend to make sure this nuclear plant is built? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’ll start off by 

saying this: the Government of Saskatchewan will view any 

move towards building a nuclear power plant through the lens 

of public safety, environmental responsibility, and cost to 

consumers. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, Bruce Power has done this study, this 

feasibility study, that shows to them that it is feasible to build a 

nuclear power plant somewhere in Saskatchewan. No location 

has been announced at this time, Mr. Speaker, just a general 

region that the company is looking at. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the cost to 

SaskPower to build new transmission lines would be huge — 

hundreds of millions of dollars — costs that would be borne by 

SaskPower consumers. 

 

To the minister: has SaskPower conducted an analysis of how 

much it would cost to build the transmission lines needed to 

carry an additional 1000 megawatts of electricity, and further 

how much of this electricity is for Saskatchewan use and how 

much is for export? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — SaskPower is certainly studying the cost 

of upgrading our grid. And no matter where the power is 

generated in this province and no matter what source the power 

comes from in the future, there is going to be a huge cost to 

upgrade our grid. 

 

It hasn’t been kept up to standards over the last 16 years. There 

has been no move away from conventional coal power 

production in the past 16 years. There has been no 

modernization carried out of the power grid in the province 

over the last 16 years. And so there will be a substantial cost 

whether the power is generated by wind, by gas, by coal, or by 

nuclear. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well well, Mr. Speaker. We know that at least 

two of the reactor designs being considered by Bruce Power are 

not yet in operation anywhere in the world, the AP1000 by 

Westinghouse and Areva’s EPR. There’s no reliable figures on 

how much it would cost Bruce Power to operate these reactors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of operating a nuclear reactor would have 

a direct bearing on how much Bruce Power would charge for 

the electricity that they generate. Since Bruce Power’s 

feasibility did not include their estimates of what they need to 

sell the power for, let me ask the Minister Responsible for 

SaskPower: how much is SaskPower prepared to pay Bruce 

Power per gigajoule of nuclear-generated electricity? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 

that member for the question although I’m puzzled by it. 

However we generate power in the future — whether it be from 

conventional coal which will have severe environmental 

penalties associated with it, whether it will be from gas which 

will also have somewhat lower environmental penalties or 

whether it will be from clean coal which is extremely expensive 

or whether it will be from wind which isn’t baseload power and 

is the most expensive of all right now — there will be 

substantially increased costs to the consumers of this province 

in the future for power, no matter how we do it. SaskPower will 

be negotiating a deal with Bruce Power, supposing that a power 

plant is built. And that work will go on as it should. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it looks like it’s Bruce Power 

or nothing. But let me say this. Mr. Speaker, the previous NDP 

[New Democratic Party] government placed a very high priority 

on energy conservation. We also made a substantial investment 

in wind-generated electricity. We also explored the potential of 

a number of environmentally friendly forms of energy, 

including cogeneration, geothermal, small-scale hydro, and 

more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has shifted the focus away from 

energy conservation and alternative energy sources to two very 

costly sources of new electricity — clean coal and now nuclear 

power. 

 

To the Minister of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker: can the minister 

provide an independent analysis of the cost of generating 

electricity from the various sources available? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 

will do what’s best for the people of Saskatchewan — for our 

consumers, for our environment, and for our public safety. 

 

The union representing Saskatchewan electrical workers is 

welcoming a Bruce Power feasibility study that indicates the 

province could support a nuclear power plant. This is the quote, 

and I offer this to the member: 

 

The nuclear option could help ensure future power 

demand is met and also be good for jobs and the 

environment, said Neil Collins, business manager of the 

International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) 

Local 2067. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on November 28 Bruce Power 

CEO [chief executive officer] Duncan Hawthorne told CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Radio that Bruce Power 

would need a lot of water out of the North Saskatchewan River 

to cool the reactors. He said quote, “We take about 2.6 cubic 

metres a second. Of course we’re circulating water and 

returning it to the river.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that would work out to more than 156 000 litres of 

water per minute each and every day, and the water would 

likely be warmer going back in than when it came out. 

 

To the Minister of Environment: does she have information on 

the effect this activity would have on the ecosystem of the 

North Saskatchewan River? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it was the 

NDP who actually asked for a siting study for a nuclear power 

plant in this province a few years ago, I would imagine that they 

would familiarize themselves with the process surrounding the 

approvals for such an operation in any province. 

 

It is the most onerous environmental assessment process of any 

industry in this country. It is done with the Canadian Nuclear 

Safety Commission. There’s also Saskatchewan environmental 

assessments that would be done. It’s anywhere between a 6- to 

10-year process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague has already said today, nothing 

will advance in this province unless our environment is 

protected along with that development, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, having read that report, and 

I’m sure the minister has as well, she’ll know this information 

I’m going to provide now. 

 

A 2007 State of the Watershed Report, published by the 

Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, indicates that all six of the 

watersheds along the proposed route are considered to be either 

stressed or impaired. One has to wonder what the impact would 

be of 156 000 litres of water per minute being drawn from the 

watershed already described as stressed. 

 

To the Minister of Environment: has her department conducted 

an analysis of the potential impact of a nuclear power plant on 

these watersheds? And what is she prepared to do if that 

analysis finds that it would place a significant further strain on 

the watershed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as the feasibility study 

from Bruce Power was released only a few days ago, I can tell 

the member opposite that considering that proposal in the last 

four days, we have not done the assessment and there is no 

proposal for a development in this province. But as I said, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the most onerous environmental assessment 

process in the country for any industry, and nothing will be 

done in this province unless the environment is uppermost, that 

the environment is going to be safe through this process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I have to say that the member’s questions last week about 

our environmental assessment processes in this province, that 

work is done by the amazing men and women within my 

ministry. And if she’s questioning their ability to fulfill their 

job, then she should just say so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The only questions I have, Mr. Minister, are of 

the minister’s ability, not the people that are working in the 

department, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cost of decommissioning these types of 

developments is a factor that often gets overlooked. This 

province has learned some painful lessons over the years of the 

consequences of ignoring this issue. Bruce Power has an 

arrangement with Ontario Power Generation, or OPG, that 

allows them to hand over title and liability for all the spent 

reactor fuel — which is the waste — in exchange for a fee. 

Ontario is then left with the responsibility of disposing of the 

spent fuel. 

 

To the Minister of Environment: since this issue is not dealt 

with in the so-called feasibility report from Bruce Power, has 

the government determined who will be responsible for the cost 

of decommissioning? And who will be responsible for the 

storage and disposal of the spent fuel or waste? 

 



December 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, there are obviously some 

huge divisions within the NDP as to the prospect of nuclear 

energy in this province. And as I have stated earlier, I’m not 

sure what part of this process the member opposite does not 

understand. This can take up to 10 years for the environmental 

assessments to be done. And if we as a province are not 

satisfied that our environment is going to be protected, it will 

not proceed. 

 

But I would also point out to the member opposite as she 

addresses the divisions within her own party, that her 

soon-to-be new leader, Dwain Lingenfelter, said this of nuclear 

energy in our province: “If Tommy Douglas were here, it would 

be exactly what he would be doing,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. Order. The member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — The Saskatchewan Party appointed an advisory 

panel to advise the government on the nuclear industry 

development. The minister who made the announcement 

recently told his Sask Party convention, and I quote: “The 

purpose of this particular lobby is not to advise us whether we 

should proceed in the full nuclear cycle. It is to help us 

understand how we can best do that.” So we know the 

minister’s bias. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Uranium Development Partnership includes 

three people with connections either to Bruce Power or to its 

owners. So three of the people who are supposed to be giving 

independent advice to government are now obvious proponents 

of a single particular project. 

 

To the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation: what does he 

intend to do about this obvious conflict of interest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for that question. This is a question that seems to 

divide the NDP right down the middle. However, we on this 

side are on the side of Saskatchewan. Those members over 

there, Mr. Speaker, are going to have to ask themselves what 

side are they on. 

 

It’s not a realistic or honest energy strategy to be against all 

kinds of energy. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the members to allow the 

minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — To quote the next leader of the NDP 

Party, Mr. Dwain Lingenfelter, who is waiting for a date for his 

coronation, here is one of the things he said. He said this on 

November 9, 2008 to the CBC. He said, “It’s got to do with 

what’s best for the economy and the environment at this 

moment.” 

 

That’s what he said that day. Do you want to hear what he said 

on October 26, 2005? That day, Mr. Speaker, he said, “If 

Tommy Douglas were here, it would be exactly what he would 

be doing.” 

 

And on June 4, 2008, Dwain Lingenfelter said, “It’s not a 

perfect energy, but compared to any other form, it will have a 

big role in the future of our society and [our] economy.” And it 

likely will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — We’re not divided on standing up for the 

people of this province and asking questions of this government 

and their ham-handed ability to manage this file. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we can all agree the province 

needs a fair and balanced analysis of this issue. One of the 

minister’s hand-picked panel members has demonstrated his 

fair and balanced approach to this issue by stating, and I quote, 

“People who don’t want to live near nuclear facilities should 

probably move.” 

 

Does the minister share this fair and balanced approach and can 

we expect this to be one of the recommendations coming out of 

his panel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I wonder 

who that member is questioning. Dr. Richard Florizone, a 

nuclear physicist? Is it Armand Laferrere from Toronto, of 

Areva? Is it Duncan Hawthorne, the nation’s foremost provider 

of nuclear power? Is it Alex Pourbaix, TransCanada Energy? Is 

it Jim Hallick from Sturgis, Saskatchewan? Is it Neil Collins 

from the IBEW? Is that who you’re questioning? 

 

How about Dr. Ted Mathie? How about Allan Earle from 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]? 

How about Dr. Patrick Moore? How about that? Is that who that 

member is questioning, Mr. Speaker? Keith Brown . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister to 

complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Grandey from Cameco, head office in 

Saskatoon. Or is it Ray Ahenakew from the Saskatchewan 

Indian Institute of Technology? Which one of those 

hand-picked members is that member questioning, Mr. 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2008 

Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is very clear that 

the proposed location of the Bruce reactor, the zone which is 

proposed to be home to the Bruce reactor, will include 

significant First Nations territory. If for instance the reactor 

were to be built in Lloydminster, there’d be significant Onion 

Lake First Nations territory affected. We’re aware that 

conversations have happened between Bruce Power and some 

First Nations. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind government that the duty to 

consult and accommodate is a duty that falls to the provincial 

government — not to the proponent, but to the provincial 

government. Therefore my question is to the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations: how does this government plan to 

provide the duty to consult and accommodate on this specific 

project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite, 

we have the opportunity to engage the First Nations first-hand 

upfront on this issue and we’ve been really pleased to hear what 

Chief Joseph has been talking about. He said he wants to be 

involved in this. He wants to have the opportunity to have First 

Nations involved in a new type of energy, where actually they 

can be consulted right from the very beginning. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear that we have a member 

from the First Nations on this very important council, and their 

voice is going to be heard from the very beginning. Because we 

need First Nations to be involved in the economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely clear that the First 

Nations want to be part of this process. The question to the 

minister was, how does this government plan to attack the issue 

of the duty to consult and accommodate? Now we heard no 

answer, but that’s typical on this file again in the House this 

afternoon. We’ve had questions to ministers and no answers. 

 

So I’m going to try, Mr. Speaker, to get some clarity. What 

we’ve heard from the ministers is a good bit of politic. I’d like 

to get from the Premier then some clarity on some of these 

questions. When the Minister of Enterprise was asked on 

Thursday of last week, would there be any public investment or 

taxpayer involvement in this project, he said all the options are 

on the table. 

 

My question therefore to the Premier is: will he today 

categorically provide to the people of Saskatchewan an 

assurance that there will be no public investment in this project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question. Certainly all options could be on the 

table, supposing we ever get to the stage of building anything, 

member. Right from CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] doing it; a CIC-government partnership; a 

CIC-private sector partnership; design, operate, build by the 

private sector; or any combination of those possibilities. 

 

We’re a long ways from laying out the financing model for this 

thing yet. We have years of environmental study to do . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And I know that the member says, 

why not. Well we do things differently on this side. We’re 

guided by what’s in the interest of the province, not our 

socialist philosophy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I give the minister this. He’s 

repeating in the House today what he said to the public through 

journalists last week, that all options are on the table, which 

opens the door very clearly to public involvement, public 

investment. 

 

And yet isn’t this a strange double standard, Mr. Speaker? 

Because when it comes to the forestry sector in our province, 

this government can be absolutely categorical in no public 

investment. 

 

So my question then is not to the minister, it is to the Premier 

— it is to the Premier. Let him today be very clear. Will there 

be, can there be public investment, public taxpayer involvement 

in a reactor project built by Bruce Power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for that 

question. And I hope we also have some questions and some 

debate to ensue about what’s happening in our country today 

vis-à-vis the federal government situation. But I’ll answer the 

question in this way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is proceeding with electrical 

generation in Saskatchewan as the previous government did. 

The previous government engaged private sector generation in 

the case of SunBridge, which was private wind energy 

generation which SaskPower purchased. 

 

We are also proceeding with public generation, public 

investment in generation. That’s under way today as SaskPower 

is investing directly in natural gas generation. 

 



December 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

So when it comes to nuclear power or wind power or solar 

power or natural gas power, there are a number of options 

available to our government that that government when they 

were in office pursued, and that is public-private partnerships, 

as they did in the case of SunBridge, and it’s also wholly 

owning the generation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whatever we do is going to be in the interests of 

Saskatchewan people, in the interests of growing the economy, 

of low cost for electricity for our consumers, and environmental 

sustainability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Premier, we need no instruction on how 

we worked to create wind-generated electricity in this province. 

 

Now this is a very interesting, I think, and telling response from 

the Premier. He now too has left the door wide open for public 

investment, for taxpayers’ dollars to go into a Bruce or some 

other reactor proposal that’s privately owned. So let us try and 

define this. 

 

Is the Premier then willing to come to the plate with public 

dollars if and when the construction has a cost overrun? 

 

Is the Premier willing to come to the plate with public dollars 

when the question of the disposal of the waste is required? 

 

Is the Premier willing to come to the plate when, about 20 years 

down the road, 20 to 25 years, the machine needs to be 

refurbished and rebuilt? Will there be public dollars? 

 

And ultimately, Mr. Speaker, when this reactor needs to be 

decommissioned, will there be public dollars or will these costs 

be borne by the private developer who will reap the profits? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member just in 

the preamble to his question said, if the government — a 

hypothetical question — if the government were to make an 

investment, partner with a supplier of nuclear energy that was 

privately owned, would that be justified? Well, Mr. Speaker, if 

the government’s going to participate, as it is now with respect 

to natural gas generation, that’s a publicly owned utility. 

 

In the case of the wind generation that his government 

undertook, they partnered with a private sector company, 

provided the transmission, worked with those private sector 

suppliers — a company that was the product of Suncor and 

Enbridge. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

the hon. member from Nutana says, well that’s just one 

example. Well it goes precisely to the heart of the question that 

we’re dealing with here. Public utilities can partner with the 

private sector, purchase electricity. They can wholly own the 

utility to generate electricity. Our government will . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I call the members to order. The 

Premier will be allowed to complete his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 

know that the government backed away from private 

partnership after their wind experience, even though it was a 

positive one. 

 

As for our side of the House, we seek safe, reliable, low-cost 

energy that’s environmentally sustainable that will also, Mr. 

Speaker, mean that this provincial economy here in 

Saskatchewan will continue to grow now and for decades into 

the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

New Security Measures for 

Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are all aware of the tragic event that 

took place on a Greyhound bus in Manitoba in June of this year. 

This was a random event, Mr. Speaker, and STC [Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company] has had a long, safe, reliable history 

of courteous service. Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, as minister, I 

immediately asked the company to review its existing security 

measures and to examine options for enhancing security for 

STC’s passengers. 

 

Today I am pleased to advise members of the Assembly 

concerning the outcome of that review. STC officials undertook 

consultations, the most important being with the drivers and 

other staff of the company. Members of the Amalgamated 

Transit Union participated in the review, and a number of the 

measures that I am announcing today are recommendations 

made by those individuals. 

 

For decades passengers have relied on the professionalism of 

STC drivers to ensure their safety. STC will continue to focus 

on its drivers for passenger security and will be putting 

additional tools in place to help those drivers and have security 

throughout the province. 

 

Starting today and extending over the next four months, the 

following measures will be implemented. Interior and exterior 

cameras will be installed in all buses that are not currently so 

equipped. To improve visibility of the passenger compartments 

by drivers, larger rear-view mirrors and improved interior 

lighting will be installed in all coaches. Larger Plexiglas shields 

will be installed to physically protect drivers and allow them 

time to address any emergencies that may arise. All buses will 

be equipped with global positioning devices with emergency 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2008 

alert capability. With the push of a single button, police and 

other assistance can be dispatched to the precise location of a 

bus anywhere in the province. Drivers will have the explicit 

authority, to be used at their discretion, to restrict carry-on 

baggage and to inspect passengers and their carry-on baggage. 

Drivers will be given additional training to better identify 

potential security problems, how to diffuse difficult situations, 

and self-defence training. 

 

The foregoing are what might be called visible measures. I am 

sure members of the Assembly will recognize that in order to 

protect the integrity of overall security measures, not all details 

of the measures will be publicly released. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with the collaborative way in which 

these new measures were developed. They are practical, 

common sense improvements that are tailored to the 

circumstances in Saskatchewan. Furthermore the measures will 

cost the relatively modest amount of $260,000 for one-time 

capital investments, and an ongoing amount of $60,000 

annually for the GPS [Global Positioning System] service and 

staff training. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time may I commend STC’s professional 

drivers and management for this timely and thorough review. 

Your professionalism is very much appreciated. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to start out by thanking the minister for providing me a copy of 

his remarks early this afternoon. I appreciate them. 

 

This is really a good news announcement and a very positive 

announcement on behalf of STC, particularly in the light of the 

tragic events that took place on a Greyhound bus in July earlier 

this year. 

 

I’m glad to see the STC is recognizing the need to provide 

utmost safety for its riders, and I think it’s also very important 

that we not only provide those safety opportunities but provide 

the perception of safety so that the riders of STC in 

Saskatchewan here will know that they are safe when they’re 

riding an STC bus, and they can relax and enjoy the STC 

experience. There’s no doubt that STC has had a long history of 

safe, reliable, and courteous service, and much of that is due to 

the professionalism of the STC drivers and their quality of 

service that they provide on an ongoing basis. 

 

The improvements to the safety factor that is announced by the 

minister, whether it be the interior or exterior cameras, whether 

it be the adding of larger mirrors for the drivers to be able to see 

the entire bus and the interior lights to improve the safety 

factors there, the Plexiglas shield to protect the drivers — these 

are all very good measures, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to 

really highlight what I think is an outstanding improvement by 

STC is the addition of the GPS or the global positioning 

devices. There was a news story not too long ago out of 

northern Manitoba where a bus had some mechanical 

difficulties and found itself broke down in a very isolated area 

of the province, and I believe the riders and passengers on that 

bus spent some 20 or 24 hours in a very cold bus and a very 

dangerous situation could have arose. 

 

So this is certainly, certainly great news I think for STC to 

provide this type of emergency services. After all we are 

entering into a Saskatchewan winter, and we know 

Saskatchewan winters can be pretty severe at times too. So if 

there was an incident such as a bus breaking down in an 

isolated area, that help would be readily available. And I think 

that is very good news. 

 

So I just want to congratulate STC on this announcement, and I 

think STC is providing once again a very positive opportunity 

for people to enjoy the ridership of the STC, but also providing 

the opportunity for providing that ridership, not only now but 

into the very foreseeable future. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Indian and Métis Relations. 

 

Support for the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to tell the 

Assembly about another positive step we are taking to improve 

the lives of the Métis people in our province. 

 

The relationship between this new Saskatchewan government 

and the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan is strong and 

co-operative. With limited human and financial resources, it’s 

impossible for the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan to effectively 

engage government, its 12 regions across Saskatchewan, its 

more than 100 Métis locals, the Métis citizens, and industry to 

discuss consultations and other strategic interests. 

 

That is why our government is today providing a $200,000 

grant to the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan in response to 

government-initiated duty obligations. Our government has had 

a positive working relationship with the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan, and we depend on their input in many areas 

including our draft consultation framework and the ongoing 

dialogue regarding the duty to consult. Building capacity is a 

priority of our government, and it is in this spirit that we are 

making this investment. 

 

In addition to the $200,000, our government has also provided 

other supports for the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. The 

organization received $35,000 for the roundtable conference on 

First Nation and Métis consultation and accommodation in 

2008-2009. The First Nations and Métis Relations also has a 

budget of $385,000 for the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan for 

the 2008-2009 provincial budget for tripartite and bilateral 

processes. 

 

Our government has also provided two separate $50,000 grants 

for consultation to the Northwest Saskatchewan Métis Council 

and to the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, Eastern Region No. 

3, for consultation. This is a total of $720,000 to support Métis 

people and their organizations. Our government looks forward 

to advancing our already vibrant relationship with the Métis 

Nation for the benefit of our whole province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 



December 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge the 

ministerial statement I have received from the Minister Draude. 

So thank you for providing this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Sorry. We’re new, eh? I mean, Mr. Speaker, so cut me a little 

slack. 

 

I would just like to comment about and acknowledge the 

funding that’s been provided to the Métis Nation — and being a 

Métis person and proud of it — and a lot of work that has to go 

on and that is required by the MNS [Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan] to do the business that needs to be done for 

Métis people of this province representing them. 

 

I know there was a press release put out by the critic for First 

Nations and Métis Relations, also with the two, I guess, Métis 

oppositional members put out a press release demanding and 

calling on the government to the need to increase the funding to 

the MNS so the area directors and the MNS could do the 

business that they were asked to do on behalf of the people that 

elected them. So I guess I just want to acknowledge the 

increased funding. It’s good for the Métis people. It’s a start, in 

light of the huge surplus we have. I think there’s a new budget 

coming up. I’m hoping that this will bring up their funding and 

bring more funding. 

 

So at this time I just want to acknowledge the money and again 

the efforts of the minister, and hopefully those continued 

positive efforts and more funding will assist the Métis to go on 

and do the business that’s asked of them, the MNS, to do. 

 

And I guess we know that the election’s over with the MNS and 

everything else. Everything’s running smooth. They’re moving 

in a very positive way; they’ve shown that. And I think at this 

time we hope that in April, the new budget, they will have the 

adequate funding that they need to do the business of the Métis 

people of this province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Contributing to the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Games 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I 

made an announcement on behalf of Tourism, Parks, Culture 

and Sport regarding a commitment our province is making to 

the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Games taking place in 

Vancouver. 

 

The location for the Olympics may be Vancouver, Mr. Speaker, 

but the games are truly going to be Canada’s games. And with 

the Olympics being hosted by our neighbour just two doors 

away, we have once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to stage this event 

and to build pride in our province at the same time. As a leader 

in the new West, Saskatchewan is going to play a contributing 

role in the games, and we are going to have a very visible 

presence there for the world to see. 

 

In June Premier Wall signed a memorandum of understanding 

with VANOC, the Vancouver organizing committee, that 

formulized our agreement to work co-operatively with VANOC 

to profile and promote the best of our athletic and artistic talent 

in the 2010 games. I am proud to announce that today we 

signed on as an official contributing province with the 2010 

Olympic and Paralympic Games. This agreement will allow 

Saskatchewan a greater participation and visibility at the 

world’s most beloved and prestigious sports event. As a 

contributing province, we are committing, as other provinces 

have already done, to do our fair share in making Canada’s 

games the best that has ever been held anywhere in the world. 

 

Saskatchewan will contribute $1.5 million to VANOC, and in 

return we will receive a number of benefits for our province. 

Half of the $1.5 million investment, or $750,000, will go 

towards Own the Podium program. This is a national program, 

Mr. Speaker, to support Canadian athletes in their preparation 

for the games and to assist them in gaining success at the 

podium. $187,500 will offset the cost of our involvement in the 

cultural Olympiad. This will allow us to showcase our diverse 

culture to the world, and it will increase exposure and 

commercial opportunities for our artists. 

 

Among other benefits we are entitled to, we are now able to 

highlight our province through a dedicated Saskatchewan Day. 

We will also have access to the Vancouver 2010 logo, the 

provincial athlete recognition program, and increased business 

opportunities. Through these avenues, we will showcase 

Saskatchewan products and services, our investment 

opportunities, and our tourism and business potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Canadians, we all share in the feeling of pride 

at what we will accomplish at hosting this event for the world, 

and we will all share in the multiple legacies that will endure 

for many years to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is good news for 

Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan people, for Saskatchewan 

athletes. We have an obligation to participate in the Olympics 

with Canada and all of our provinces and territories because we 

are going to host the world in a few short months. I guess it’s 

only about 14 or 15 months from now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us remember the Expo in Vancouver 22 

years ago when Saskatchewan had a very high profile and 

provided a welcome to people from around the world. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my hope that we will again showcase the arts of 

Saskatchewan whether it’s the performing arts or the visual arts 

— dance, music, theatre, all of those things — as well as the 

athletes of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now at this point many athletes are trying to qualify so that 

they can participate in the Olympics, and some of the money 

that’s announced today will go to assist those special athletes 

that are going to make it into the Olympics. Mr. Speaker, I have 

to say that I have a special interest in this because my nephew, 

Nils Lokken, is working very hard to qualify as a cross-country 

skier. And we all hope to have him there in 2010. But if he 

doesn’t make then, well he’ll be trying for the next one. 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2008 

But I think there are quite a number of Saskatchewan people 

who are in that category, but most of us will be in the category 

of being proud to be Canadians and proud to be from 

Saskatchewan. And I know that all of the athletes and the artists 

and the performers and the people of Saskatchewan will want to 

be part of this event, and show our pride in Saskatchewan. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions no. 133 to 135. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 133 to 135 tabled. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 64 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 64 — The 

Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to be able to have the opportunity this afternoon to rise 

and make some short comments on the amendments that are 

proposed for The Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know myself and my colleagues, we have read 

through the legislation, through the explanatory notes. I’ve 

taken the time to look at the comments that have been made in 

the House by the minister as well as by my colleagues, and I 

know that we on this side of the House have had a real concern 

as to the consultations that have been done on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will be well aware that throughout the 

municipal world in Saskatchewan there are a number of pieces 

of legislation that have an impact, and they have been divided 

into The Cities Act, into The Municipalities Act, and into The 

Northern Municipalities Act, and for a good reason. While we 

are all one province, we deal with many of the same situations. 

We have many similarities, but there are also flexibilities that 

are needed by the municipalities to deal with their unique 

circumstance — whether urban, rural, or northern. 

 

So when we’ve seen The Northern Municipalities Act come 

forward, we have taken the time to look at the changes, to do 

some analysis on them, and more importantly to make sure that 

the consultations have been done, and that the changes that are 

proposed are understood and agreed with by, most importantly, 

those that are in the northern municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a number of changes proposed 

here but I think, most importantly, it’s a more provincial system 

of assessment and allowing that province-wide assessment 

system to be put in place. 

 

I know that when The Cities Act and The Municipalities Act 

were changed a number of years ago to make changes for the 

’09 provincial reassessment, there were some concerns from the 

northern municipalities that they needed to have the 

consultations and the understanding and assurance that any 

changes made to The Northern Municipalities Act were 

appropriate for the situations in the North. 

 

And no matter how often we look at the various issues in an 

area of the province, there are always exceptions to those rules. 

So it’s always good to have the consultations, because I think 

we are often surprised by issues that may be brought up by 

folks that live in certain areas of the province. 

 

And I know in the northern municipalities there’s always issues 

of, what’s a seasonal property? What’s a permanent residence? 

What’s commercial? What may be only a seasonal commercial? 

And how they are defined, and how those assessments will 

affect those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spoke to a number of people. I know 

there have been meetings held and conversations held. And 

while we all share this understanding of a need for a 

province-wide assessment system, we all know that a 

one-size-fits-all doesn’t work. And we’re fairly comfortable that 

the changes proposed for The Northern Municipalities Act 

really have the options and the flexibility that are needed in the 

northern municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with the various discussions we’ve had, I’m 

more than comfortable to see this Bill move to committee 

where my colleagues will be able to ask the more detailed 

questions that are difficult to get answered otherwise. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Municipal Affairs that Bill 

No. 64, The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 

2) be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill’s referred to the Standing Committee 

on Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 



December 1, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

Bill No. 54 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 54 — The 

Vital Statistics Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 sur les services de l’état 

civil be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

rise and speak to the Bill to amend The Vital Statistics Act in 

our province. 

 

There may be a few members that will be staying in the 

Chamber a bit longer or a few people tuning in who, seeing 

another piece of relatively dry legislation — very important 

legislation, Mr. Speaker; no doubt very important legislation as 

was The Trustee Act, Mr. Speaker, very important legislation — 

may be tuning in or paying attention here in the Chamber 

because they expect that there might be another movie review. 

I’m not aware of the use of the vital statistics system in popular 

culture. And so I can advise anyone right off the top, Mr. 

Speaker, that I won’t be commenting on the role vital statistics 

has played in popular culture. Well I suppose if I had maybe 

given it a little bit of thought, I might have been able to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is, as I said in my opening remarks — 

somewhat jokingly, but not about this aspect — important 

legislation. And the keeping of this vital and properly named 

vital information, Mr. Speaker, is very important. It’s very 

important to individuals who are affected by it. It is an essential 

part of our personal record: where we were born, to whom we 

were born, and when. And of course, from that flows all types 

of rights and entitlements after a certain period of time has 

passed, so that even the timing of the record of the date of birth 

is vitally important. 

 

And we are learning more and more about the role that 

inheritance plays in one’s health, and maybe beyond what we 

had ever thought even a few years ago, Mr. Speaker. So this is 

information that’s vitally important — not to prolong too long 

the play on words, but vitally important — to the individual. It’s 

also very important to the society at large that we maintain this 

kind of information in aggregate so that we can properly plan 

around health care, around education, around other issues like 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As you can see from the Bill that I will probably be speaking to 

in a few moments — the consequential Act in respect to vital 

statistics — the keeping of vital statistics impacts upon any 

number of areas, particularly in the health care system and 

particularly around issues of birth and death. And those are 

dealt with in other pieces of legislation as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s important that this information be kept accurately, and it’s 

important that this information be kept well. It’s important to 

the individual, it’s important to our society, and it probably has 

an economic importance too, Mr. Speaker, but that would be 

secondary I think to the areas that I’ve already talked about. It’s 

important that it be kept accurately, and it’s important to be 

kept well, and it’s important that it be kept private when it’s 

appropriate that it be private, Mr. Speaker. 

And the impact of The Health Information Privacy Act, Mr. 

Speaker, in keeping people’s personal private information 

which is appropriately personal and private — and this 

legislature has had over the last couple of years an opportunity 

to discuss and debate what is appropriately private and what is 

appropriately public in the case of health information — but 

this type of information is as a rule when it applies to the 

individual, Mr. Speaker, most appropriately kept private. 

 

And when one moves to a system where it is largely recorded 

on paper and kept in files secured in government offices, it is 

maybe harder to recover, but it’s also harder to unintentionally 

release, Mr. Speaker, than when it is kept electronically. And so 

as we talk about now recording information that was recorded 

primarily on paper, now electronically, Mr. Speaker, we have 

reasons to be concerned that this be done properly and that we 

look at how this is being done. 

 

And we have had recent cases in the news about the release of 

this information because people did not appreciate what was on 

the material that they were putting out in the dump or a 

reselling or whatever, Mr. Speaker. So it’s very important that 

as we move from a paper file to an electronic file that we have 

confidence in who’s holding the information. 

 

And speaking for the New Democratic Party, we are very 

pleased that the government is expressing confidence in the 

Information Services Corporation to properly hold this 

information, to keep it private, and have it available to whom it 

should be available when it needs to be available, but to no one 

else, Mr. Speaker. And I think anyone who’s spoken on this Bill 

on this side of the House has expressed that same confidence 

that the government now has in ISC [Information Services 

Corporation]. 

 

And we are now willing to go over the Bill in detail, being 

satisfied that we, I think to a large extent, agree with the 

government on the principles that are being reflected in this 

legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion put forward by the Minister for Crown Corporations that 

Bill No. 54, The Vital Statistics Act, 2008 be now read the 

second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2008 

Bill No. 55 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 55 — The 

Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

rise on The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act. I 

had just recently concluded my remarks, very recently, on the 

companion Bill. And in those remarks I mentioned in passing 

the impact that changing how we keep vital statistics impacts 

across particularly the health care system. This Bill requires 

consequential amendment to The Cancer Agency Act; The 

Coroners Act, 1999; and The Funeral Cremation Services Act; 

The Health Information Protection Act, which I referred to in 

my comments on the previous Bill; The Local Authority 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I did want to comment on the 

importance of the protection of this private information and that 

as we make a significant change in how we keep it and how it 

becomes accessible and how we deliver the information when 

it’s supposed to be delivered, it’s important to keep in mind 

always the importance of protecting this information and 

making sure it’s not used for purposes, either intentionally or 

unintentionally, purposes for which it was not provided, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And Alexandre Dumas once said that imbeciles were preferable 

to rogues because at least rogues sometimes took a rest. And 

sometimes it’s more a concern of what the unintentional 

problems might be, what might happen through inadvertence or 

carelessness than what someone would do out of malice, Mr. 

Speaker. And so we have to protect ourselves both against — 

maybe more against — inadvertence and thoughtlessness than 

we do against malice. 

 

That said, I believe that the government understands those 

principles. And we are now prepared to send as well to 

committee The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 

2008. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Crown Corporations 

that Bill No. 55, The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2008 be now read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’ll be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow for the Standing Committees on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice as well as Human Services to meet this 

afternoon, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt this motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 to enable the work of committees to proceed. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:46.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1921 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1921 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1921 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1921 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1921 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1921 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1922 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1922 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1922 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1922 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World AIDS Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1922 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1923 

 Canada 55 Plus Games 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1923 

 Medal of Courage Awarded to Bengough Resident 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1923 

 2008 Saskatchewan Book Awards 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1924 

 Maidstone Group Home Society Nominated for Donner Award 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1924 

 School Closures 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1924 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Nuclear Power in Saskatchewan 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1924 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1925 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1926 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1926 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1927 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1928 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1928 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1928 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 New Security Measures for Saskatchewan Transportation Company 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1929 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1930 

 Support for the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1930 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1931 

 Contributing to the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Games 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1931 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1931 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1932 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 64 — The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1932 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1932 

 Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 sur les services de l’état civil 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1933 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1933 

 Bill No. 55 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1934 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 1934 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


