




















































Hansard: December 04, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 24A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 4, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1973 

 December 4, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I‟d like to welcome to the legislature two 

special people from my constituency — Nicholas and his 

mother, Denise Redman. Nicholas goes to school in Invermay 

and this fall Nicholas, one of 15 students from Canada, 28 from 

the world, went on a Cape Farewell expedition which raised 

awareness of environmental concerns in the Arctic. 

 

He spent two weeks on the ship. And Nicholas told me that the 

trip was a life-changing experience with the wildlife that he 

saw, the friends he made, and the landscape he travelled over. 

May I ask everyone in the Assembly to help me welcome 

Nicholas and his mom to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

the members of the Assembly, in your gallery is my wife, 

Leone. She‟s come and spent the week up here with me. She 

very seldom spends a lot of time as she wouldn‟t see me very 

often anyway. And she‟s come to take me home, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s a privilege for me to be able to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of this Assembly, seated in your gallery, 

some very special guests who have come a very long way — 

come from the United Kingdom in fact — partially I think to 

visit their daughter, Sarah Mills, but probably mostly just to see 

question period here in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Brian and Eileen Mills have joined us here today. I think this is 

about now 30 years of their visiting our country and specifically 

our province, especially since their daughter who is a member 

obviously of the Saskatchewan legislative press gallery, 

especially since she moved here in 2003. I believe it was 

Brian‟s brother, John, the late John Mills, who was a principal, 

a very, very well regarded and highly respected principal at 

Preeceville and was known to people close to those of us on the 

government benches. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so the Mills family has contributed greatly to 

the province of Saskatchewan already through John and his 

family at Preeceville, and now Sarah. And we‟re also 

welcoming the tourism and the commerce of Sarah‟s folks, 

Brian and Eileen, as they visit again. So we want to welcome 

them to the Assembly and wish them a very merry 

Saskatchewan Christmas. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

would like to introduce to this Assembly my son Morgan who is 

in your west gallery. Now Morgan actually works in the 

building here, but very seldom he comes down to watch the 

proceedings. And I would like to tell you that he‟s a bit of a 

chip off the old block — at 24 years old, he‟s already going 

bald. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce him to his 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, it‟s my pleasure this morning, 

members, to introduce to . . . Order. I‟d like to ask for 

members‟ indulgence to also recognize a gentleman who‟s 

joined us this morning, served a long time in this Legislative 

Assembly, long-time Hansard employee, will be retiring this 

Friday — Mr. Keith Foster. He‟s retiring after 27 years of 

faithful service. 

 

He joined the Hansard team on January 23, 1982, way back 

when editors used electronic typewriters and audio was 

recorded on large reel-to-reel tapes. In almost 27 years at 

Hansard, Keith has seen many changes; however, the qualities 

of a good Hansard editor remain the same and Keith embodies 

them all. He has been a significant contributor to the Hansard 

team, bringing his love of language, his attention to detail, his 

conscientious editing. Most significantly, Keith has always 

taken pleasure in working for the Assembly and helping his 

colleagues in meeting their deadlines while getting the words 

right. 

 

Keith‟s enthusiasm for Hansard and for the Assembly has made 

him a valuable colleague and his fellow Hansardians will miss 

him. 

 

Keith has many interests. He is a published poet and a short 

story writer as well as a stamp and photography enthusiast. He 

is looking forward to retirement so that he can spend more time 

on these passions. We all wish Keith well and that he will have 

a happy retirement. 

 

I ask Keith to stand and be acknowledged. And he also has 

some of his colleagues who have joined him this morning. And 

I ask members to welcome Keith Foster to the Assembly today 

and congratulate him upon his retirement. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 



1974 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

today to present a petition concerning the need to maintain 

quality health care services in our province, and issues dealing 

with quality health care services which include recruitment and 

retention, ensuring adequate staffing, adequate funding, and 

most importantly to many, collective bargaining in good faith. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed from citizens from 

Herbert, Gouldtown, Hodgeville, Morse, Kindersley — a 

number of pages — Swift Current, Shaunavon, Regina, Willow 

Bunch, Assiniboia, Mossbank, Moose Jaw, Rockglen, Flintoft, 

Limerick, Cardross, and Viceroy. Mr. Speaker, I so present on 

behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present a petition in support 

of indexing the minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, the minimum 

wage increases are often sporadic and do not always reflect the 

rising costs faced by minimum wage earners. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by residents of Moose 

Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon, Coronach, Weyburn, Midale, Estevan, 

Aberdeen, and Arcola. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to rise again 

today and present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan seniors. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan‟s senior 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary education. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students who are pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Saskatchewan 

Students‟ Union, the University of Regina Students‟ Union, and 

the First Nations University of Canada Students‟ Association. I 

so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence 

Against Women 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1991 parliament 

proclaimed December 6 as the National Day of Remembrance 

and Action on Violence Against Women. This day is a time to 

recall the tragic deaths of 14 promising young engineering 

students killed at École Polytechnique in Montreal on 

December 6, 1989. This infamous day is a horrific example of 

the all-too-familiar reality for many Canadian women who 

suffer at the hands of others. 

 

Each of us has the power and responsibility to speak out against 

violence and help to create a world where people can build their 

lives without the threat of violence. 

 

The YWCA [Young Women‟s Christian Association] of 

Canada is one organization working to fight violence with the 

Rose Button campaign, reminding us that violence against 

women is a social issue that impacts us all. The White Ribbon 

campaign is another way that the men in our lives can show 

their participation in the fight to eliminate violence against 

women. 

 

I ask that you join me in taking the time to think about the 

women who have died or gone missing, and of those who live 

daily with the spectre of violence hanging over them. I ask that 

we all work towards the day when the Rose Button and White 

Ribbon campaigns are no longer necessary, when no woman 

has to fear. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1975 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Questions from Students 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, during Education Week I was 

invited to participate as a guest reader in Ms. Elsbeth 

Dormuth‟s grades 5 to 7 Read to Succeed class at 

Confederation Park Community School. After reading to the 

class, I asked the students what they were presently working on, 

and they told me they were studying politics in Canada and the 

provinces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Friday, November 21, the class put in writing 

their personal interests, future aspirations, their thoughts, ideas, 

and questions, and forwarded this in a letter to my constituency 

office. Mr. Speaker, the students are glued to the TV in their 

classroom this morning watching the Assembly, and I want to 

tell you that I have been assigned some homework. The 

homework comes in the form of some questions which they 

want answered and which I will now share with the Assembly. 

 

From Seabaschien: what is the job of the Premier? Kyle: how 

come Saskatchewan is the richest province today? Bryce: who 

chooses when and how to fix our roads? Kyla: why does the 

Queen decide who the Lieutenant Governor is? Austin: why 

should I stay in Saskatchewan when I get older? Leah: why 

does the Prime Minister ride in a limousine? And finally, Ms. 

Dormuth: where does the province get money from to run 

hospitals and schools? 

 

The letter ends by telling me that “As we read and research 

more about Canada and its levels of governments, we will write 

and ask you more questions. We‟re looking forward to seeing 

you again.” Signed, Kyerra, Sierra, Josh, Cassie, Leah, Theresa, 

Kyla, Bryce, Austin, Seabaschien, Ayasha, Kyle, Ms. Dormuth, 

Ms. Beckstrand, and Mr. R. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in wishing 

these students the best in their futures, and again thanking Ms. 

Dormuth and her class for their enthusiasm and interest in our 

country and our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Wendel Clark Honoured 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In many Prairie 

towns, hockey continues to be the number one winter sporting 

activity. My home town of Kelvington is no exception. In fact 

this community of just 800 people proudly proclaims five native 

sons who have become NHL [National Hockey League] hockey 

players. One of them, Wendel Clark, was recently honoured by 

the Toronto Maple Leafs when his number 17 was raised to the 

rafters at the Air Canada Centre. 

 

Wendel was a defenceman with the WHL [Western Hockey 

League] Saskatoon Blades who converted to forward after his 

first-place pick in the 1985 NHL draft pick. He had three 

different stints with the Maple Leafs and is currently employed 

by the team as a community ambassador. 

 

Wendel captained the team from 1991 to 1994. During this time 

he was often referred to as Captain Crunch, not just because of 

his moustache, but also because of his very physical and intense 

style of hockey. 

 

At this special event at the Air Canada Centre, Wendel was 

quoted as saying that the two proudest moments of his hockey 

career was when he was drafted first overall by the Toronto 

Maple Leafs and, second, the day he was named captain. He 

sees this latest honour as his official hat trick. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Wendel has not only made a name for himself in 

the hockey world, he is fondly remembered by his home 

community. Wendel has never forgotten his grassroots and the 

people that encouraged him in his hockey career. For years he 

coached at the summer hockey school in Kelvington. He signed 

jerseys, and they‟ve been favourites at many auction sales, 

raising hundreds of dollars for the community facilities, 

organizations, and families. 

 

The community of Kelvington is proud of their hockey son, and 

we congratulate Wendel on his new honour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

Support for Women Victims of Violence 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, at this time of year when everyone 

is busier because of the season, there are people and 

organizations who still dedicate themselves to making Regina a 

safer and compassionate community. One such initiative is the 

Leader-Post Christmas Cheer Fund. For the 16th consecutive 

year, every penny donated will provide much needed funds for 

four Regina shelters — Transition House, the YWCA‟s Isabel 

Johnson Shelter, Wish House, and Sofia House. To date, $1.1 

million has been raised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, violence against women is a sad reality that far too 

many are dealing with. Too often children are witnesses to the 

violence. It was only last Friday that a female friend of mine 

appeared bruised and battered on the left side of her face, and 

that was only what was visible. The psychological impact is 

much more severe. She is fortunate in that she has had many 

offers of shelter and assistance; however, others require the 

services that our Regina shelters provide. It is essential that the 

shelters have the means to be able to accept the women and 

children when they require assistance. 

 

December 6 also marks another solemn occasion when a lone 

gunman entered École Polytechnique and told the women to 

leave and then shot the remaining women. In the end he killed 

14 women simply because they were women. 

 

As a society we have much work to do in raising awareness 

about violence against women and finding better methods to 

protect them when there is a risk of harm. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 

of my colleagues to commend the dedication of the Leader-Post 

Christmas Cheer Fund and also those who make contributions 

and assist women and children when they have the courage to 



1976 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

escape an environment of violence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 

 

Kindersley Wins Seat Belt Challenge 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

residents of Kindersley have been rewarded for buckling up. As 

part of its commitment to reduce deaths and injuries on 

Saskatchewan roads, SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] ran the seat belt challenge in the Heartland Health 

Region. 

 

The challenge is a community-driven project designed to 

improve seat belt use in the province, which includes roadside 

activities and community-based events. In April, students‟ 

groups conducted roadside observation surveys in each of the 

communities to measure seat belt usage rates at the beginning 

of the challenge and did the same again in September. The 

survey results were very positive, with all communities 

participating achieving an increase in seat belt usage over the 

months of the challenge. 

 

I am pleased to say that Kindersley is being presented with 

$50,000 first place award from SGI for increasing their seat belt 

usage by an amazing 14 per cent. It‟s now up to Kindersley 

Town Council to decide which roadside safety improvements 

will receive priority for this funding. With the success of the 

Heartland project, SGI plans to continue the seat belt challenge 

in 2009. 

 

I‟d like to congratulate the people of Kindersley for keeping 

their safety top of mind, and urge all people of the province to 

follow their lead and buckle up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Christmas Greetings 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we prepare for the 

holiday season, a season of peace, of hope, and of time with 

those we hold most dear, it is important to remind ourselves of 

the spirit of the holidays. Though our nation is facing an 

economic crisis that has affected many across the globe, we are 

still very fortunate as Canadians. Many of us enjoy peace and 

comfort while other nations are ravaged by war, hunger, and 

disease. Many in this world live in lands where the threat of 

political violence is constant or where hostility is continuous. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, these are not circumstances that we are 

powerless to change. T.C. Douglas once said that: 

 

The shepherds who heard the message of „Peace on Earth‟ 

did not consider that to be a description of things as they 

were, but a vision of what they might be if we could learn 

to live together in a spirit of mutual goodwill and better 

understanding . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, Christmas is a glimpse; a glimpse of what the 

world can be. And for this reason it is important to gather 

together with loved ones and to observe the season in whatever 

our custom, to renew the pledge of goodwill to all. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and to all members, happy holidays. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During this time 

when we celebrate the birth of Christ with family and friends 

and remember those who are no longer with us, I would like to 

acknowledge some of the blessings that we have received this 

past year. 

 

Saskatchewan has been blessed with financial prosperity and 

resources. At a time of year when many people are surrounded 

by an abundance of food and gifts, our government has made 

many announcements in the past several months that ensures 

that seniors and vulnerable families and individuals share in this 

prosperity and are not forgotten. It is both an honour and a 

privilege to work with and for the people of Saskatchewan 

during my first year as an elected member of this Assembly. 

Together we can build a strong and stable province with a life 

that is better for everyone. 

 

Novelist Oren Arnold once suggested that some of the best 

Christmas gifts are forgiveness for an enemy, tolerance for an 

opponent, an open heart to a friend, setting a good example for 

children, treating yourself with respect, service to the public, 

and charity to all. 

 

I believe that it is these gifts combined with the gifts of strong 

relationship with family and friends that are true blessings in 

our lives. These blessings not only serve us now but throughout 

the entire year. We would like to wish all of the people in our 

province our very best wishes for the holiday season, and safe 

travels into the new year. May peace, fellowship, and blessings 

be with you all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 

a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] interview 

yesterday, the president of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association said cattle numbers in the past year have dropped 

dramatically, and he‟s worried that the decline in numbers is far 

from over. 

 

Cattle numbers are declining significantly under this 

government, and they‟re refusing to provide any assistance. So 

to the Minister of Agriculture: the minister is sitting on $2 

billion in surplus. He‟s had an opportunity to help those 

producers, and he‟s done nothing. Why is this minister and his 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1977 

government turning their backs on the livestock industry in our 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, being the last day of session, I‟d like to remind the 

member of a number of things this party has done in one short 

year compared to the record of their record for 16: Mr. Speaker, 

crop insurance review, we‟re improving crop insurance; 

AgriStability administration coming home to Saskatchewan; 

farm and ranch water program infrastructure; gopher rebate 

program; fully funding AgriStability; hog TAP [targeted 

advance payment] 2007-2008 program; hog and cattle loan, $90 

million. Now we‟ve deferred the principle on those loans for 

one year. We‟re improving extension services, increasing 

revenue sharing to RMs [rural municipality], increased oil and 

gas compensation, and a Crown land sale program, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In one year we‟ve done more than that opposition party did in 

16 years of government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, livestock producers in this 

province are desperate. The bills are coming in and credit is 

tight. Many producers advise us that they won‟t be able to meet 

their commitments. The programs that the minister refers to will 

be of no use to livestock producers who have been backed into 

a corner and forced to sell out because of that government‟s 

lack of action. 

 

Livestock producers don‟t need more debt, and they certainly 

don‟t want the minister giving them more speeches on what he 

hasn‟t done for them. They need an immediate cash injection. 

Will the minister finally take some action and provide for 

livestock producers that cash assistance that they need before 

it‟s too late? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the member‟s 

information, if she checks cattle prices from last fall, when they 

just finished government and we just came in, the cattle prices 

today, actually some of the cattle prices are higher today than 

they were a year ago. Did I notice in their campaign literature 

last fall anything for the livestock sector? No, we didn‟t. And, 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to education tax rebate, they 

absolutely didn‟t even include it for livestock producers in this 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that member‟s been on the record a number 

of occasions saying have you called your federal counterpart, 

have you talked to him. Well, Mr. Speaker, that NDP [New 

Democratic Party] opposition is propping up a coalition that is 

going to do absolutely nothing — nothing, Mr. Speaker. What 

does she think they‟ll do next week if the federal government 

changes? I‟ll get on the phone, I‟ll call Ottawa, and I‟ll ask for 

Jack and Gilles. Do you think they‟ll have much sympathy for 

the livestock producers in Saskatchewan? I don‟t think so, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday a 73-year-old rancher 

contacted me. That rancher has spent $250,000 out of his 

AgriInvest fund, and he‟s spent over $550,000 of his life 

savings. He‟s lost $800,000 in equity. I can tell the member, 

that rancher could care less about what‟s happening in Ottawa. 

He wants some help now because he can‟t pay his bills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — This government has the financial resources 

to stop this downhill spiral. What is that minister waiting for? 

What is that minister scared of? Why is he prepared to let the 

cattle industry and that 70-year-old rancher go down the tubes 

with his life savings? When is that minister going to do 

something on behalf of those livestock producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that member can 

get on her high horse and say why aren‟t we bailing out the 

livestock industry. But think for a minute what their record was. 

How quickly she forgets that rural Saskatchewan was totally 

ignored by that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, and the member says 

that producers in this province don‟t care what happens with the 

federal government. I take exception to that. I think they really 

care what happens in Ottawa because we need our federal 

government to also come to the plate and help cattle producers 

in this province. 

 

We‟ve put that ask in, Mr. Speaker. The federal Conservatives 

are talking about what they could do to help the industry. And 

the uncertainty that they‟re helping prop up does not do one 

thing for the cattle industry or rural Saskatchewan, for that 

matter, by propping up a coalition government in Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Government’s Performance 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of 

the more sensible things this government has done with the 

surplus left to them by the former New Democratic Party 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

government was to implement some tax cuts. But the problem, 

Mr. Speaker, the problem, Mr. Speaker, with the government‟s 

tax cut is that tax cut won‟t arrive till next April when income 

tax returns are filed. 

 

The fact of the matter is — and I think we all felt it yesterday 

— the wind chill was up, the temperature is down, and 

overnight furnaces in Saskatchewan have been running at full 

speed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government sits on a huge surplus that‟s been 

provided by energy resources. My question to the Premier 

today: why is it that the Sask Party government has missed the 

opportunity to help Saskatchewan families with high energy 

costs — energy costs which they raised 20 per cent — why 

have they missed this opportunity, with the resources they have, 

to help Saskatchewan families, seniors, low-income families, all 

families in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 

his question. I‟d point out though that if he left behind the $3 

billion surplus as he just claimed, then why didn‟t that 

government do anything for the cattle producers that the 

member for Nutana was just talking about? That would be an 

interesting answer to that question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is working very hard together 

with the people of this province to take the opportunities that 

have been presented to us in an unprecedented way in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

People in this province have told this government they want us 

to take the opportunity of a surplus to cut taxes. We‟ve done 

that. They‟ve said take this opportunity to pay down debt; 40 

per cent will be reduced off the debt in our first budget year, 

Mr. Speaker. They‟ve said take the opportunity to invest in 

infrastructure. They‟ve said take the opportunity to share it 

through the employment supplement, we did it six months ago. 

They said take the opportunity to increase rental supplements 

for Saskatchewan people, we did that six months ago, Mr. 

Speaker. They said, fix The Residential Tenancies Act; that was 

introduced this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s more work to be done, but this government 

is taking every single opportunity to work for and on behalf of 

the people of the province to create a stronger Saskatchewan 

and a better life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when the livestock industry was 

hit with the BSE [bovine spongiform encephalopathy] crisis in 

this province, we responded immediately with $55 million, Mr. 

Speaker. And when the cost of energy skyrocketed, we 

responded immediately to provide relief to Saskatchewan 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right next door in Alberta — a province that the 

Premier has much admiration for, and its government — right 

next door in Alberta, families in Alberta are receiving support 

from their Conservative government in terms of energy costs. 

As the member from Meewasin pointed out, families in Alberta 

are saving $27 a month because of the interest and the support 

of the Alberta government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier has an opportunity here today to 

reduce home heating costs right now for Saskatchewan families, 

not with benefits that may appear next April. My question again 

is to the Premier: will he today, as we now meet the onset of 

winter, will he provide SaskEnergy customers — both families, 

businesses, and communities — with a rebate like previous 

governments have done in this province and like the 

Government of Alberta is doing today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this government of the 

province of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan are 

not simply going to be satisfied with just trying to keep up with 

another province. They believe that it is Saskatchewan‟s turn to 

lead. They believe that Saskatchewan can do even a little bit 

better than the province next door. And that‟s why they support, 

Mr. Speaker, this government‟s move to reduce taxes after the 

changes are implemented, Mr. Speaker, and after they‟re 

approved by members of this House. And I hope that member 

will vote for those tax changes. 

 

Here is the fact of the matter: a family of four in the province of 

Saskatchewan will pay no provincial income tax until they 

make $41,300. How does that compare with Alberta? Well they 

start paying taxes at $36,325. 

 

When it comes to sharing prosperity with Saskatchewan people, 

we‟re not going to be number two. We‟re going to be number 

one. When it comes to the economic growth that we want for 

Saskatchewan, we‟re not going to be settling for number two. 

We want to be number one, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the vision of 

this government, and we invite, we invite the members opposite 

to join us and the people of the province in this new vision for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, having passed and received 

Royal Assent to the Premier‟s tax cuts yesterday, today is a 

chance for the Premier to show some leadership. Let‟s show a 

little leadership for support for our livestock industry. Let‟s 

show a little leadership to providing relief to Saskatchewan 

families with their energy costs. 

 

Now it may not be surprising, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government wants to raise the SaskEnergy rates and feels 

nervous about providing any support for energy in this 

province, given their Sask-first policy for the Crown 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

corporations — which policy, Mr. Speaker, is to sell off those 

profitable revenue centres of our Crowns, thereby transferring 

that source of revenue to the consumer in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. They say, Mr. Speaker, for example, they‟re going to 

sell Heritage Gas which returns revenues from natural gas 

outside of the province to the people of Saskatchewan. They say 

they‟re going to do that under this Sask-first policy. 

 

So my question to the Premier today is, why is this Sask Party 

government undermining the ability of our Crown utilities to 

provide reasonable rates, affordable rates to the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, well I thank the hon. member 

for the question. The answer in terms of this government‟s 

attention around the Saskatchewan-first policy for Crowns, I 

think, was provided with great clarity in an announcement that 

was made just last week when this government pointed out that 

because of that Saskatchewan-first policy, there would be $120 

million-plus investment in SaskTel. To do what, Mr. Speaker? 

To provide 100 per cent high-speed coverage for the province 

of Saskatchewan and 98 per cent coverage for cellphone 

coverage in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is 

the net result. That is the objective of the government with 

respect to Sask-first. 

 

But we didn‟t stop there this session, Mr. Speaker. We were 

busy in this session cutting taxes and reducing debt and fixing 

highways and expanding technology and improving the 

graduate retention program and helping renters, Mr. Speaker. 

We were busy this session fighting crime. We were busy 

ensuring, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the province, that the 

people of the province could enjoy a selection of better wine 

which stands in great contrast to the whine we get from the 

other side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before I recognize the next 

speaker for the question, I just want to remind members that 

while we‟re winding down the fall session, I think it‟s still 

appropriate to recognize the fact that the member placing the 

question and the minister responding do have the right to be 

heard and to listen to. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. If 

this government‟s handling of the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, thank you again. If this 

government‟s handling of the corrections system is an example 

of how they intend to deal with crime in the province, we have 

some things to be worried about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I was asking the Premier about his policy on the sell-off of 

the Crown assets. He indicates the policy is clear. Well it is 

clear at least to the editorial board of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 

when they wrote of this Sask-first policy quote, it is: “. . . like 

ordering Crown executive to employ meat tenderizer mallets on 

the companies until they are soft enough to be sold.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what we think is happening. They‟re going 

to soften up our Crown corporations by selling off the profitable 

pieces one by one, and they hope that this will soften up the 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟ll ask the Leader of the Opposition to 

be given the opportunity to place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you again. Thank you again, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And for the fourth time, thank you again, Mr. 

Speaker. If this Sask policy, if the Sask-first policy which is 

putting privatization first and Saskatchewan families last, if the 

Premier is arguing this is not the precursor to the privatization 

of our Crowns, then simply will he explain to the people of 

Saskatchewan why in the world would you sell off your 

profitable enterprises that are bringing revenues to the people of 

Saskatchewan, keeping our rates low and affordable, enabling a 

government in Saskatchewan to provide to its people the lowest 

cost bundle of utilities in Canada? Why is he doing it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think it was the 

previous government of the province that that member led, that 

pointed out when they announced the sale of the upgrader asset 

that belonged to the people of the province, when they 

privatized the upgrader, they said there are certain times when it 

is in the interests of the Government of Saskatchewan and 

taxpayers to move an asset to the private sector. 

 

The Sask-first policy means for the people of rural 

Saskatchewan that they‟re going to have 98 per cent coverage 

on their cellphones. The Sask-first policy, Mr. Speaker, means 

for the people of rural and urban and northern and southern 

Saskatchewan, they‟re going to have 100 per cent coverage with 

respect to the Internet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s what the policy means. That‟s the manifestation of it. 

And I dare say those people who are tired of dropped calls, who 

are tired of dial-up Internet are saying thank goodness for this 

policy. Thank goodness that this government is investing right 

here in the province of Saskatchewan, in addition to cutting 

taxes, reducing debt, investing in infrastructure, and ensuring 

there‟s an insurance policy that will stand this province in good 

stead for years to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, another good example in 

the very press conference and scrum which followed the 

conference announcing the expansion in SaskTel of high-speed, 

the Premier himself and the minister indicated clearly this was 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

but a continuation of the program and policy of the former New 

Democratic Party government. And we have supported them in 

the continuation and the building of that policy with, of course, 

financial resources left behind by the New Democratic Party 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the course of this session, we‟ve had some 

discussion about the process leading to a decision on the 

feasibility or unfeasibility of a private sector nuclear reactor in 

the province. Having reviewed some of these discussions, Mr. 

Speaker, I note that on June 17 — June 17, the day I believe 

this government announced the Bruce Power feasibility study 

— the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation said in no 

uncertain terms quote: 

 

This is not going to be built with taxpayer dollars or 

SaskPower fees. This is going to be built with private 

funds. 

 

Well how times have changed, Mr. Speaker. Just yesterday 

when they asked about the potential of taxpayer dollars . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d ask the Leader of the Opposition to place 

his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well we all know now, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government is quite willing to put taxpayer dollars into this 

project, so my question to the Premier is: what has changed? In 

five months, what has changed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just say this with 

respect to the SaskTel announcement. What I said that morning 

at the press conference was that I gave the government, the 

previous government, credit for having made some investment 

with respect to mobility coverage in our province. And I gave 

them credit for making an investment with respect to Internet 

investment in Saskatchewan. But the point was that the job was 

left undone, Mr. Speaker, that coverage was not universal in the 

province, and that it was our vision for complete connectivity. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, our government has undertaken to finish 

that job. 

 

There were many, many jobs that we inherited undone by the 

previous government. Roads that needed to be fixed, we are 

completing that job, Mr. Speaker. Taxes that needed to be cut, 

prosperity that needed to be shared — we are also completing 

that undone job, Mr. Speaker. Debt that needs to be reduced in 

the province. We‟re fixing up what was left behind by that 

previous government, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that those most 

vulnerable, those who are disabled, who wait on wait-lists, 

those who are seniors who‟ve been waiting for an increase in 

their low-income tax benefit — Mr. Speaker, all those jobs left 

undone. There‟s more work to do, Mr. Speaker, but here‟s the 

good news. This work is getting done. Saskatchewan is 

stronger, and we have a better life in the province for it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if I recall my question had to do 

of this Premier and this government‟s policy in terms of the 

financing of a nuclear reactor in the private sector. Unless I 

misheard the Premier, I don‟t believe that was anywhere in his 

answer. So perhaps I‟ll try again because we know, Mr. 

Speaker, we know by experience that there can be significant 

cost overruns in the building of a reactor. There can be 

significant refurbishing costs along the way. We know there are 

issues of waste disposal. We know there will be future costs for 

decommissioning. 

 

Back in June the minister responsible was indicating that there 

would not be a chance of public dollars going into the private 

sector reactor. This week, as recently as yesterday, the 

government seems to be wide open now to all of the options 

which clearly include a significant investment by the taxpayer 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So my question to the Premier again is what has changed in 

those five months from when the feasibility study was 

announced by the minister and a very clear position was stated, 

to what we‟re hearing today from this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for the question. You know, he was quoting from an earlier 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix editorial. There‟s one in today‟s paper, 

and the editorial board of The StarPhoenix today is quite 

critical, I think, of what we‟ve heard from members opposite 

and specifically the member that was just on his feet asking the 

question. 

 

I think there‟s an understanding in this province that, with 26 

per cent of the world‟s uranium production, we ought to be 

exploring uranium value-added opportunities. We ought to be 

very aggressively looking at opportunities for nuclear power 

because we know, Mr. Speaker, that in terms of CO2, it‟s a 

much more sustainable source of power than others dependent 

on fossil fuels. 

 

We‟ll have a long-term due diligence process, a chance for 

people to participate. This is a debate that is long overdue in the 

province and, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage members 

opposite to try to come to a position on energy issues. They‟ve 

got two positions with respect to oil sands — stop them; no, go 

ahead. They‟ve got two positions on nuclear power — stop it; 

no, go ahead. They‟ve had two positions on the Sask-first 

Crown policy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As much as I think Saskatchewan people are marking this 

session of progress in the Legislative Assembly, I wonder if 

they‟re asking themselves if the opposition over there can come 

to a conclusion, actually a position on important issues in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next question, I would 

also like to remind ministers that responses closer to the 

question would be greatly appreciated. I recognize the Leader of 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let 

me try and get a clear position from the Premier and the Sask 

Party government whose responsibility it is to have clear 

positions. I want to know why the double standard, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟ve got a double standard here. 

 

We‟ve got a government that says we will not invest Crown 

assets or energy resources in providing a rebate for families and 

people. We‟ve got a government that says we will not invest in 

the agricultural sector, in the cattle and livestock sector, even 

though we‟re seeing this dramatic drop of the herd in our 

province. We‟ve got a government that says unequivocally they 

will not invest in the forestry sector even though we‟ve seen 

now eight closures in that sector and hundreds of families out of 

their livelihoods. 

 

But we will invest, they say, we‟re quite, quite willing to invest 

in a private sector nuclear reactor. So my question to the 

Premier is why the contradiction? Why the double standard? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand perhaps why 

members opposite do not want to review this session. I think 

that perhaps some were expecting the Leader of the Opposition 

and the NDP would want to review the session. Maybe it‟s 

understandable that they don‟t want to do that because much 

progress was made, and I think the session exposed the fact that 

they have some major splits over there on that side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I would say to the hon. member, he asked this question two 

days ago. I‟ll answer it again. Our government, our government, 

and even in opposition, certainly never opposed the fact that the 

then government would have some wholly-owned, 

government-owned generation capacity, and that in some cases, 

as they did with wind power, that they would work with the 

private sector, Mr. Speaker. That‟s the position they held. It‟s 

the position we have, Mr. Speaker. We‟re going to do what‟s 

right for the province in terms of affordable energy that‟s 

environmentally sustainable, and that will help continue to grow 

this very dynamic economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier invites me to review 

this session. I‟m more than pleased to do so. Every sensible 

thing, every sensible thing this government has done within the 

course of this session has either been done on New Democratic 

policies or programs in place, with money left behind by the 

New Democratic Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now what we have seen, Mr. Speaker, is a 

session of two things — missed opportunities and messes being 

created in this province. They have missed an opportunity to 

provide support for families through their energy costs. They 

have missed an opportunity to support the forestry sector. They 

have missed an opportunity to support the livestock sector. 

They have missed an opportunity, by the way, to preserve 

protected lands in this province. 

 

And what they‟ve been about, Mr. Speaker, well it‟s a mess 

after a mess. We‟ve got a mess in the health care negotiations. 

We‟ve got health care workers coming to this legislature. Why? 

Because of their ill-advised, their ill-advised essential services 

legislation. We‟ve got a mess in the corrections system. It can 

only be described as a mess. 

 

The Speaker: — I call members to order and ask the member 

to place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — It can only be said they‟ve got a mess in the 

corrections system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will place my question. I will place my question. 

First of all I want to wish a very Merry Christmas to the 

Premier and to all members opposite. But my wish even more, 

Mr. Speaker, my wish even more is that he would take this 

coalition government of his, of liberals and conservatives and 

reformers, I wish he would take this Conservative government a 

little Christmas holiday and figure out before we come back 

here in the spring, one, how they are going to seize some of the 

opportunities they have; and number two, how they‟re going to 

start cleaning up the messes that they‟re making. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well let me say to my hon. friend, thanks 

for the most roundabout Christmas wishes that I‟ve ever 

received. But I reciprocate and wish him and all of his members 

a very Merry Christmas. And when we return, Mr. Speaker, in 

the spring, I know the debate will continue. But as for this 

session, Mr. Speaker, I guess we‟re going to agree to disagree 

because I think much progress has been made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this session saw the most single-year, historic tax 

cut in the history of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this session saw the largest 

reduction in debt in the history of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It has seen, now two times already, the 

largest infrastructure investment in the history of the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It has seen, Mr. Speaker, one of the largest 

single increases for those who need employment supplements in 

this province, six months ago, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve increased 

rental housing, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve added new police to the 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

streets of our province. There‟s help for renters in terms of The 

Residential Tenancies Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we moving in terms of exploring nuclear power. 

We‟re leading the nation in economic growth. We‟re the talk of 

Fortune magazine and The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Speaker. 

But more importantly, we‟re the talk of main street right here in 

our province as people are proud of the province and looking 

forward to a bright future ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 604 — The Professional Public Service 

Employees Protection Act 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 604, The 

Professional Public Service Employees Protection Act now be 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved that Bill No. 604, The Professional Public Service 

Employees Protection Act be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Earlier this day I laid on the Table the 2008 

volume 3 Report of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Order for return. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 183 ordered for return. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Disappointment in Government 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well it‟s 

a real pleasure to enter into this 75-minute debate where we call 

on the Assembly to express its profound disappointment in the 

Sask Party government for their complete lack of vision for the 

forestry sector, and for breaking their promises to rural 

Saskatchewan in terms of keeping rural schools open . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. It‟s been brought to my 

attention that notice came in the name of the member from The 

Battlefords, so the member from Nutana, I understand, would 

have to ask leave to speak ahead of the . . . 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask leave to speak. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to speak. Is 

that leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well I‟m pleased that in the Christmas spirit, 

the members opposite are prepared to let me speak. So, Mr. 

Speaker, what this motion expresses is the profound 

disappointment for the breaking of the Sask Party‟s promises to 

rural Saskatchewan, particularly when it comes to small-school 

closures, payments to farmers living in the southwest part of our 

province to deal with drought, and also support for the hog and 

livestock industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there‟s no question that the crisis in 

livestock has hit our province hard. Mr. Speaker, my colleagues 

and I were at the APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of 

Saskatchewan] reception last night. And what were people 

talking about at that reception? They were talking about the 

crises in the livestock industry, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues and 

I were at a reception of the cattle industry last Thursday night at 

Agribition, and what were the livestock people talking about? 

They were talking about the crises in the livestock industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government, which has $2 

billion in its insurance fund, as they‟re calling it, is not prepared 

to provide any kind of emergency cash payments. Mr. Speaker, 

people in the livestock industry that are represented by Sask 

Party MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] are 

contacting my office and the Leader of the Opposition‟s office 

and they‟re telling us that without some form of immediate 

relief that there will be bankruptcies across Saskatchewan, and 

there will be a serious decline in our herds, Mr. Speaker. 

Without immediate, emergency assistance and direct aid, this is 

a sector that will basically reduce itself in our province. 

 

The Alberta government has provided assistance to their 

producers with cash support. And in fact the cattle industry in 

our province has asked for similar support, and they‟ve 

indicated in a letter to all Sask Party MLAs that without similar 

and immediate support for Saskatchewan cattle producers, we 

will see a significant reduction in forage acreage and cattle 

numbers within the province will occur, Mr. Speaker. In this 

letter, they ask for an immediate, a direct assistance of $148 

million in order that people in our province can have parity with 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

their neighbours in Alberta. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture has indicated a 

number of changes that have been made by this government. I 

have to tell the minister and his colleagues that those changes, 

while welcomed by producers across the province, do nothing 

for those people who are in the livestock and hog industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in the livestock and hog industry want 

something more than deferrals of principal payments on loans. 

They want a direct payment by the province of Saskatchewan in 

order to support their industry. 

 

The minister, with some fanfare, in his newsletter in February 

of last year, indicated that there was a new agreement with the 

federal government when it comes to AgriStability. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that agreement is not working for people in the 

livestock industry, and it‟s not working because in order for 

people to be eligible for any kind of payment under 

AgriStability, you have to have two positive margins, Mr. 

Speaker. And I can tell you that the livestock industry, that the 

people who have contacted our offices have clearly indicated 

that they‟re not in a position where they have two positive 

margins in the last five years. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟re eligible for nothing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are very, very touchy 

about this subject because I know that the people that are 

contacting my office and my colleague‟s office, they‟re also 

contacting the members opposite. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the 

man that contacted me yesterday — indicating that his 

AgriInvest fund of $250,000 is gone and that he has, in addition 

to that, depleted $550,000 in equity, in investments in his 

operation, is gone — he contacted that minister‟s office 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So people are not only contacting us, but they‟re also contacting 

the members opposite. So they‟re hearing from livestock 

producers that they want some action on behalf of themselves 

by the members, Mr. Speaker, that for the most part these 

ranchers and farmers voted for. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You better check your numbers, Pat. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, I am. I am checking my numbers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is happening is that your loans come due and 

you have to pay. And when you don‟t have anything to pay, Mr. 

Speaker, you start to deplete your equity. And, Mr. Speaker, 

those livestock producers are now selling off their herds. And 

that minister has heard that. That minister must know that the 

numbers of cattle in our province are declining and they‟ve 

declined significantly in the last year. Now the minister will 

say, the minister will say . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to allow the 

member who‟s been recognized to make her comments. Other 

members will have the opportunity in a few short minutes to 

enter the debate. Member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now that member will say, well 16 years. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what is interesting when you have a 

journalist, a consultant such as Kevin Hursh respond to what‟s 

happening in the cattle industry, he‟s saying — it‟s not me; it‟s 

not the member opposite — he‟s saying that the NDP did more 

for the livestock and hog industry than the members opposite. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those livestock producers know that because 

they expected something from this government, that‟s the 

disappointment. They expected some . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well you say they didn‟t expect much from my 

government. They expected something from you and they have 

gotten absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. Nothing. And that 

government is sitting on $2 billion — $2 billion in cash — and 

they have done nothing, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely nothing. 

 

Now they can have platitudes. They could be the good old boys 

that go out and shake hands and go to receptions and give little 

speeches. But, Mr. Speaker, that is not cutting it. And it‟s not 

cutting it because people can‟t pay their bills. They have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It‟s becoming difficult to hear what the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana is bringing to the debate and I 

ask the members to respect the right of a member to speak. The 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, they came to government a year 

ago and, with much fanfare, they announced loans for the hog 

and livestock industry. That‟s what they announced. Well what 

people are saying now is, we need more than loans. Loans 

aren‟t good enough. We need cash because we can‟t pay our 

bills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was speaking to a man, an older gentleman, who 

helped his son and daughter get into the industry, and what he 

tells me is that he can‟t pay his bill. If nothing happens by the 

middle of January, he can‟t pay his bills and he‟s in trouble, Mr. 

Speaker. He‟s in trouble. 

 

Last night I spoke to a young guy who‟s from the southwest 

part of the province. He was at APAS. He came back from 

Alberta; he came with some cash. And what has happened to 

him? He‟s lost $250,000 in equity. And he‟s a cow-calf 

operator, Mr. Speaker. He wants something to be done and he 

wants something to be done by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people represent these producers. I 

understand there‟s over 10,000 farmers in the province and 

ranchers in the province that have cattle. They want something 

done by this government. And they are incredibly disappointed 

that somehow they have been able to implement tax reductions 

for all of us; they‟ve been able to implement a change when it 

comes to the guaranteed income supplement, the Saskatchewan 

income plan for seniors; they‟ve done something for people 

with disabilities; they‟ve done something for CBOs 

[community-based organization]. They have not been able to do 

anything for their base, Mr. Speaker — the people that got them 

elected, Mr. Speaker. They have done absolutely nothing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they did announce that there will be a 

one-year deferral of the principal payments owing from these 

cattle and hog short-term loan programs. Well big deal, Mr. 

Speaker. All this does is prolong the start date of the 

repayments. The producers still have to repay those loans, and 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

they‟re struggling today. They need some sort of direct support 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the members opposite have had one year. They‟ve had a 

year. They‟ve got, with their friends, to do something about 

changes to the AgriStability program. Has that minister 

indicated to the public that he is lobbying hard to change 

AgriStability to get rid of those two positive margins? In fact he 

signed on to it. Not at all, Mr. Speaker. Has he indicated to 

them, I am going to do what I can with my agricultural 

colleagues across the country and with the present Minister of 

Agriculture to change AgriStability so it works for the livestock 

and hog industry? Not at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The federal Throne Speech came down. Did they have any 

reference to the livestock industry and the hog industry in that 

federal Throne Speech? Not at all. The word is that when it 

comes to the livestock and hog industry, the Conservatives in 

this country are nowhere to be found. They can‟t be found here 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and they can‟t be found in 

Ottawa. 

 

Now the minister has said that he spoke to Mr. Ritz a couple of 

times. He hasn‟t been able to tell us whether or not Mr. Ritz is 

prepared to work hard to change the program. We know that the 

minister and Mr. Ritz have provided absolutely no guarantees 

of any kind of aid. The minister could, if he wanted to, provide 

some aid to the people of our province, particularly those in the 

livestock and hog industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister has said that Mr. Ritz was 

totally non-committal in that area right now, but at least we 

have it on the table. Well what do we have on the table? Do we 

have changes to AgriStability? What kind of changes? What 

kind of changes? Are they the kind of changes that are going to 

help those people in the livestock and hog industry to get some 

help? I don‟t know that, Mr. Speaker, because that minister has 

not been forthcoming. Do they have on the table that there is 

going to be a direct payment to those people in the livestock 

industry now or shortly after Christmas, Mr. Speaker? Because 

the bills are coming due. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that, I know that the federal 

government is somewhat of a bully. We‟ve all seen that in the 

last several days. We know that that has been the history of that 

federal government, particularly Mr. Harper and Mr. Ritz, but 

maybe, Mr. Speaker, it takes that government to stand up to 

those bullies on behalf of livestock and hog producers in our 

province. But we‟ve seen nothing of that. We have seen no 

response from the Sask Party. They have refused to provide 

producers with any kind of immediate payment. They‟re 

completely ineffective when raising this issue in Ottawa, and 

obviously the Prime Minister, he won‟t listen to the members of 

parliament, but he‟s obviously not listening to the Premier of 

our province. 

 

Now these people said they wanted to give peace a chance. 

Well we‟ve had a year to give peace a chance. We have nothing 

in the Throne Speech. We have nothing in the way of direct aid 

from Ottawa, and we have no changes to the AgriStability 

program, which these folks over there signed on to, in terms of 

changing, in terms of changing the positive margins. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s not working for the livestock industry. It‟s simply 

not working, and when you have a program that doesn‟t work, it 

means you need to go back to the table and renegotiate those 

terms. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is also, this is also a government that 

promised rural Saskatchewan . . . They brought people in from 

all over rural Saskatchewan. They were in these galleries in 

order to keep rural school closures from happening. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a number of rural schools that are on the 

chopping block as we speak, including the school that I went to 

as a young child. Those members opposite promised those rural 

people that they were going to save, they were going to save 

those rural schools. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they haven‟t saved those rural schools. They 

got some sort of little program that they‟re calling schools of 

opportunity, but they‟re not saving those rural schools from 

closure, Mr. Speaker. And they promised the people that they 

brought into this gallery that they would do so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these people pretend to represent rural 

Saskatchewan. But if you look at what they‟ve done in this 

session of the legislature, they did nothing when it comes to 

rural school closures, not a thing. They did nothing for the 

livestock industry. They did nothing for the hog industry and 

the forestry industry. There are people that live in rural 

Saskatchewan that are attached to the forestry industry, and 

they have done nothing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to move this motion: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its profound disappointment 

in the Sask Party government for their complete lack of 

vision for the forestry sector and for breaking their other 

promises to rural Saskatchewan, for example to keep 

small schools open, pay drought payments to farmers in 

southwest Saskatchewan, and fix producers‟ support 

programs for the hog and livestock industries. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its profound disappointment 

in the Saskatchewan Party for the complete lack of vision 

for the forestry sector and for breaking their other 

promises to rural Saskatchewan, for example to keep small 

schools open, pay drought payments to farmers in 

southwest Saskatchewan, and fix producers‟ support 

programs for the hog and livestock industries. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to rise 

in this House today and oppose this motion. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

from the forestry end of the province, being from Carrot River 

and having Hudson Bay also in our constituency. And to have a 

motion like this, it‟s kind of a, well basically a convoluted 

motion as it is. It takes in quite a few different things. But I 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

guess that‟s what we expect out of the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we all realize that there is a big 

problem within the forest industry, and much as I would love to 

see it growing because, of course, Carrot River being the town 

that I am from and having Hudson Bay within our constituency, 

I would dearly love to see the forest industry going. 

 

But unfortunately, unfortunately it just doesn‟t make any 

economic sense at this present time. We are not the only ones, 

we are not the only ones who are suffering due to the downturn 

in the lumber industry. From January 1 from 2003 to June 1, 

2008, there‟s been 38,428 layoffs within the forest industry 

across Canada — 207 mill closures. Now we‟ve seen eight mill 

closures within Saskatchewan. And I‟ll tell you what: that 

probably doesn‟t even count all of them because there‟s also 

lots of small little operations. 

 

The economics just are not there. You know, I was very, very 

happy when the Carrot River mill was changed over to a stud 

mill because I said, you know, that‟s one thing that this country 

will always need are studs. And unfortunately even that, even 

that didn‟t work. 

 

When you go to the likes of Hudson Bay, the plant at Hudson 

Bay can produce enough OSB [oriented strand board] to make 

5,800 houses per year. And that‟s just a small plant, and it can 

make 5,800 houses a year — produces that much. That market 

at the end just isn‟t there. And I‟m sorry, we cannot see why 

would we put money into a market that just isn‟t there. 

 

When you go back, the previous administration promised $100 

million to Domtar only a little over a year ago. Where would 

that money be? That was taxpayers‟ money. It was ludicrous to 

offer Domtar money like that which would have been long 

gone, and you would have just kept on putting money into 

basically a dead horse. I believe there‟s going to be a forest 

industry within this province. It will come back at some time. 

But why spend hard-earned taxpayers‟ money on stuff like that 

that just flat out doesn‟t make any economic sense? 

 

Now I can see why the NDP would want to do it. Like I mean, 

they‟ve done it with SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], they did it with Navigata, they did it 

with a pile of other things. But this government on this side 

wants to be more prudent. After all, this is taxpayers‟ money, 

and we speak for the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

They did have some reports. They had a report that was done in 

2006, and in this report it had participation from industry, from 

labour, from environment groups. What did they do with it, Mr. 

Speaker? They put it on the shelf and did nothing with it. And 

then they turned around and criticize us for not having due 

diligence within the forestry sector. I‟m sorry. We do have due 

diligence, and that is, we are not going to waste the 

government‟s money on just handing it out. We certainly would 

like to help on the infrastructure end of it when things get 

rolling again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about doing different things, but when 

you go right back — I‟ve just got to take a look at my note here 

— on April 2, 2008 the MLA from Prince Albert Northcote was 

asked by the media, and I quote, „“Weyerhaeuser said there is 

really nothing that any government could do to help the Hudson 

Bay OSB plant stay open.”‟ And his reply was, and I quote, 

„“Well I guess that is true.”‟ 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, when the member from P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Northcote was asked if there was anything to keep the 

mill in Hudson Bay from closing, what did he say? He said, and 

I quote, „“It‟s tough to say.”‟ So, Mr. Speaker, much as we 

would love to see some of these things going forward, it‟s just 

not going to happen. 

 

And in this long motion, it also was brought out, Mr. Speaker, 

about the closure of schools. Well our Minister of Education 

has put down a very good program for schools of opportunities, 

the schools of opportunities within this province, and this 

province is growing. And this is a great thing to have because 

now when you have places that are growing within this 

province, these schools can actually go back and apply, and 

apply to have and bring forward a reason why they‟re going to 

have new students coming into these schools. 

 

Unfortunately the previous administration were always 

prepared for a downturn, and they kept on . . . They never had, 

they never had the vision to see this province moving forward. 

Therefore when we have our schools of opportunity, this lets 

the people in those communities that have the vision, that have 

the vision and see this province going forward, those schools 

will not be closed. That is there, Mr. Speaker. That is there for 

the people of this province, for the rural people of this province, 

and this is a great initiative. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And while I‟m speaking of that, Mr. Speaker, you want to talk 

about the previous administration on closing things such as 

schools, etc., I can talk about our area. My home town of 

Arborfield back in the ‟90s had their hospital closed, and they 

went and they moved it. They told the people in Arborfield, 

don‟t worry, Carrot River‟s only 15 miles away. Carrot River 

had a school that was built by the Grant Devine administration, 

or excuse me, a hospital. So it was a fairly new hospital. Four 

years later after they closed the Arborfield hospital, they closed 

down the hospital in Carrot River. That is the foresight that that 

previous administration had. They had the foresight that we 

weren‟t going to have any more people coming into this 

province, and we weren‟t going to grow this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are growing this province. We‟re growing this 

province very well — 17,000 more people year to year. So that 

brings us back to the point that yes, we have these schools of 

opportunities. We have the schools of opportunities where we 

have a community, a community that feels that they‟re going to 

be growing, they‟re going to get people there. 

 

And I can guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, I‟m probably the only 

one in this House that‟s ever worked within the forest industry. 

My dad ran a lumber mill, and I have hauled logs into 

Weyerhaeuser, so I know what the forest industry is like. Even 

the people at home, even the people in Carrot River admit that 

there is nothing that the government can do to help out the 

forest industry until things actually turn around, until we have 

what is the worst housing crisis in the US [United States] move 

forward. And then we will actually be able to move forward on 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

the forest industry. 

 

In saying all of this, Mr. Speaker, this is a long and, like I said, 

convoluted motion. Mr. Speaker, I am against this motion. I 

would vote against this motion for the simple reason that it 

doesn‟t really make any sense. It just doesn‟t make sense for 

what we have, what we have in this province. 

 

We will see this province grow. We will also see it grow in the 

ag end. And up in our area unfortunately we don‟t have many 

ranchers, so I can‟t talk to that end. But I can tell you one thing 

— all the farmers in our area are sure happy about the tax cuts 

that we‟ve done on the rural land which that administration 

never did a thing for. 

 

My time has come to an end, Mr. Speaker, so I thank you for 

listening to my rant and rave. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to enter the debate here in the Assembly here today, 

Mr. Speaker, and I certainly support the motion that‟s been put 

forward. And I‟ll expand on some other areas as well that aren‟t 

even mentioned in this motion. 

 

But the thrust or the gist of this motion is just the real failing of 

the Saskatchewan Party to represent rural Saskatchewan with 

strong leadership and to address the needs that they have. The 

motion that I am supporting that has been moved today reads as 

follows: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its profound disappointment 

in the Saskatchewan Party government for their lack of 

vision for the forestry sector and for breaking their other 

promises to rural Saskatchewan, for example to keep 

small schools open, to pay drought payments to farmers in 

southwest Saskatchewan, and to fix producer support 

programs for the hog and livestock industries. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly support this motion, and I think 

many people within Saskatchewan support this motion. I know 

that there‟s a lot of concern in rural Saskatchewan, and the 

reason it‟s important for us to speak to this, Mr. Speaker, is that 

in our House, in our Assembly we have on the other side of the 

House predominantly rural representation, predominantly rural 

MLAs. 

 

When we look at rural constituencies and who‟s bringing their 

voice to this Assembly, it‟s supposed to be the members 

opposite. And that‟s not happening, Mr. Speaker. And so what 

we find is we‟re getting more and more and more calls through 

our offices and more individuals who are really concerned and 

want to meet with us and want us to bring their voices that 

aren‟t being brought by the members opposite to light. 

 

And so in the end we have the members opposite who said 

anything to get to elected, and they made promises all over rural 

Saskatchewan. And here they are today really, really failing to 

follow through on those many broken promises. They‟re 

missing in action in their own constituencies, and they‟re 

missing in action in bringing those concerns and those 

opportunities from their own constituencies to the Assembly. I 

guess they‟re missing in bringing it possibly to their caucus 

table, certainly to the cabinet table. And it‟s a shame, Mr. 

Speaker, that the betrayal that we‟re seeing is occurring, and it 

comes down to a question of integrity and being able to follow 

through with one‟s promises. 

 

I‟m going to speak today specifically to education, but I do 

want to highlight some of the other concerns that we‟re hearing 

on a regular basis from rural Saskatchewan. In fact, I only have 

10 minutes, Mr. Speaker, and that certainly won‟t allow me to 

get into the kind of breadth and depth that is needed. 

 

But what‟s something that‟s a real concern is when we‟re 

looking at our ag producers, and specifically our livestock 

industry right now. 

 

Members opposite always like to talk about 16 years, or what 

we did or what we didn‟t do, and they like to talk about records. 

Well it‟s of huge concern, Mr. Speaker, that when we look at 

the cattle herd in Saskatchewan that in one year — one year, 

Mr. Speaker — has been decimated, has been actually 

decimated without any response and any action from the 

members opposite. We‟ve gone from 1.5 million head to 1 

million, Mr. Speaker, as an approximation. That‟s a third loss of 

our herd here in Saskatchewan, a third of the herd lost here in 

Saskatchewan this year. 

 

The broken promises to respond extend themselves into areas 

such as the property tax. And we‟ve seen this government, that 

opposition, make all sorts of promises on property taxes. Now 

they‟re elected and they‟re not coming through with it. And 

we‟re talking about constituencies in rural Saskatchewan that 

have some of the highest mill rates, some of the highest 

assessments in our province, and it‟s a shame. 

 

We‟ve seen some movement on agriculture, which is important 

— we continue to urge this government — but nothing for 

commercial, nothing on the residential side. And I certainly 

look forward to the much heralded report and action that‟s 

going to be coming, and I know rural taxpayers are certainly 

looking for this as well. 

 

I go into other examples. I mean our RMs have concerns. 

Through our compounding and investment we‟re seeing roads 

that are being pounded, infrastructure being pounded at new 

rates. And then they need some support to make sure that 

enforcement of heavy-haul routes and that making sure that that 

infrastructure is able to be maintained and not depleted with the 

resources coming from certain parts of the province that make 

our entire provincial treasuries flush. 

 

We look at our towns, and there‟s such needs with water and 

waste water, roads and hospitals and schools. We need support 

to open lots from housing. 

 

And then we see some real critical errors of this government, 

and one I‟ll cite. For example, when we have a government 

minister, the member from Cannington, who‟s called to a 

community meeting down at Oxbow, Saskatchewan, and the 

reason he‟s called, Mr. Speaker, is because their hospital has 

been reduced to half-time, Mr. Speaker, and the community‟s 

outraged and they‟re concerned. 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

And what they‟re saying is that the government‟s talking all 

about all this nursing recruitment, but it‟s not hitting the mark. 

So they bring the member from Cannington, and what does the 

member from Cannington do with a full house, a full house in 

Oxbow, a packed auditorium? Well he throws down the 

gauntlet to Oxbow, Mr. Speaker. He chastises Oxbow residents 

for not doing enough, not doing enough to bring nurses to their 

community. And he pits Oxbow against all the communities of 

Saskatchewan. He has no solutions for the community of 

Oxbow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People come back up . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I sure have 

been to Oxbow. The member asks. I sure have. You bet. I was 

actually down there not too long ago here. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when we have a member step forward to a community who‟s 

saying, we‟ll do anything we can to bring nurses to our 

community, and the member stands on his feet and chastises 

them for not doing enough and pits them against each other, and 

finally he offers his wisdom. 

 

His wisdom is this, Mr. Speaker. He said, if each of you would 

go home and phone your nursing relatives in England and tell 

them to move to Oxbow, we could solve this solution. This is 

the kind of grand vision and wisdom we‟re getting from the 

members opposite. It‟s an absolute shame, Mr. Speaker — 

absolute shame. 

 

The deputy minister is saying he‟s going to deal with his 

member. The Deputy Premier‟s saying that he‟s going to deal 

with his member. I sure as heck hope he will. If he‟d like to see 

statements and videotape of this chastising of rural 

Saskatchewan, and Oxbow specifically, we can certainly 

prepare that for him as well. And I hope as the Deputy Premier 

he wouldn‟t stand for that kind of action. 

 

You know, this government, they‟re just offside in certain areas 

too. They‟re offside with increasing utility rates and power rates 

and energy rates for rural Saskatchewan, who are so dependent 

on that power in many ways. They‟re large consumers to bring 

their livelihood, Mr. Speaker. And they‟re eroding the base of 

our Crowns that provide that competitive cost, that lowest cost, 

and we‟re seeing a huge abandonment right there. 

 

And then we see the government excess. It‟s just offside with 

rural Saskatchewan. These members opposite go out and buy 

themselves lavish SUVs [sport-utility vehicle] to cruise around 

about the province. And, Mr. Speaker, this isn‟t the reality of 

Saskatchewan people. And, you know, I have relatives all 

across this province and lived in rural environments, And we‟ve 

got a lot of, you know, two-wheel drive vehicles driving around 

out there, getting around just fine. But the members opposite 

think they need these lavish, expensive SUVs. It‟s a shame. 

 

I don‟t have enough time here, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to 

get to the fact that the broken promises around education. These 

guys criss-crossed the province and said, school closures are 

going to be a problem of the past when we‟re elected. In fact 

they made promises that schools that had been closed would be 

reopened. They made promises that dollars that were going to 

be made available by phony-baloney programs that they touted 

and made a big deal of, would be paid back retroactively. 

 

All of these promises have failed miserably. All of these 

promises have now become broken promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people of rural Saskatchewan are incredibly angry, Mr. 

Speaker, with . . . You know, we see the Minister of Education 

who shouted out and he said, what, do you think my 

handbook‟s nothing, I believe was the quote that he shouted 

across here. Well the people of rural Saskatchewan certainly 

don‟t think that handbook‟s a whole heck of a lot. 

 

And I know that the Minister of Enterprise doesn‟t think that 

handbook‟s a whole heck of a lot, because he‟s trying to rewrite 

policy himself. He‟s offered a plan forward that he . . . And I 

know it‟s probably a bit of a wrestling match in that caucus 

over there, in that cabinet over there, and I guess the Minister of 

Education won this one. I don‟t think they leg wrestled. I don‟t 

know how they made this decision or however it occurred. But 

the Minister of Enterprise didn‟t win that debate and I know he 

brought forward a different plan for school closures. And I 

know the Minister of Enterprise certainly doesn‟t think the 

Minister of Education‟s handbook is very much, nor do the 

communities of Saskatchewan whose schools are being 

reviewed for closure here this year. 

 

Now we‟ve got this new, convoluted process put forward by the 

Minister of Education, this schools of opportunity process that‟s 

an energy-draining, resource-draining activity that‟s placed on 

to communities, that has to run at the same time as school 

boards are doing their thoughtful review of communities. And 

in the best case scenario, we‟re providing potentially stopgap 

funding that isn‟t allocated into where it really should be. And 

that‟s how we bring education to our students in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This minister‟s failed. This government‟s failed. They‟ve 

broken promises across rural Saskatchewan. They‟re missing in 

action . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, before I 

begin I must comment on the tie I‟m wearing. I‟ve got a lot of 

comments today because it‟s a loud tie, but this is my July 1 

Canada Day celebration tie, is when I wear it. But today I‟m 

wearing it and asking everyone to let‟s pray for Canada unity 

today. That‟s what‟s first of importance. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to get into this debate. The one on the other 

side, the opposition keep talking about agriculture, forestry. 

Where were they when we brought forward the best budget, the 

best budget this province has ever seen? It did more for the 

people of Saskatchewan than any other budget in history, and 

they stood there, picked their political side, and not looked at 

what‟s good for Saskatchewan. They just picked what their 

party did and they voted against the best budget this party has 

ever seen. And then they get upset when we mention the 16 

years. 

 

In the five years that I‟ve been here, all I heard from that other 

side was Grant Devine, Grant Devine, Grant Devine. Now all of 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

a sudden they don‟t want us to talk about their record, their 16 

years, their pathetic 16 years. For 16 years they stood there and 

they didn‟t even know what rural Saskatchewan was. They had 

built their socialist castles in Regina and Saskatoon, and from 

there they figured they could rule the world. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that came to an end. We even wonder if they 

can pronounce the word rural without having a bad taste in their 

mouth. They say they know agriculture. They know agriculture 

because grandpa had a farm or uncle had a farm. Mr. Speaker, 

they don‟t know it until they‟ve been there. They‟ve never had 

the dirt under their nails. They‟ve never stood with a farmer 

after he‟s had his crop wiped out by hail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got a member yelling over there, nonsense. 

I‟d like to come and see him follow the plow once. He talks 

about it, but he‟s never really done it. Have you ever stood by a 

farmer when he stands by his hailed-out field and watch him . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, he mentions talking about reality. 

This is reality. Have you ever stood beside a farmer whose crop 

has been totally wiped out by hail and watch a grown man cry 

because his whole future has just disappeared before his eyes, 

or when he‟s hit by an early frost? Go out there and feel what 

these people have been feeling. Or stand by a cattleman who‟s 

just had a lightning strike and six head of cattle are laying there 

dead. The old adage, don‟t judge a man till you‟ve walked a 

mile in his shoes, fits here. They have not been there. They just 

think they‟ve been there. 

 

They accomplished 16 years of nothing for agriculture. Not a 

thing for agriculture, and now they say that they care. You can‟t 

feel the joy or the pain unless you‟ve been part of it. The 

opposition has no idea, no comprehension. It‟s just lip service. 

 

I have a neighbour who grew up his whole life in our 

community, and his father joined the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] Party when it started and CCF was 

a rural party. And his son grew up, and he also joined the CCF 

and when it became the NDP, was a card-carrying member. 

When I stood my name up for election, he came over and said, 

the Sask Party, the Sask Party is the last hope for agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Now the NDP talked about we should throw a 

whole bunch of money into agriculture. Well we have to be 

very careful because of the problems we‟re having with 

countervail measures by the United States. We have to be very, 

very careful. And our minister is working on it, and we‟re 

putting in a lot of hours. And we‟re doing more than just lip 

service — 60 million available for cattle and 30 million was 

available for hogs, low interest rate at 2 per cent, 

one-year-optional deferral on principal, Mr. Speaker — and 

we‟re going to bring ag stability home to Saskatchewan. This 

has been commented on by farmers. And one of the biggest 

comments, and I quote, is from Jack Hextall, Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen‟s Association president: 

One of the first things that cattle industry representatives 

requested from the newly elected provincial government 

last November was to bring the administration of 

AgriStability home to Saskatchewan . . . And we applaud 

Minister Bjornerud on his response to this request. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP increased taxes, but we are . . . ag land 

rebate from 38 per cent to 47 per cent this year. We have 

promised 80 per cent rebate by the fourth year on ag land. And 

the NDP, what did they do? Mr. Speaker, they downloaded and 

downloaded and downloaded on the producers and RMs. 

Nothing new for ag land in their 2007 campaign. They did not 

even mention livestock in their campaign. 

 

The NDP‟s record, they closed 31 rural extension offices. That 

was to help agriculture. They closed the extension service 

branch. That also was to help agriculture. They eliminated, 

eliminated the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 

program, they said, to help agriculture. Livestock feed 

insurance program was cut from 2001 to 2006. With their 

control of crop insurance, the premiums skyrocketed and the 

coverages dropped and dropped. Cut spot loss hail from crop 

insurance. And then they closed the largest number of rural 

hospitals and schools ever. They left rural highways in the 

biggest ruin in history; and they spent money on ridiculous 

agriculture programs. 

 

And of course the shining star from over there is that great 

SPUDCO disaster. One of the biggest fiascos in agricultural 

history was caused by a government. They ignored the drought 

in the Southwest. They would not commit to fully funding 

CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization], and the 

grazing of pasture technology program was cut. That‟s your 

record. We have been government for one year, and we have 

done more than you in 16. And you say we‟re ignoring 

agriculture? All I can do is look with disgust at your record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must yet touch on forestry. We understand that it 

is a very, very difficult time for forestry. The forestry sector has 

been besieged, besieged, not just here, but world wide. The US 

housing market, which is where we sell our lumber into, is 

almost non-existent. There isn‟t a forest company in the world 

that is managing right now. So the former government would 

have put in $100 million to keep Weyerhaeuser here, and today 

what would be happening with that 100 million? They‟d be 

coming and wanting more. It would be a similar program like 

we saw up north where they put almost $1 billion into a pulp 

mill to try and make it survive. 

 

It‟s a tough situation in forestry. Our government is working 

hard. Our ministers are trying to work out solutions, and it‟s not 

going to be easy. But our ministers and our team are there. We 

are looking at solutions for the forest industry, and we are 

looking at long-term solutions because immediate solutions are 

just totally tied to what is happening to the forest industry. 

 

The member from Carrot River Valley gave a bunch of quotes 

about the member from P.A. Northcote on his comment on the 

industry. This shows where they are at. They don‟t understand 

forestry. They just don‟t have a clue of what‟s happening, 

similar as into agriculture. So, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the 

motion, and I thank you very much for the time. 

 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to definitely speak 

in favour of the motion that‟s been presented to the House. I 

would like to start out, Mr. Speaker, the forestry industry is in 

dire needs of assistance. You know, there‟s many promises 

made, certain individuals will make. The member from Prince 

Albert Carlton definitely made promises in his campaign and as 

he was . . . [inaudible] . . . and he is elected now as a member of 

this House. He made his statements very clearly: a vote for 

Darryl would be a vote for the pulp mill opening and the mill 

opening. 

 

And, you know, I find it very hard to find the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton making statements, and then when it 

comes back to dealing after he‟s successful, I sometimes 

wonder was this process politics or was it not politics? You 

know, was his word his word, and that‟s good, and he‟ll follow 

through with what he promised to the voters that supported him. 

He‟s got some areas to answer to. 

 

I guess you talk about the forestry sector and the dire need that 

it needs and the problems that are with the forestry sector. Mr. 

Speaker, we know there‟s a lot of concerns and a lot of issues 

that have to be addressed. There was supposed to be a process 

and a report on the forestry by the member and a few of the 

MLAs. They were supposed to do a report on the forestry sector 

with shareholders and provide that and make some 

recommendations on the industry and community. And at this 

time, we have not seen that report. That report has been asked 

to be tabled. It has not been tabled. Where is that report? It 

would be interesting to see what kind of recommendations are 

coming. So I guess I‟m really excited to find out about this 

report, what kind of help it‟s going to do for the forestry sector, 

and who exactly did they involve in this report. But glad to see 

that. 

 

So at this point, you know, you also go to the next sector, and 

you talk about the renaming of the Forestry Centre which is 

very interesting, you know. I find that very interesting that the 

time will come to have a centre changed. ForestryFirst? How 

about dealing with the communities first that are impacted by 

the forestry sector, the letdown in the industry and the families 

that have been impacted on this. How about the review? How 

about talking to them? Where are the meetings going to 

happen? How are they consulted? Who should they talk to? 

 

It is the responsibility of this government to hear their concerns, 

and I hope, I hope that you guys will make an effort to go and 

listen to them. And then we go out and we have an opportunity, 

and it‟s called sector teams. And the forestry‟s been fortunate to 

have a sector team so it can make recommendation to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. I find it hard to understand, it‟s one meeting 

they‟ve had. One meeting in a year that this whole . . . The 

opportunity they‟ve come together, they‟ve had one meeting. 

 

And you have the minister making comments of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. He thinks that‟s a good working place. I find it 

very interesting why he figures one meeting within a whole 

year is moving in the right direction. And I think he said the 

quote, it was a pretty good job of having one meeting to make 

recommendations to Enterprise Saskatchewan from the forestry 

sector. Well if that‟s a good start or a pretty good job, well I‟m 

concerned. 

 

Now we know that the federal government came out with some 

money to help the forestry sector. And that‟s why we‟re asking 

for . . . Questions . . . The money was divvied up or sent to 

certain departments. We‟ve asked those questions and today, 

I‟d like to hear what communities that are impacted have had an 

opportunity to have some of that money? What is that, I believe 

$36.4 million. Where‟s the money? Who‟s using those dollars? 

 

We talk about the concern and, you know, there‟s concern for 

the forestry sector. And some of us may have worked in the 

forestry sector; some of us haven‟t. Some might have family 

businesses that are in the forestry sector for years. There might 

be problems. 

 

And I want to go back to this because this is very interesting. 

When you talk about a sector team, how about a sector team for 

the forestry industry that‟s out there? I hope that when it comes 

and makes recommendations that it would definitely . . . 

Enterprise Saskatchewan will take those recommendations from 

the forestry sector team. It‟s important that they‟re . . . And we 

heard that they‟re supposed to be the industry, the professionals. 

They‟re supposed to have the professional background, the 

knowledge. I hope that Enterprise Saskatchewan takes the 

recommendations of the forestry sector team and moves on 

those. Now that they start their one meeting, I‟m hoping they‟ll 

have many more meetings to bring recommendations to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, so this government will act on that. 

 

That‟s why, when I see what‟s going on with the forestry sector 

that I support this motion . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

that‟s very good, and that‟s the point. If they‟re the 

professionals, I think it‟s wonderful that the recommendations 

that come from that team will definitely be acted on by 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, if that‟s what the minister‟s saying. 

Well that‟s nice. That‟s wonderful. I‟m glad to hear that, and 

I‟m sure the sector team will be glad to hear that. 

 

[11:45] 

 

You know, you talk about dollars and all the money that‟s in the 

coffers and talk about a track record. And some of the members 

opposite talk about the different programs that they‟ve offered 

and the kind of things they‟re doing for Saskatchewan people, 

saving them money. How many people are unemployed that 

will not have, true, will not be impacted by any tax cuts? How 

many people in the North are affected by the forestry, the 

closures? Many of them. What this tax break‟s going to do for 

them, I truly don‟t know. Maybe you guys are going to explain 

that. You‟ll do a better job explaining it to them than I 

understand it. 

 

But actually I see so many needs in the North that are being . . . 

I don‟t know if it‟s the understanding, that we don‟t understand 

what we‟re saying as northern people. I‟m hoping that we can 

bring the issues to this government who is responsible to take 

care of the issues. And we could make comments about who‟s 

to blame, but today the decision is yours and your government 

has the power. You have the options, you have the choices to 

make. The people that supported you, it‟s time that you say, 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

well it‟s time that you help them in the North. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Why didn‟t you do that for 16 years? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — There you go. Thank you for that 16 years 

again. 

 

It‟s amazing what the track record of the opposite will be, what 

your government will do. We‟ll see what your track record‟s 

like. You get to make all the decisions. And I hope, I hope in 

three years that the people of this province send you a message 

and look at your track record in all the industries, and let‟s see 

if everything‟s all so wonderful. 

 

So it‟s easy to blame, but at the end of the day I hope, for the 

northern people and the people of this province, the government 

will act on some of the problems that are happening — not talk 

about them, act on them in partnership with the communities 

that are coming before you. 

 

There‟s many issues. We‟ve got roads, education. There‟s a lot 

of things going on, and it‟s our responsibility as MLAs and as 

members of this Legislative Assembly to deal with those 

problems. So hopefully at the end of the day we can work 

together . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . There‟s many more 

announcements should be done, and you can comment about 

schools announcing. That‟s wonderful. We need many more 

announcements. I encourage you to make more announcements 

in the North. Thank you, Mr. Member opposite. 

 

Anyway at this point I‟ll wind it down. I‟ll wind it down. And I 

just want to say I do support this motion and I will give my 

backing to this motion and move forward. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, certainly I‟m pleased to be able to enter into this 

75-minute debate to take the members opposite to task over 

their motion. Even in the best economic times that this province 

has seen, they always seem to find the dark side. 

 

Certainly there are some challenges in some sectors of 

agriculture and the forestry sector. However they should 

remember, I‟m sure, unless their memories are very short, when 

they were government they had no magic wand to find those 

magic solutions to solve these very difficult problems. 

 

In my constituency we don‟t have a forest industry, but in some 

of my previous experience in this House I did have some 

knowledge and contact with the forest industry, particularly in 

agroforestry which is a new initiative that is currently under 

way at the ForestFirst centre in Prince Albert. And contrary to 

what the member from Northeast said, it is more than just a 

name change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a whole new direction 

for at least part of the forest industry. 

 

As some of my colleagues on this side of the House have said 

with regards to forestry, this is not a problem that is only unique 

to Saskatchewan. It‟s a problem all across this country, all 

across North America, and I‟m guessing a large part of the 

world. There is economic factors have come to bear. Housing 

starts are down in North America. And we‟ve seen this in the 

past. Commodity-based industries are always subject to the 

cyclical price cycles, and unfortunately the forest sector is 

seeing one of those down times right now. 

 

In fact I would guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we‟re seeing a 

fundamental change in the forestry industry all across this 

country and all across North America. And that is what this 

ForestFirst centre is designed to help with. It is designed to take 

a new vision and look for new opportunities in the forest 

industry. 

 

And the one that caught my attention was, establish and develop 

the fundamentals of a viable agroforestry sector. This is an idea 

that‟s been around for quite some time. And the reason I‟m 

raising it in this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that it has some 

real opportunities down the road for parts of agriculture in this 

province, and particularly those areas in part of my constituency 

and more in the Northeast and those agricultural areas where 

trees grow very rapidly and abundantly. 

 

It is another option that I believe will be there sometime in the 

future. And instead of reacting all the time to the current 

situation, we need to be forward-looking. And that is what this 

government is doing. 

 

We certainly, as any government, we don‟t have magic wands 

to fix every problem. If governing was that easy, we wouldn‟t 

have any problems in this province or in this country, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But some of the initiatives that we‟ve already 

done in our short period of time since the November 2007 

election, this is just one small example. 

 

One of the members opposite was very critical over the 

Minister of Education‟s new initiative to deal with school 

closures in rural Saskatchewan. Well the fact is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that change is the only constant in our world today, 

and that‟s how it‟s been for a long time. And so there‟s 

rationalization takes place, whether it be in the grains industry 

. . . We saw massive rationalization with the grain handling and 

transportation system a number of years back. 

 

We see changes in rural communities where some communities 

grow, other ones decline because of proximity to larger centres, 

services that are lost in their communities. And as a result 

people no longer live in the area. The number of children in 

school diminishes. 

 

And what we‟ve done is we‟ve given those communities who 

are faced with that very difficult task of dealing with school 

closures more options, making sure that the community is fully 

consulted, that the consultation period is longer. And we also 

put in place a new initiative called the schools of opportunity 

where communities, if they can present a business case that 

their community is going to grow and their schools are going to 

grow, that there is some time for them to put that into place. 

 

Part of the motion that the members opposite put forward, it 

says, and I quote, “fix producer support programs for the hog 

and livestock industries.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the 

key word here is fix because the reason that those programs 

need to be fixed . . . And there is no argument, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; we have some very significant shortcomings in the 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

programs that are there. But one of the reasons that we have 

those shortcomings is because when those members opposite 

sat on this side of the House, it was well known that they 

provided very little leadership at the national level where most 

of these programs were designed. 

 

In fact, the former minister of Agriculture, Eric Upshall, went to 

Ottawa when there was a crisis in the grain industry and says, 

we‟ve got a problem in agriculture in Saskatchewan, but it‟s the 

federal government, you have to fix it; and went and left 

without bringing any ideas to the table, without bringing any 

dollars to the table. And those deficiencies continue. 

 

Our Minister of Agriculture is working hard to fix those things. 

You don‟t fix something in a matter of a month or two, the 

things that haven‟t been working as they should for a long 

period of time. And especially when you‟re dealing at the 

national level, dealing with other provinces, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it takes some time. In fact, Saskatchewan‟s credibility 

was much less than it needed to be, and we need to build that 

credibility up on the national level. And the Minister of 

Agriculture and our Premier have done just an excellent job in 

that regard. 

 

And we are putting real initiatives forward, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I‟m confident that in the future, in the short future 

we will see some initiatives that will address some of these 

problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know there is real hurt in the livestock industry out there. 

I have producers who are feeling the effects of the perfect storm 

that has hit them, and we‟re just coming out of some of that. 

When we had the dollar at par, we had energy costs at the 

highest levels they‟ve ever been, grain prices, particularly feed 

grain prices, were at very high levels, and that spelled bad news 

for the livestock industry. 

 

It‟s no big secret that when grain prices are high, which is an 

input to the livestock industry, the price paid to the primary 

producers in the livestock industry drops, and vice versa. When 

feed grain prices were low, the calf prices and hog prices were 

quite strong because of the relationship between the input side 

of one industry and the other, the grains and livestock sector, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I can assure the producers out there 

that we are working hard on coming up with those solutions 

because the band-aid solutions didn‟t work in the past, and that 

is not what the livestock producers are looking for now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — . . . to the 10-minute question period. 

I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. I 

just want to ask a question to the member of Batoche who 

spoke about the 16-year record of the NDP. The question is 

actually twofold, Mr. Deputy Chair. Number one, would the 

member agree that in those 16 years that the NDP paid down 

$11 billion in interest payments, and does that have an effect on 

how you‟re able to respond to some other crises? And the 

second thing, Mr. Deputy Chair, the second part of my question 

is, after we paid down 11 billion, you paid another four and half 

billion dollars on your actual debt, does that have an effect on 

how you‟re able to respond to certain sectors? 

And my final part of my question, Mr. Deputy Chair, is 

promises made by that party opposite, Mr. Deputy Chair, were 

made by a number of those members, a number of them. And 

that member in particular, the member from Batoche, who had 

no support for industry — whether it‟s cattle or whether it‟s 

forestry — to have no support for them, he was commissioned 

to make a report, a report on the future of forestry. Where is that 

report, Mr. Deputy Chair? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise to 

answer that question about the report. They were the 

government. They had the reports, and they put them on the 

shelves. We issued a report for internal before we were the 

government. That was our own report, but you had reports and 

you didn‟t use them. You sat there on them and did nothing in 

forestry until Weyerhaeuser said, we‟re leaving. And then, oh, 

maybe we can pull out 100 million. There‟s your report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. As a cow-calf 

producer from rural Saskatchewan, I understand that the prices 

of cull cows, cull bulls, and fed cattle are higher now than they 

were when the NDP was still in government. Hog prices are 

now also $25 to $50 a head higher than they were when the 

NDP was government last fall. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member from Regina 

Rosemont: why did your government not help livestock 

producers last fall? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It‟s my pleasure to take the question. 

And it‟s an absolute shame we‟ve seen from this government 

since they‟ve been elected in regards to the livestock sector. 

And that member can ask questions and quote prices and 

whatnot, but what‟s happening to the herd? Because that‟s 

where the tire hits the pavement. 

 

And what‟s happening is we‟ve had a third of our herd reduced 

in one year. So where the tire hits the pavement, where the 

support needs to be, they‟re failing. They‟re failing miserably 

and we expect a whole heck of lot more. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. 

Northcote. 

 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

Mr. Furber: — The member from Batoche had mentioned that 

the report that he generated in his time spent running around the 

province in support of forestry was an internal report. And so if 

it‟s an internal report, shouldn‟t some of his members 

understand what‟s in that report? Wouldn‟t one of the members 

that was on that tour understand some of the things that came 

out of that report, some of the points that were made? You‟d 

think somebody would know about it. Somebody would know 

something about that report. 

 

So why is it — to the member from Batoche — why is it that 

the minister responsible for forestry has no idea of anything that 

came out of that report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — The minister has lots on that report. But where 

was your report? You did nothing. You‟re the boys that sat on a 

report that was an inch thick on what should be done on 

forestry. It was people right in the industry that came to you 

with answers, and you didn‟t give them anything. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Just to remind the members to direct 

the question and answers through the Chair. I recognize the 

member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — They had their chance. They had an inch-thick 

report and they waited until the ship sank. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Mr. 

Speaker, would the member consider encouraging the 

73-year-old gentleman to whom she referred this morning to 

share his records with a representative of our caucus so that we 

might actually review his situation with the purpose of seeing if 

we can offer some positive advice and counsel? 

 

On our side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we actually 

have members who are successful and have been successful 

agriculture producers. And we also have a number of people 

with various business backgrounds, accounting training, etc. 

Would the member encourage her example case, producer, to 

allow us to examine his records so we can determine how 

serious his situation really is? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when you have a very 

large operation, when you have your son and your daughter 

involved in your operation, and when you‟ve experienced low 

prices for a number of years — I think there are some members 

over there that understand this very well — you start to see a 

reduction in your assets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I will talk to the gentleman to see whether or not he‟s 

prepared to share his business situation, but I will say to the 

member . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I don‟t like to cut in 10 

minutes, but I would like to hear the question being placed and 

the answer being placed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I will certainly ask the gentleman if he‟s 

prepared to share his information, but I can tell the members 

opposite he has been in contact with their members. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the members across the 

way here, opposition members as the Sask Party, looked 

communities in the eyes, looked residents in the eyes and made 

promises about stopping school closures. Then the minister 

came forward and he put forward his failed plan. What did the 

people say about it? Well in the Leader-Post, “Education 

minister flunks the test.” By the CBC, “School closure law 

called broken promise.” By the Leader-Post, “An F for Sask 

Party.” 

 

My question is to the member from Carrot River. How do you 

justify your blatant broken promises with regards to school 

closures? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well I thank the member for that question, 

and actually what we have done, what our minister has really 

worked on is getting together the schools of opportunity. This 

puts forward schools of opportunity for areas where there is a 

possibility that that school may be closed. That community, Mr. 

Speaker, can actually, can actually go out and request a school 

of opportunity because this province is growing now, contrary 

to what it was doing before — it was going downhill all the 

time. Now our province is growing, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re 

going to be getting more people in here, and that‟s why we have 

the schools of opportunity. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. My question is to the 

member from Last Mountain. And I‟d ask that member if he 

could share with the House some specific ways that your 

government could help the livestock industry in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I certainly 

would be pleased to inform the member opposite as to the 

things that this government has already done. We have fully 

funded the AgriStability program right up front, something that 

that government never did until the 11th hour. We are 

aggressively moving forward on the reduction of education tax 

on property. In our platform we said that for agricultural land 

we would be at 80 per cent rebate at a minimum at the end of 

our first term. We are working aggressively on that file as 

opposed to . . . There was no mention from members opposite 

in their platform to do with any tax relief on agricultural land. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture worked to put a water program in 

place for the Southwest to address some of their water needs. 

There are many more other initiatives that we have already 

done. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 

River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Yes thank you, Mr. Speaker. Due to the 

downturn in the forest industry and due to the . . . Speaking of 

the member from Cumberland, I would like to ask the member 

from Cumberland, what would be his suggestion that could be 

done with the forest industry? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — It needs, the industry that‟s out there . . . 

This is a recommendation that you guys could use if you‟d like, 

to go out to the communities that are impacted, to the people 

that are impacted and ask them, and to the industry and ask 

them, what truly can we do? Is there anything as a government 

we can do to assist you? What is it? You‟re first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, with cattle revenues coming in 

below the cost of production, I would like to ask the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood if he believes . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 75-minute debate has now 

expired. We now move on to private members‟ motions. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Harrison.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood 

River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

very pleased to stand and enter the debate on the motion put 

forward by my colleague and friend from Meadow Lake, and I 

would just like to enter again the motion into the books. And 

the motion is: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan supports 

the consideration of further value-added development of 

Saskatchewan‟s uranium industry including nuclear power 

generation and recognizes the potential benefits to the 

growth and prosperity of the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m very, very supportive of the nuclear 

industry in this province, and I wish members on the other side 

would also. They are no doubt a house divided when it comes to 

the nuclear industry and the value-added. We have a former 

premier that would march around trying to destroy the nuclear 

industry in this province. Him and his colleague, Peter Prebble, 

that marched against the nuclear value-added plant that was 

going to go into Warman. That‟s the kind of people we have on 

the other side of the House that are against any of the progress 

being made. We have a former premier that announced that this 

is the dirtiest form of energy — and yet today he‟s probably 

flip-flopped a little on that — talking about the dirtiest form of 

energy, when in fact it‟s probably the cleanest form of energy 

when we start looking at greenhouse gases or GHGs. And that 

is the place of the future, is looking at nuclear generation to 

reduce greenhouse gases. And yet the former premier calls it the 

dirtiest form of energy. That is totally unbelievable and 

unacceptable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Our government, we on this side of the House, we fully support 

adding value to our uranium. Value-added. And we have 26, 

slash, 30 per cent of the world‟s uranium, and we have some of 

the richest uranium deposits in the world. I and some of my 

colleagues had the opportunity to visit a uranium mine in the 

North, and some of the uranium there is so pure that it has to be 

downgraded or mixed with sand so they can process it. That‟s 

the type of uranium mines that we have in this province. And 

what do we do with it? What have we done with it? Under the 

former administration, they put their head in the sand, put it into 

yellowcake, close their eyes, and ship it out of the province to 

be processed. 

 

Again, back to the former premier, it was he and his cohorts 

that marched against having any value-added in the uranium 

industry in this province. Such a terrible, terrible way to go, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We have on this side of the House opened our 

eyes, our eyes to the value that this could be for the province, 

the total uranium industry and what it would do. We also feel, 

because we are a supplier of uranium, a world supplier of 

uranium, that we should be in on all of the advance technology 

that goes into the industry. We should be doing that here. We 

should be a leader on this file, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We have a natural advantage in this regard to lead, because of 

our uranium resources that we have. And so the potential is 

definitely obvious. We have companies in this province that are 

very, very world renowned in the uranium industry. 

 

So what would all of this do? When we start looking at, why 

would we want value-added? Why would we want to enter into 

this industry, value-added? Well you look at the jobs that it 

would create, the thousands of jobs. And I do have some figures 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I would like to read into the 

record. 

 

And we hear members opposite talk about, oh in 25 years what 

are you going to do, you know, what about in the future? Well 

in fact Bruce Power talks about a 60-year operation. Sixty years 

if they were to build a nuclear facility here in this province — a 

60-year plan. 

 

But I really want to talk about some of the impacts that 

value-added would have on a province. And even if we just 

look at the generational loan and not the enrichment and 

enhancement even, just nuclear generation, it would contribute 

about 4 billion — $4 billion — to the provincial economy. It 

would generate a total of 20,000 direct and indirect jobs during 

the construction phase. During the peak year of construction, 

the project would directly and indirectly contribute 

approximately 2.2 per cent of provincial GDP [gross domestic 

product] — 2.2 per cent. 

 

And yet we have members on the far side and the opposite side 

that are against it. They‟re against the growth; they‟re against 

everything that‟s kind of nuclear. They‟re against the province 

growing. I think they realize that if this province grows and the 

people moving back into this province are entrepreneurs and 

business people, they are really not NDPers. 

 

But a nuclear facility not only provides significant economic 

impacts during construction, but it would provide the economic 

benefits again — and I want to reuse that phrase — for 60 

years. And economic impacts are estimated to be . . . And I just 

want to go over some of these. The project will generate 1,000 

full-time jobs in addition to 900 indirect jobs for 60 years. On 

an annual basis, the project would contribute $240 million to 

the provincial economy. In fact the construction of a nuclear 

power station in Saskatchewan would be the largest single 

infrastructure project ever undertaken in our province — the 

largest infrastructure project. I think that‟s worth repeating. 

 

And what would a power plant bring to Saskatchewan through 

revenues? And I‟ve talked about this. Construction phase, 

project total tax revenues generated would be about $1.8 billion. 

Sixty years of operation, it would literally bring $10 billion in 

government revenues. 

 

And I kind of want to talk a little bit about the revenues creating 

some very, very high-paying jobs, lots of jobs, and the 

value-added part of the nuclear cycle also, if we get into the 

enrichment and enhancement side of it, the jobs that that would 

create. And it would put us as a world leader in the uranium 

cycle. 

 

[12:15] 

 

And if we look at the billions of dollars, the billions of dollars it 

would create for this province, why would members opposite be 

against that? Why would they actually be against growth? There 

are the fearmongers. There are the fearmongers over there that, 

ooh, people will glow in the dark. We know how they operate. 

We know how they operated in the election campaign, that they 

operate on fear, total fear. 

 

So where do they come from on the nuclear side of the House? 

Fear. People will glow in the dark. If you touch anything 

nuclear, you‟ll glow in the dark. And I would remind members 

opposite that the nuclear industry, the uranium industry, the 

nuclear spinoff . . . And I talk to people quite freely and openly 

about this and I say, when I talk about the nuclear cycle or the 

nuclear industry, what do you think of first? And I think this is 

where members opposite come from. What do you think of 

first? And a lot of people will say, Chernobyl. They will think 

the bomb. And that is where the fear has been implanted in the 

people‟s minds. 

 

Three Mile Island . . . And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the 

opportunity to fly over Three Mile Island. And I did it at 

extremely low level. And the output of that, the total . . . this 

thing that was supposed to be such a catastrophic mess, I flew 

over it and it wouldn‟t even light up the luminous dial in my 

watch. There is absolutely no leakage from that whatsoever. 

And yet the fear, the fear that‟s been involved with even the 

Three Mile Island one, and it‟s purported and spread by people 

like members opposite. 

 

But then you have to get realistic . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

All three of them. Then you have to get realistic. And I address 

it to people and I say, what do you think about medical 

isotopes? Oh, they‟re good. Oh boy, this medical isotope is just 

a fabulous thing. For cancer treatment, it‟s just absolutely 

outstanding. 

 

Well then I posed the rhetorical question: where do you suppose 

the isotopes come from? There‟s not a little magic wand that 

creates isotopes. It comes from uranium and from the nuclear 

industry. And so here we have people that are turning their eyes 

against, turning their backs on an industry that is providing 

some of the best health care services that we have in the world, 

and they want to turn their backs against that. I don‟t think 

that‟s very genuine. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s an awful lot of issues, reasons why 

we want to be involved in the nuclear cycle. And I mentioned 

money that would be generated for the province. And I don‟t 

know how anybody on the other side could even be against the 

creation of new wealth in this province, but here‟s 80 reasons, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here‟s 80 reasons why we on this side of 

the House are in favour of creating new wealth in this province, 

and again as I mentioned, the billions of dollars that would 

come from the nuclear enhancement in this province. 

 

And the 80 reasons . . . I‟m going to enlighten people opposite 

with some of the reasons why that I think that we should be 

involved in getting this money. Because we could increase 

operating funding to post-secondary institutions, like, to the 

tune of $27 million. Well we made that promise, Mr. Speaker, 

and guess what? We kept it. 

 

How about keeping tuition affordable for students by increasing 

operating funding to post-secondary institutions? And that‟s a 

promise that we made, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s a promise we kept. 

That is why we want to enhance industry in this province, so the 

province could actually gain more money. 

 

If you have the resources, you can launch the most aggressive 

youth retention plan in Canada by rebating up to $20,000 in 

tuition costs for post-secondary graduates who stay in 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

Saskatchewan for seven years after graduation — $20,000. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this takes some resources; this takes some 

revenue to do that. If we expand our nuclear industry, we would 

have money to do that. But oh, by the way, we did that. Promise 

made, promise kept. 

 

We also having money to put into the school of public policies 

to assist in professional development opportunities for public 

servants. See, we need revenues so we can do that. But there 

again, Mr. Speaker, is a promise that we made and it‟s a 

promise that we kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talked earlier on on this day about agriculture, 

and we said on this side of the House that we were going to 

conduct an immediate review of crop insurance program to 

determine how the coverage could be increased and the 

premiums reduced. Again we need revenues to do that. If you 

enhance something like the uranium industry and bring business 

into this province, you have the revenues to do that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have done that. We made the promise and we kept 

the promise. 

 

The fully funding of provincial government‟s share of 

agriculture risk management programs. Again revenues from 

such industries as a nuclear industry give us the resources, and 

would give us more resources where we could do that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there was a promise that we made and a promise that 

we kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you have increased revenues from any of 

our resource industries, well from any businesses even that pay 

money into the province, you can actually help out the people 

of the province. One way of doing that is ensuring safety to the 

degree possible for our citizens. And one way of doing that is 

having more police — unlike a government that I knew here 

once a few years ago that had promised 200 police officers — 

and promise made, promise not kept by the previous 

government. 

 

Two hundred police officers they promised and — what was it? 

— eight years later that we still didn‟t have the 200 police 

officers. Well, Mr. Speaker, with the resources that we have and 

the resources that we can expect from the uranium industry, we 

have said that we will hire 120 new police officers over the four 

years. There‟s a promise that we have kept, Mr. Speaker, 

already. 

 

Again with additional resources you can put money into dealing 

with organized crime and gangs. By the way, that‟s a promise 

that we made, and that‟s a promise that we kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s time to just talk a little bit about some 

of the record of the other side. We hear just a little bit of push 

back from them — I‟m not sure on what topic they‟re trying to 

push back on — but when I talk about the amount of things 

that‟s been done with increased revenues. And as this province 

grows, so does the provincial coffers grow. 

 

And we are a little bit different on this side of the House. No, 

I‟ll rephrase that. We‟re one heck of a lot different than the 

people on the other side of House, because when they had a 

little bit of extra money, do you know what they did? And it 

wasn‟t really extra money because the province was hurting at 

the time. But they decided, they decided that with the extra 

money that they gained, they would do something like buy into 

tappedinto.com. And we have a question on this side of the 

House. How did they make out, Mr. Speaker? How did they 

make out with tappedinto.com? Well I‟m going to stand here 

and tell you how they made out. They lost $6.7 million, $6.7 

million. 

 

Well that wasn‟t good enough. They had to go into Persona, 

which is another dot-com, and how did they make out with 

Persona? Well that one outdid it a little bit. That was $9.4 

million loss. So here we‟re talking about value-added in the 

uranium industry and what we could do with value-added 

dollars. 

 

And what did they do with the little bit of the extra money that 

they had, that they could not afford to lose, Mr. Speaker? Well 

they decided that a couple really wasn‟t enough, so they got 

into . . . My favourite is Navigata. And Navigata cost us $70 

million and we don‟t know how much more, because with the 

putting the books into a pot on the stove and stirring it up, they 

rolled Navigata into the parent company and so we couldn‟t 

even see how much more Navigata actually lost. But, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s $70 million lost in one company with an 

outside investment, out-of-the-province investment, and here 

we‟re looking at value-added within the province of 

Saskatchewan and how we can wisely spend dollars. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There are just too many debates taking 

place across the floor, unfortunately, which is interfering with 

the member‟s opportunity to be heard. So I would ask members, 

we‟re not that far away from adjourning the session to enjoy the 

holiday season, so let‟s begin it right now. I recognize the 

member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well I don‟t blame them for yipping, 

Mr. Speaker, because they just can‟t . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would just ask the member not to comment 

on Speaker‟s rulings or indirectly refer to. Member from Wood 

River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well members 

opposite really don‟t enjoy bad news, but I‟m going to give 

them some more bad news from their record. 

 

Did I mention Retx.com? Retx.com, well they only lost $26 

million. You know, the minister responsible for SPUDCO, he 

was proud about this one because he lost more on SPUDCO at 

$35 million so he outdid Retx.com by a few million bucks. 

They were competing to see what ministry and who could lose 

the most money. 

 

Well then we have Craig Wireless. Craig Wireless only lost 10 

million. That didn‟t even make it into their group of top 10. 

 

NST [NST Network Services of Chicago], $16 million loss. 

 

And here‟s a catchy one, really catchy. Clickabid.com lost $1.9 

million. Now again, I‟m going to repeat to members, when we 

look at value-added in the uranium industry and the dollars that 

we would get from that, I assure members on that side of the 

House that we would not put it into Clickabid.com. 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

Soft Tracks, $2.2 million loss; agdealer, $8.9 million loss. 

 

The list goes on. And I‟m sure members opposite enjoy this list 

so I‟m going to continue with it. 

 

How about Channel Lake? We heard about Channel Lake, I 

believe. That was a $15 million loss . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes, I think the designated leader of the party opposite was 

involved in that. 

 

Guyana, a $2 million loss. 

 

Then we come to one of my all-time favourites. We had a 

socialist government that wanted to get involved in everything 

so it could be under the umbrella of the socialist system. They 

wanted to get into bingo. Under the I, mega bingo lost $8 

million. Why in the world would even a socialist want to get 

involved in running a bingo industry? But oh, we had women 

and men on that side of the House that said, oh we‟ll get into 

the bingo. It‟s kind of nice to be involved in bingo, so we will 

get into bingo and we‟ll only lose $8 million on it. 

 

Well, Pangaea. Pangaea lost 3.5 million. So again we want to 

enhance this province, grow this province, increase revenues in 

this province so we can do the right things, and here they are 

doing that kind of investment in the past. 

 

We also know, Mr. Speaker, that they wanted to basically throw 

away $100 million in the forest industry, offering a sweetheart 

deal to a company. And we are not in favour of that although 

there‟s lots of forestry around where the uranium is mined. And 

we want to enhance the uranium industry in this province. And 

there might be some forest area around where the uranium 

industry is, but I‟ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn‟t put $100 

million into that forest area around the uranium mines. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, the money that can come in from these 

resources would allow us again to make promises and to be able 

to keep promises. And I think it‟s worthwhile to note some of 

these promises that we would be making and keeping. Funding 

for schools that meet stringent criteria, schools of opportunity. 

If you have the resources, you can do that. Well we did. We 

made a promise, and we kept that promise. 

 

The reduction of the education portion of property taxes for 

Saskatchewan homeowners by increasing the property tax 

rebate from 10 to 12 per cent in 2008-2009. Increased revenues 

allow us to do that. We made that promise, and you know what? 

We kept that promise. 

 

Increase the rebate on agricultural land from 38 to 47 per cent. 

Again, with increased revenues you can do that and, Mr. 

Speaker, that was a promise that we made and that‟s a promise 

that we kept. 

 

Increasing education operating funding to school boards by $28 

million. When you have funds, when you have increased 

revenues from industry such as value-added uranium industry, 

you could afford to do that. And, Mr. Speaker, we made that 

promise, and that‟s a promise that we kept. 

 

We provided an additional $2 million to community schools 

across the province for school lunch and anti-hunger programs. 

Again, with enhanced revenues we were able to do that, and 

that was a promise that we made and a promise that we kept. 

 

I think I‟ll pause on some of our promises for a couple of 

minutes, Mr. Speaker, and move . . . I‟ll get back to them. 

 

Looking more directly at the nuclear power, it would definitely 

increase our uranium exports. We could see uranium 

value-added here, value-added where we could actually get into 

the producing of rods, and look what that would do for exports 

— not only jobs and revenue for us in this province, but for 

exports. 

 

And we have to be realistic about the generation of electrical 

power. And I know members opposite . . . It would be fun to be 

in one of their debates in their caucus when they get into this, 

the yes, no part of the nuclear industry. But if we can put 

value-added into this industry, I mention the dollars it would 

create but the opportunities it would create for technology, we 

could be at the leading edge of the nuclear technological cycle. 

It‟s kind of a non-stop, open-ended opportunity for us to be 

involved in this and we should, we should, and could be the 

world leaders in technology in the uranium cycle. 

 

We have to look, we have to be realistic and look at other 

countries. We look at countries like France. They‟re generating, 

I think it‟s 50 per cent or 70 per cent of their power generations 

come from the nuclear cycle. And I think we should inform 

members opposite that are so much against the nuclear cycle, 

that my time that I spent in France I didn‟t really see anybody 

that was glowing in the dark. They have their nuclear facilities, 

but I didn‟t see one person that was glowing in the dark in 

France. 

 

Other countries around the world are looking at going into the 

nuclear generating systems for very, very many good reasons. 

One is the CO2 emissions and the sustainability as we start 

looking at fossil fuels — and there is a finite supply — and the 

nuclear generation of electricity would greatly, greatly enhance 

the length of fossil fuel supply in this world. 

 

And we know that the global demand for nuclear energy is 

going to increase even though we have the diehard leftists that 

are against it; reality does set in. Reality does even come to the 

mind of some of those in the extreme left of the political 

spectrum that are dead against this. They don‟t mind turning the 

light switch on and having a light bulb, but they‟re against how 

the source gets there. And again, head in the sand — the ostrich 

theory — they put their head in the sand and they don‟t believe 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, from the report they talk about . . . 

I‟m going to give you some quotes from the report, Bruce 

Power report, “The economic and environmental benefits make 

the case for nuclear power a [very] compelling one.” And we on 

this side of the House totally agree with that. Members 

opposite? A little bit of flip, a little bit of flop. I don‟t know. I‟ll 

keep my head in the sand. I won‟t vote on that. I‟ll go out of the 

room while you guys vote on it. Well half of them would go out 

of the room if it comes to a vote on it or half of them just 

wouldn‟t vote. And we actually have seen that happen. 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

We can encourage “. . . post-secondary institutions to establish 

educational programs in the area of nuclear science.” And this 

is out of the report, this isn‟t our words, this is out of the report 

from Bruce Power. We totally support adding value to the raw 

uranium. 

 

Again as I mentioned visiting the mine and seeing the ore come 

up and through the process. And I couldn‟t really explain the 

whole process, but it is turned into a yellowcake, and the 

yellowcake is then shipped out of the province. And we even 

have members opposite that are against the transportation of 

yellowcake. Well you can put your hand in a barrel of 

yellowcake, and it wouldn‟t hurt you. I mean, it‟s . . . But not 

from them. Because they want to promote the fear of this. So 

even driving a truckload of yellowcake down the highway, 

they‟re against that. They‟re against that because oh this bad 

word uranium, and they don‟t want to have anything to do with 

anything in uranium except close their eyes and take in the 

revenue from it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we have always said that we 

would do and which we are doing is we‟re consulting with the 

people of Saskatchewan and what their feelings are on nuclear. 

And it‟s not surprising to me; it‟s surprising to them. But 

there‟s a majority, a majority of the people in this province 

today that are in favour of nuclear generation of electricity. A 

majority of the people are in favour — I‟m going to repeat that 

because members opposite should hear that — a majority of the 

people in this province are in favour of having nuclear 

generated electricity. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the dichotomy that comes from the other 

side of the House is strange at best. As I mentioned earlier, we 

have a former premier that was just absolutely against it. He 

was marching, marching with his cohorts to stop the uranium 

processing plant in Warman. And that was one day. 

 

Now on the next day followed a couple years later, a few years 

later, and this is what the former premier had to say just 

recently, „“The province would consider any business case to 

establish a reactor or nuclear waste storage facility in the 

province.”‟ There‟s a little bit of dichotomy in there. There‟s a 

little bit of flip and a little bit of a flop because he says we don‟t 

want to do anything, we don‟t want any part of the nuclear 

industry in this province.  

 

In fact we shouldn‟t even be mining it and that is actually a 

quote, “The Government of Saskatchewan should phase out 

uranium mining in the province.” That is a quote. That is a 

quote, and I would repeat it again for the member opposite that 

in . . . Mr. Prebble as a matter of fact that made the quote. And 

he said, “The Government of Saskatchewan should phase out 

uranium mining in the province.” And he also quoted, he said, 

“As long as I am in this legislature, I will continue to oppose 

that practice . . .” 

 

So here we have a group of women and men on that side, I 

don‟t know if they‟re on the flip side or the flop side because 

it‟s both. There‟s a flip and there‟s a flop. And you know the 

former premier, the leader of the socialist party, says that: 

 

“As a province that mines and benefits economically from 

uranium, it is our responsibility as citizens of the globe to 

share in the burden of dealing with all the byproducts of its 

use.” 

 

That is again the former premier that is totally against the 

uranium, but well maybe I‟m not, but maybe I am. And so we 

have no idea where he stands. 

 

At least the designated candidate for the leadership, he has a 

firm position. That‟s one thing I give him credit for. He has a 

firm position on the nuclear industry. I don‟t know if members 

opposite support that or not, but I‟m not sure, I‟m not sure. 

Again a caucus divided. They should actually form a coalition 

over there on the uranium front. 

 

Here again I‟ll quote what the then premier said, actually it was 

in 2005:  

 

“Let me say today definitely, the answer is no. Under my 

leadership in this province, there will not be in 

Saskatchewan a nuclear waste disposal facility.”  

 

Now right out of the same one, he says: 

 

“As a province that mines and benefits economically from 

uranium, it is our responsibility as citizens of the globe to 

share in the burden of dealing with all the byproducts of its 

use.” 

 

Again is that Mr. Flip or is that Mr. Flop, because he has just 

said — and those two statements both came in 2005 — we‟ll 

have no part of that, but oh by the way, we‟ll have part of that. 

We should. So what is his position? I don‟t know if anybody 

over there actually has a position on the uranium industry. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Let‟s talk some more about their failed 

business dealings. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Shall we? I‟ve got another page of failed 

business deals that I could enlighten them with. 

 

And then we have the former minister of Finance, he also 

got into the quotes on the nuclear industry. And he said, and 

I quote, „“If you benefit from the mining of uranium or the 

use of uranium in your nuclear reactors . . . you can‟t then 

wash your hands of all the other issues.”‟ 

 

Now is he on the side of flip or is he on the side of flop because 

again there‟s two sides or three sides or no sides to that group of 

women and men on that side of the House when it comes to this 

industry. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter, the only candidate for the leadership thus far 

over there, as I mentioned, he‟s made his case pretty solid, 

pretty solid. And I want to quote him and he said, “If Tommy 

Douglas were here, it would be exactly what he would be 

doing.” I‟m not too sure who Tommy Douglas is, but he quoted 

Mr. Douglas anyway, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is just so much positive to deal with the 

uranium industry and the value-added. I mean, I could talk for a 

long time on the benefits that we would reap in this province 

from value-added in the industry — the revenues, the jobs. 

 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

And I understand members opposite. They really don‟t like to 

see growth. They‟re probably against having 10,000 new jobs 

created from this industry. They‟re probably against that. 

They‟d probably stand up and vote against it. Again, their 

philosophy is if we don‟t have these 10,000 more people 

coming in, there‟s more for us. Right? I think that was quoted 

from one of their ministers as a matter of fact, that if people 

leave the province there‟s more left here for those of us that are 

left. There‟s more for us. So here we are looking at growing the 

province and expanding our resource base value-added, and 

they actually wanted people to leave the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agreed time has come that we were going to 

shut down this debate for the moment. And at this time, I would 

like to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Wood River has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to move a motion adjourning the House, 

but before I do I‟d like to ask leave to make a short statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this is the time of year again when we come to the 

completion of the fall session of the sitting of the Saskatchewan 

legislature. And certainly it is one of those times and 

opportunities when we can express our gratitude for those many 

people that make it possible for us to do our job as members of 

this Assembly. 

 

And to certainly begin by thanking you, Mr. Speaker, and all of 

the staff and personnel under your direction that support us in 

our work as legislators. Mr. Speaker, I won‟t go into the 

detailed listing of all of them — they know who they are and I 

certainly will intend to recognize them more individually at the 

end of the spring session — but at this time I want to express 

this Assembly‟s heartfelt appreciation for everything they do to 

assist us in the discharge of our duty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, I would like to thank the 

Opposition House Leader for his efforts in this regard and the 

opposition caucus for their efforts in terms of making this 

legislature a place of debate and consideration and decision, and 

certainly, I think, it does all of us proud by the way we conduct 

ourselves in this Assembly. 

 

At this time of the year it‟s particularly important, I think, to 

recognize and thank those who are probably the most important 

to all of us in terms of the discharge of our duty, and that‟s our 

families. You know, it is always something that I think does not 

get said often enough to our spouses and our families in saying, 

when we come home exhausted at the end of the week and they 

are understanding and helpful and supportive, is — I don‟t think 

any of us say often enough and meaningfully enough and 

lovingly enough — thank you. And I think that when we have 

the opportunity to do it officially on the record, we should take 

that opportunity and mean it from the bottom of our hearts to 

thank our families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re at the time of year 

as well where we‟re going to embark on a very special season, a 

season of wonder and joy and family being together, and being 

able to relive our own childhood, and maybe in the eyes — for 

me now, of our grandchildren — for many members, their 

children. But it is also a time of wonder and awe and 

celebration. 

 

And I think my favourite advertisement on television is the ad 

— I won‟t say the company that is responsible for it — where 

these two little kids with reindeer horns on their head are 

decorating the Christmas tree. And then as the camera pans 

backward, the tree is decorated beautifully up to the height that 

they can reach. Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, at our 

household that‟s the level where we can only put the candy 

canes down to because they can help themselves if we get it any 

lower than that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a season of awe and wonder, and we have 

to remember as well it is all because of a child that 2,000 years 

ago came into the world to bring peace and tranquility in the 

world. And I think in closing, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to wish 

everyone in this Assembly, their families and loved ones, a very 

merry and blessed Christmas and the very best in the new year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. By leave, I request time 

to also bring greetings. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has asked for 

leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 

appreciate the opportunity to, on behalf of the opposition 

caucus, on behalf of the leader of the New Democratic Party, 



December 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

and on behalf of my caucus colleagues to bring the greetings of 

the season here as we close this session of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I share with the Government House Leader our 

thanks to all of those who serve us as we are doing the work 

that the public has asked us to do, including yourself, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you for what you have done to ensure that we 

have the capacity to do the work that we do here, and for those 

who support you in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker — the Clerks at 

the Table, the Pages, the people behind the wall who are 

working in the offices, etc., Mr. Speaker, our friends at 

Hansard. Today we celebrated long service of an individual at 

Hansard who visited the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and you 

recognized that individual earlier today, Mr. Speaker. There‟s 

an awful lot of people who help us to do that work, and on 

behalf of the caucus I say Merry Christmas and best wishes to 

them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to all of those who serve the people of 

Saskatchewan through their standing for nomination for 

election and for their service in this Chamber, thanks for all that 

has been done on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. And 

also especially to the Government House Leader, who 

throughout this session has provided me with the information 

that I needed to be able to do the work for the opposition caucus 

that allows this place to work in a fashion that allows work to 

be completed. And so I thank the Government House Leader in 

that regard. 

 

Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place did a member‟s statement, a member‟s statement of 

Christmas greeting. And in that statement the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place quoted the former leader of the New 

Democratic Party, a former premier of this province, an 

individual who is recognized by all political parties, Mr. 

Speaker, as a great and wonderful individual, Mr. T.C. Douglas, 

who once said: 

 

The shepherds who heard the message of „Peace on Earth‟ 

did not consider that to be a description of things as they 

were, but a vision of what they might be if we could learn 

to live together in a spirit of mutual goodwill and better 

understanding . . . 

 

Mr. Douglas was a wise individual, Mr. Speaker, whose words 

when spoken are as important today as they were then. So for 

this reason, Mr. Speaker, it is important when we gather 

together with our loved ones to observe this season, in whatever 

our custom, to renew our pledge of goodwill to all. 

 

I want to also, as the Minister of Finance, the Government 

House Leader, indicated, to thank our families at this time of 

year, Mr. Speaker. We are leaving this place and we are 

returning to do some work in our constituencies, but also now 

to spend, at this important time of year spend some valuable 

time with our families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think I have said on previous occasions and certainly in social 

occasions around here that quite often this place is not very 

spouse friendly. We get wrapped up in a lot of the work that we 

do here, Mr. Speaker. We know our work is important — 

sometimes we think it is more important than it actually is on a 

given day, Mr. Speaker — but it is our spouses and our 

immediate family who support us in our desire to do the best we 

can in this place. And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, they are sitting 

alone watching the work that we do and we need to remind 

ourselves and them of how important that individual 

relationship is between us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to my spouse, Cheryl, working at home in 

North Battleford today — as she has been throughout this 

session, Mr. Speaker — I say thank you, and on behalf of the 

opposition caucus to all of our immediate spouses, Mr. Speaker, 

I say on our behalf, thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that having been said, we are returning to our 

constituencies for this important time of year. We will return in 

the new year back to our seats. Mr. Speaker, I know we all look 

forward to the time at home. We look forward to the time when 

we return here. I wish us all best wishes for this time away, and 

I hope we return in good spirits, good health, prepared to 

continue to serve the interests and needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I present the motion as presented by 

the Government House Leader, I also want to extend my thanks 

to each and every one of the members of the Assembly. At 

times it‟s been somewhat of a challenge, but that‟s the political 

field we play in, we work in, and each and every one of you are 

a spokesperson for your constituents. And we don‟t always 

agree, but this is the opportunity to share the values that you 

stand for, regardless of which side of the Assembly you happen 

to sit on at this time. And as Speaker I want to thank you for 

your co-operation through this past fall session. 

 

You know, as was already mentioned there are many people 

that we want to say thank you to, and to the Clerks at the Table, 

to Greg and Ken, Iris and Meta, we say thank you. To the Pages 

who have served us this fall session we want to say thank you, 

to Brianne Coffey, Meagan Fraser, Tanessa Johnson, Samantha 

Kerr, Desiree McPartlin, and Raegan Woods. And we trust that 

even though it‟s a short session it‟s been very rewarding for 

you, and educational. And thank you so much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — To our Sergeant-at-Arms, Pat, and his staff, 

both the ongoing security and sessional, thank you. So far he 

hasn‟t caught me with the club yet. 

 

But you know, what I find interesting about this place is the fact 

that we not only have strong views but we also have the 

opportunity to laugh. And you know, I guess sometimes I may 

have looked quite stern. I trust that hasn‟t been always reflected 

as the true who I am, but I really appreciate each and every one 

of you as individuals. 

 

And what I‟ll say as well, thank you to the many staff people 

and the people who work in the backrooms. And certainly in 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 2008 

my office to Margaret and Kathy and Irene and Rhonda, as 

she‟s facing some challenges at this time. 

 

You know, I walk downstairs to the cafeteria . . . I think we‟ve 

also acknowledged the cafeteria staff have worked very hard. 

But I think we would also like to extend a special wish to our 

cafeteria chef. It‟ll be a challenging Christmas for him and his 

son. And if you have a moment just say, yes we‟re thinking of 

you; it‟s going to be difficult but, you know, our thoughts are 

with you — we trust you‟ll find this a special season, difficult 

as it is. 

 

Finally, just a wish that each and every one of you enjoy this 

time with your family and recognizing the reason for the 

season. It‟s been shared by members on both sides of the 

Assembly as the message of hope and peace and love that came 

through a child. May you not forget that. That‟s what binds us 

together. At the end of the day, that‟s the only hope we really 

have. 

 

And I want to extend my sincere wishes for a very Merry 

Christmas and a Happy New Year. And I‟ll look forward to 

working with you and meeting you all again as we gather 

together in the new year. 

 

At this time I place a motion that this House do now adjourn. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until the call of the Chair. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:58.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1973 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1973 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1973 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1973 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1974 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1974 

 Questions from Students 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1975 

 Wendel Clark Honoured 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1975 

 Support for Women Victims of Violence 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1975 

 Kindersley Wins Seat Belt Challenge 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

 Christmas Greetings 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1976 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1977 

 Government’s Performance 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1977 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1978 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 604 — The Professional Public Service Employees Protection Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1982 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1982 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1982 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Disappointment in Government 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1982, 1992 

  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1984, 1992 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1986, 1991 

  Kirsch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1987, 1991 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1989 

  Hart ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1990, 1993 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1991 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1991 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1992 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1992 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Saskatchewan’s Uranium Industry 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1993 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1998 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1998 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1999 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


