




















































Hansard: April 23, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 31A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 23, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1061 

 April 23, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure today to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, 54 bright-eyed 

students from the Father Robinson School in Saskatoon. 

 

Father Robinson School is in the heart of the Saskatoon Silver 

Springs constituency. It‟s the largest Catholic school in 

Saskatoon with some 630 students. Now I‟m told that they‟re a 

very well-behaved bunch, Mr. Speaker, but I don‟t know by the 

list of their chaperones here . . . but I think they just had some 

chaperones that wanted to come to the legislature as well. 

 

Supervising the students are teachers Cheryl Green and Ann 

Waugh, both contributors in Saskatoon in many, many ways. 

Ann and her husband, Kevin Waugh, do so many things for the 

community, as well as Cheryl Green. 

 

We want to welcome also chaperones Theresa Stadnyk, Monica 

Thiessen, Rick Libner, Cathy Wyszomirski, Renee Tuttle, Lila 

Williams, Brenda Steinke, Corrie Martens, Elsa Belyk, 

Courtney Waugh, Dwayne Palchewich, Shelley Rissling, Susan 

Bristow, Lea Hause, Shauna Kachur, Karen Popoff, Heath 

Muggli. And we don‟t have the name of the bus driver on the 

list, but I‟m sure that . . . I know he got you here safe, and he or 

she will get you home well. 

 

We as members of the legislature are so pleased when students 

can come. I know that the students have questions that they are 

going to put to the Premier and myself a little bit later today. 

And we sure, we sure appreciate the questions. They‟ll have an 

opportunity to hear some of the questions that the opposition 

put forward, and I know yours will be as good, if not better. I‟d 

ask all members to welcome the group of students from Father 

Robinson School in Saskatoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. All hon. 

members in this Assembly will have noted that the participants 

in the Saskatchewan House of Prayer have been dropping by on 

a very regular basis and been seated in your gallery today. 

There are two from the constituency of Swift Current that I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the Assembly. We had the opportunity to briefly say hello 

earlier this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure for me to introduce Bonnie 

Johnston and Maureen Quincy from Swift Current, from 

southwest Saskatchewan. And I would ask all members to 

welcome them to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I would also like to acknowledge 

the presence of Mr. Kevin Fenwick, our Provincial 

Ombudsman, sitting in the Speaker‟s gallery. I‟d like to extend 

a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s with a great deal of pleasure I rise to present a 

petition on behalf of Moose Jaw residents. And the petition 

deals with the expansion, the proposed expansion to Moose Jaw 

Union Hospital. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide the funding for the 

expansion and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union 

Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased today to stand and present a petition on 

behalf of Saskatchewan residents dealing with Bills 5 and 6, 

Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the people from the 

communities of Saskatoon, Regina, and various other 

communities across Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

present a petition that reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that our Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens that have signed this petition live on 

Avenue E, Avenue H, 8th Avenue, St. Paul‟s Place, Spadina 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

Crescent, Avenue B South, 20th Street, Avenue E, Avenue H, 

Clarence, Molloy Street, 22nd Street, Avenue U, Avenue Q, 

and Avenue F and Avenue K. All people that live in that area, 

Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Recognizing Administrative Professionals 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is 

Administrative Professionals Day, a day set aside to express our 

gratitude for the hard work and invaluable contributions that 

administrative professionals provide on a daily basis. Mr. 

Speaker, behind every successful office, there‟s an efficient and 

dedicated staff of administrative support in support of us. 

 

In today‟s high-speed, demanding, and technical world, the role 

of the administrative professional is ever-changing and 

becoming increasingly dynamic. Mr. Speaker, whether the 

individual is caring for a sick child while they find a parent or 

guardian to pick up the child from school or child care; whether 

the individual is juggling a calendar to book appointments for a 

cancer patient, with our constituents, or with a client; or simply 

accepting calls from a working mom who calls and asks for her 

child to be notified that she should go to the child care program 

because a conflict has come up and neither parent can pick her 

up from school, all of these individuals are such an important 

facet of our everyday lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would personally like to thank Margaret, Jannet, 

Val, and Gail from our caucus office, the NDP caucus office; 

Sherry and Nathan from the Regina Walsh Acres constituency 

office; and Marcia from St. Mary‟s School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all of my colleagues I‟d like to take 

this opportunity to acknowledge the hard work and all of the 

administrative professionals throughout the province and in our 

constituency offices and in our caucus offices, and commend 

them for their tireless efforts and commitment. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 

House in recognition of the Administrative Professionals Week 

and all those who work in our caucus and our party offices, as 

well as in constituency offices across the province. I know I‟m 

speaking for the entire caucus when I say we‟re able to perform 

our duties only thanks to the hard work that Marianne Hoffart, 

Linda Holzer, Brooklyn Elhard do each and every day, even 

when we‟re not in session. Erin Brehm also does a tremendous 

job at the party headquarters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these four women provide professional, efficient, 

and timely assistance that goes well beyond what is required. 

They are the detail people, Mr. Speaker, and the work they do 

all too often goes unrecognized. They take care of the little 

things that are critical as we go about our duties. 

 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] are not the only 

ones who benefit from their help. All the employees in our 

caucus and party offices do. I plan on making it a point to call 

my constituency office today so I can thank my constituency 

assistant. These individuals provide a vital link with our 

constituents. While we can‟t be in our offices every day, our 

CAs [constituency assistant] are, and they act as our eyes and 

ears at home. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw High School Drama Festival 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, A.E. Peacock Collegiate was centre stage for the 

Moose Jaw High School Drama Festival recently. Four Moose 

Jaw schools participated in the festival: Vanier Collegiate, 

Central Collegiate, Peacock Collegiate, and Cornerstone 

Christian School. Also in attendance for the festival were 

Assiniboia Composite High and Central Butte School. 

 

The event was a great success, and all the schools did an 

excellent job with more than 25 awards being handed out 

throughout the festival. Vanier Collegiate took several awards. 

The school performed the comedy 15 Reasons Not to Put on a 

Play, which took best overall play. The school will be 

performing the play at the provincial championship that will be 

held in May at the University of Regina. 

 

Central Collegiate presented the play Making Nice, and Peacock 

performed Juvie, with both productions claiming a number of 

awards. 

 

Karrie Ritchie said in her four years as a coordinator, this was 

the very best festival. With well-prepared casts and crews, 

Ritchie was grateful for the students who made the festival one 

to remember. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 

recognizing these talented students involved in these 

productions and the supporting staff and volunteers that helped 

make this festival possible. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

2008 Premier’s Dinner 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last night 

business leaders and residents of Regina attended the 2008 

Premier‟s dinner here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, the dinner was a 

huge success, being sold out three weeks ago and being 

attended by over 1,600 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it started off with the Premier being introduced by 

one of Saskatchewan‟s greatest broadcasters, Pamela Wallin, 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

who as we all know is a true champion of Saskatchewan and 

went on to serve as the Canadian Consul General to New York. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every person who attended the dinner came away 

inspired and determined to work together to help Saskatchewan 

continue to grow. Mr. Speaker, the Premier outlined his vision 

for Saskatchewan and how the rest of Canada is talking about 

Saskatchewan and the province. Mr. Speaker, the Premier also 

talked about the Saskatchewan Party government‟s 

achievements since taking office a few short months ago and 

how our government is showing true leadership, and how we 

are ready for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have been able to attend many dinners and hear 

many speeches given by very influential people, but last night, 

Mr. Speaker, was something truly special for me and those who 

attended, and will go down as one of the most successful events 

held and hosted by Saskatchewan‟s Premier. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Crocus Co-op Celebrates Anniversary 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday, Crocus 

Co-op in Saskatoon celebrated its 25th anniversary by hosting a 

very special luncheon. My colleagues from Riversdale and 

Meewasin and I were able to take part in the celebrations. 

Members, friends, and supporters recall the journey Crocus has 

taken over the past 25 years. One special speaker, Dianne 

Billings, the first female president, talked fondly of the 

challenges Crocus overcame to be what it is today. 

 

Crocus Co-op, a non-profit, charitable, member-guided 

organization, works on behalf of people recovering from mental 

illness by promoting their rights and responsibilities; providing 

a safe, accepting, drop-in environment; and promoting 

members‟ growth through vocational, educational, recreational, 

and social programs. 

 

Crocus is a place where staff and members can work and play 

together in a non-judgmental environment. It‟s a place where 

members can find companionship, understanding, and support. 

It‟s a place to learn, work, and heal. 

 

The transitional work program is the real heart of the 

rehabilitation strategy at Crocus. Suitable employment tops the 

unmet needs of the membership, putting real money into their 

pockets, and it brings the dignity of earning your own way. 

 

Crocus is proud to have served our community for the past 25 

years and looks forward to continuing to be an important link in 

helping to banish the stigma associated with mental health and 

to provide help to successfully recover from mental illness. I 

ask all members to join me in congratulating Crocus Co-op on 

their 25th anniversary. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

Dress For Success Suit Drive 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to announce that 

tomorrow afternoon the Government of Saskatchewan is 

hosting a suit drive to benefit Dress for Success Regina. 

Between 11:30 and 2 in the first floor rotunda, volunteers from 

our government and Dress for Success Regina will be collecting 

clothing and financial donations for this organization. 

 

This incredible organization is quite new to our city, Mr. 

Speaker, and aims to promote the economic independence of 

disadvantaged women by providing professional attire, a 

network of support, and the career development tools to help 

women in our city thrive in work and in life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, upon a confirmed job interview, clients are 

referred to Dress for Success Regina through a variety of 

referral agencies. They are invited to the boutique and are suited 

for this interview by a trained volunteer who also provides the 

woman with encouragement that in turns raises her confidence 

and self-esteem. After the client secures employment, she‟s 

invited back to the boutique for an employment suiting which 

includes a week‟s worth of clothing and accessories. 

 

We only get one first impression, Mr. Speaker. While clothing 

cannot make the woman, it really can provide her with the 

confidence to make that impression a good one, regardless of 

her economic situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to invite all the employees of this 

building to donate clothing to Dress for Success Regina in the 

next couple of hours, and I‟d like to thank you all for support of 

this worthy cause. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Disposal of Records 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has made a 

lot of interesting statements in the last weeks, but the one I find 

most interesting is where he claims that the Sask Party didn‟t 

leave anything behind when they moved out. 

 

Actually in my very office there‟s a vault in the wall, and when 

I moved into my office, there was a lot of stuff left behind. 

There were old VCRs [videocassette recorder], tape players, a 

video camera, and other electronic equipment. There were news 

releases and files on anything from GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program] to Fishing Lake, from 16 years ago to one 

year ago. And there was a sign left on the door by members 

across the way saying, quote, “hidden agenda vault, established 

1997.” You can‟t make this stuff up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another interesting thing is that Monday the Justice minister 

told police that the Sask Party takes personal correspondence 

and casework very, very seriously, but not so seriously that they 

didn‟t leave a few boxes of it behind. We found this personal, 

private information in the hidden agenda vault, and we did the 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

right thing. We turned it over to the Privacy Commissioner, and 

he wrote back to us saying that we needed to shred it or turn it 

over to the MLAs across the way. 

 

So to the Sask Party: we have your files; come and get them. 

And the Privacy Commissioner says to give them to an MLA. 

I‟m pretty busy with House duties and committee work, but I 

have some spare office hours between 2:30 and 3:30 today, and 

that‟s room 140. Come and get your files. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Measures to Assist Low-Income Workers 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, last night while the Premier and 

his MLAs were out at a $225-a-plate dinner, the people of our 

province were at home wondering why the mean-spirited 

government cut for a program for low-income workers. 

Yesterday the Minister of Health said the program was simply 

too expensive. 

 

Well we‟ve seen those members opposite give $60,000 increase 

to Ken Love, a $20,000 increase to Mr. Eberle, $50,000 to 

Kevin Wilson, and $75,000 to Doug Emsley. While a health 

benefit program to low-income workers is a little too rich for 

the minister, he apparently has no problem spending more than 

that to pad the pockets of Sask Party friends. 

 

So to the Premier: how does he defend this double standard — 

big bonuses for Sask Party friends and staff, and no health care 

benefits for low-income working people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the 

Saskatchewan Party government has done what it always said it 

would do, and that is to share the prosperity of our province 

with all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In our budget, Mr. Speaker, we have 500,000 for school lunch 

and anti-hunger programs in the community schools. In our 

budget, Mr. Speaker, we have the largest increase ever to 

low-income families to help them raise their children. Mr. 

Speaker, in our budget is $5 million for CBOs 

[community-based organization] for life skills and job trainings. 

 

In our budget there, we just dedicated last week $440,000 for 

the food bank to help with the cull program with the hogs. We 

have 1 million additional dollars for transitional houses and 

sexual abuse centres. Mr. Speaker, we have a refundable tax 

benefit of up to $150 per year for children aged 6 to 14, 

registered in cultural, recreational, or sports programs. Mr. 

Speaker, I hope they have another question because this list 

goes on and on of the good things in our budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — When the Health minister was asked why he 

axed the program, he responded that low-income working 

people should simply get a higher-paying job. I‟ll remind the 

members opposite that the vulnerable workers report found that 

90,000 Saskatchewan residents earn less than $10 an hour or 

less than $20,000 a year. 

 

So to the Premier: does he really think that his government‟s 

only responsibility is to tell low-income working people to get a 

better job, or does he think that the Minister of Health might, 

just might, have some responsibility to ensure that 

Saskatchewan‟s most vulnerable workers, i.e., low-income 

working people, should have access to some health benefits? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

glad to yet again be able to answer the member‟s question by 

going through the number of great things in our budget that 

helps working people and lower-income people. 

 

We added 500 additional new daycare spaces for the price of 

$33.8 million. We doubled, Mr. Speaker, the tax credits for 

families. We doubled the tax credit for families taking care of 

the disabled. We added 7.5 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 

long list of all the initiatives in our budget that will help 

families and low-income people in our province. We added 7.5 

million for early childhood development and KidsFirst 

programs. We added 38 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] locations 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my own Ministry of Social Services added 

additional funding for Egadz for youth, vulnerable youth in 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, we have a 15 per cent increase for 

foster care rates in our province. Mr. Speaker, I hope there‟s 

another question, because I could just continue on and on and 

on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of 

Health was asked by reporters whether any due diligence was 

done to ensure that health benefits are available for low-income 

working people, the minister replied and I quote, “I haven‟t 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

done that work, no.” Well good to see that the government cuts 

first and then asks questions later. 

 

Now anti-poverty advocates say they know many people who 

would benefit from this program. And Peter Gilmer from the 

Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry called the program‟s cancellation 

a step backwards. 

 

To the Premier: is his advice still simply to get a better job or 

can they at least consider . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member may place her question. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So to the Premier: is his government‟s advice 

simply still for low-income working people to get a better job, 

or can they do some due diligence and reinstate the program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder when the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] were in government, what was their 

advice. Let me see. On their 1991 NDP election promise was to 

eliminate the need for food banks in Saskatchewan. They had 

16 years to do that, Mr. Speaker. The NDP had 16 years to do 

that and what happened? We have, at the end of 16 years, have 

the highest number of people using food banks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also they said that they would work to end child 

poverty. What did they do in 16 years, Mr. Speaker? Well we 

lead the nation in child poverty. Mr. Speaker, we have a lot to 

do as a new government and we intend to do it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So let‟s recap, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

government that‟s sitting on $1.3 billion in cash. This is a 

government that shows such contempt for working people and 

low-income people that they do a couple of things. They axe 

Station 20. They do in the dental sealant program for 

low-income kids in inner city neighbourhoods in Saskatoon and 

Regina. And now they cancel a health benefit for very 

low-income working people, Mr. Speaker. This really does tell 

the public what this Sask Party government is prepared to do 

when it comes to mean-spirited cuts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would ask the member once again: can she at least consider 

re-implementing this health benefit for very low-income 

working people? And as we know, there are many businesses in 

this province that cannot afford these types of health benefits, 

and they need to attract workers. Can she at least consider 

re-implementing this health benefit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there was a gentleman who once said that it is a sad truth that 

only blocks from the marble steps of this legislature, only 

blocks from the marble steps of this legislature it is the sad truth 

that children in this city go to school hungry. And that‟s a 

disgrace, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is well known in this House 

and across the province that the growth industry in 

Saskatchewan in this decade has been the food banks. 

 

And you know who said that, Mr. Speaker? Well it is the 

Leader of the NDP, and they had 16 years to address this 

problem. And, Mr. Speaker, what does the Saskatchewan Party 

do in their very first budget only months after the election? We 

added money for the school lunch and anti-hunger program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Water Quality 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a recent 

report in the Canadian Medical Association Journal indicates 

that Saskatchewan has among the most boil-water advisories of 

any province or territory in the country. According to the report, 

Saskatchewan ranks fourth with 126 advisories as of March 21. 

By comparison, Mr. Speaker, Alberta had 13 such advisories, 

and Manitoba only 59. Of the boil-water advisories in our 

province, 53 are considered emergency advisories. This means 

that a threat to human health has been conclusively identified in 

the water source. 

 

My question is to the minister: with $1 billion in the bank, the 

Sask Party government is in a strong position to act on this 

issue. What will the minister do to address water quality in our 

province? What is her plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for her question, and I would point out that I‟m pretty 

sure that not every one of these water advisories came down in 

the last five months. I would imagine that some of these came 

down while the NDP was in power as well. 

 

But as for water in this province, Mr. Speaker, obviously it‟s a 

priority for this government to ensure that we have a quality 

water supply for people of this province and to promote 

conservation as well. And we look forward to, after signing the 

agreement with the federal government on infrastructure, 

money coming into this province, that where there are 

improvements that need to be made, those can be made through 

that funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I will remind that minister that 

many of the boil-water advisories are in rural Saskatchewan, so 

if she‟s really a friend of the rural Saskatchewan she claims to 

be, perhaps she could also answer the question. José 

Miville-Dechêne . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d ask members to allow the member to place 

her question. Member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, José 

Miville-Dechêne, the editor of The Water Chronicles, an 

independent water monitoring organization, has warned that, 

quote, “Everybody in Canada seems to think [that] we don‟t 

have issues with water, and we do, and they‟re growing.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province has among the most boil-water 

advisories in the country, and she has no plan. My question is to 

the minister. Will the minister commit today to doing the 

necessary consultations to developing a plan to substantively 

address the very serious issue of water quality here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would point 

out to the member opposite, if she went through our budget, 

which was released not so very long ago, that she would see a 

$6 million investment in new dollars for water development in 

southwest Saskatchewan. 

 

The Premier and I attended the Council of the Federation in 

January in Vancouver and are committed to a water strategy for 

not just this province but for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, the Premier and I were at the Council of the Federation 

meetings in Vancouver in January and are committed to a 

national water strategy, working with other premiers and 

provinces across the country. And there is currently a 

development committee that has drafted a Canada-wide strategy 

for managing water across Canada, and we look forward to the 

outcome of that report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, for a government that claims it‟s 

moving forward, that minister sure spends a lot of time looking 

back. 

 

Our province has among the most difficulties with water quality 

of any jurisdiction in Canada. Climate change and the 

development of oil sands will exacerbate the problem, and how 

does the minister respond? She cut all but 40 of the $320 

million set aside for climate change initiatives, eliminated the 

Office of Energy Conservation, and disbanded the climate 

change secretariat. She‟s failed to address the acidification of 

water sources in the North, and now we see that she has 

absolutely no plan to deal with water quality, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question is to the minister. Will the minister come clean 

with the people of Saskatchewan and admit that she is no more 

interested in addressing water quality than she is in addressing 

climate change? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for her question, for bringing up climate change. I 

know the opposition likes to use the phrase stunningly 

incompetent, and I think they use the phrase because they‟re 

intimately familiar with it. 

 

We know that the NDP had absolutely no plan for industry or 

SaskPower on climate change when they were in government, 

and they are apparently incredibly confused when they‟re in 

opposition. Mr. Speaker, the Environment critic said Tuesday 

during a scrum that, quote, “intensity-based targets do nothing 

in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.” But then she 

went on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “I would say the 

federal targets are something that they [meaning us] should 

clearly be adopting.” 

 

I would point out to the Environment critic for the opposition 

that the federal regulations are intensity-based, the very thing 

that she argued against. And, Mr. Speaker, I would also point 

out to the member opposite that the targets for the federal 

regulations are 20 per cent over . . . a reduction by 2020. The 

targets that they themselves adopted are 32 per cent. Is she now 

abdicating her party‟s position? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Investment Strategy 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Increasingly 

Saskatchewan people are worried about their Crown 

corporations. Their concerns follow recent comments made by 

the Minister Responsible for the Crown Corporations. Last 

week the minister said that the Sask Party would be interfering 

in the operations of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 

and placing a moratorium on all further out-of-province 

investment. He also said that party would be reviewing all 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

Crown investments outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Navigata is a SaskTel Crown asset that the Sask 

Party has used a whipping boy for years. My question to the 

minister: will the Sask Party be selling all or part of Navigata? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

reminder for the member opposite and for all members of the 

legislature that we are the party that keeps our promises. On 

November 7 and throughout the election campaign, we said to 

the people of Saskatchewan that Saskatchewan‟s Crowns will 

remain under public ownership, and that‟s what we intend to 

do. That‟s where they will stay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To specifically address the member‟s question, today we talked 

in the release of the SaskTel annual report about an audit that 

this government will be undertaking to audit all out-of-province 

investments. It‟s something that is necessary. It‟s something 

that would be done in the private sector. And it‟s something 

that‟s incumbent upon a responsible government to do in light 

of the situation in the Crowns today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there‟s 

another rumour in Saskatchewan, and it involves Saskferco. To 

the minister: will the minister confirm that his government has 

engaged the services of CIBC Wood Gundy to sell the 

government‟s Saskferco assets? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — To be clear — and I thank the member 

for his question, Mr. Speaker — to be clear, this is an 

investment, a government investment, not a wholly owned 

Crown corporation. The province holds an interest in Saskferco 

with a substantial business partner. The government‟s interest is 

a minority interest. And we have not only some commercial 

interests to protect in the comments we make, but we are also 

subject to the majority shareholder‟s wishes on this matter. So if 

they have an interest in selling Saskferco, that may happen at 

some point. Thank you for the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, like a leopard, the Sask Party, 

it hasn‟t taken them very long to show their true conservative 

spots. The members opposite did a lot of talking before the 

election about how they wouldn‟t privatize Saskatchewan‟s 

Crown corporations. But they conveniently forgot to mention 

that some Crowns are more Crown than others. After only five 

months in government, Mr. Speaker, three of our province‟s 

Crown assets are clearly on the chopping . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After only five months 

in government, three of our province‟s Crown assets are clearly 

on the chopping block. 

 

My question is to the Minister Responsible for CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. What other 

Crowns, Crowns that belong to the people of Saskatchewan, are 

on the Sask Party‟s chopping block? What‟s next? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognized the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — I thank the member for that question as 

well, Mr. Speaker. And certainly during the reign of the 

previous NDP government some Crowns were a lot more 

Crown than others. And here‟s three that were a lot less Crown 

apparently. 

 

The Husky shares that that former government possessed and 

were sold — and were sold, Mr. Speaker. The Cameco shares 

that that government sold, and I think they made a good deal on 

those Cameco shares, Mr. Speaker. But they did, but they did, 

Mr. Speaker, sell them. And most recently and just before the 

last election in 2007, Mr. Speaker, they sold their government 

shares in the NewGrade upgrader here in Regina. Clearly some 

Crowns under that administration were more Crown than 

others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Accountability and Transparency 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before the election, the members 

opposite claimed they would come to government and make 

government more transparent and more accountable. Now they 

have just tabled in this House, legislation that does, Mr. 

Speaker, just the opposite. 

 

Up until now, Mr. Speaker, all expenditures made by the 

Premier and cabinet, over $50,000, required an order in council. 

That order in council made the expenditure public in a matter of 

days. This week they introduced Bill 31 which will change that 

provision, Mr. Speaker, which will allow the Premier and the 

cabinet to spend up to $350,000, Mr. Speaker, without an order 

in council, without public exposure of the expenditure, for at 

least a year. 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

I ask the Premier: how can this change that he has proposed be 

described as improving accountability and transparency? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member for the question. I think it‟s fair to say that The Growth 

and Financial Security Act that this government introduced in 

December, and that will pass this spring, makes great strides 

towards increasing the accountability and the transparency of 

the government. It strengthens the balanced budget legislation 

of the province of Saskatchewan. And moreover every single 

decision that this government makes either in council or in the 

Legislative Assembly is subject to and open to scrutiny of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We will be accountable for decisions that are made on this side 

of the House, in the cabinet. We‟ll be accountable for 

legislation that is passed, Mr. Speaker. And that has not always 

been the case. And if the Leader of the Opposition wishes to 

discuss it further, I‟d be more than happy to do that. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they promised to be more 

accountable and transparent. Part of their commitment was to 

place all OCs, all order in councils, online so that the public 

could see them. Now what they‟ve failed to mention to the 

people of Saskatchewan was they were prepared to jack up by 

seven times the amount of money this Premier and this cabinet 

can spend without reporting it publicly, until such time as it 

may appear in the public accounts. 

 

How, Mr. Speaker, can, how can the Premier defend that 

commitment made to the people of Saskatchewan with this 

legislation that‟s now before the House? It is clearly breaking 

his commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the scope and scale of 

government activities obviously, since the original OC levels in 

terms of expenditures were set, has changed. We also want to 

ensure, Mr. Speaker, that government can react, that ministers 

can react to situations as they arise. 

 

But this notion, this notion that any tax dollars would be spent, 

notwithstanding whether they‟re decisions made in council or 

not, is ridiculous because it will be accountability through 

public accounts. There is accountability through estimates. 

There is accountability through the media. Obviously the 

government will be indicating when investments are made. 

 

We will be forthright with the people of this province. Those 

orders in council will be posted online, Mr. Speaker, for all to 

see. What we will not have in this province under this 

government is the spectre of a six-year cover-up, the likes we 

saw of SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company], from those members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of Manitoba 

requires that every expenditure made by cabinet and the 

Premier over $50,000 have an OC. The Government of Alberta 

places no limit; every expenditure made by the Premier and 

cabinet is reported publicly immediately. The Government of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, insists that all contracts over $10,000 be 

made public. This Premier and this cabinet now want the ability 

to spend $350,000 and not have it reported immediately to the 

public, to the opposition, or the media. 

 

I say again to the Premier: why does he want this change? Why 

has he put this change before the legislature? And does this 

change not distinctly break a promise that he made to the people 

of Saskatchewan that they would be an open and accountable 

government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 

have noted of late from other provinces like Manitoba, for 

example, who I think this day are following our example of the 

half million dollar investment with respect to the culled pork, 

the culled sow program. Manitoba‟s following suit with respect 

to the Government of Saskatchewan‟s initiative. We notice that 

Alberta now‟s talking about the new West and introduced their 

own Ready for Growth budget. I think it was yesterday in 

Alberta. 

 

I‟d expect, Mr. Speaker, that other provinces will want to look 

at the way things, the way business is done, the way decisions 

are made. They may well follow the example of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And I don‟t know, but they may well follow 

our example in this regard as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will say this, that the decisions that we take, that 

the expenditures we make are going to be accountable. They‟re 

a part of public accounts. They‟re a part of the day-to-day 

accounting that this government has been making and will 

continue to make. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we will 

continue to provide proactive government that reacts to 

situations as they happen. It will be responsible and 

accountable, markedly different than what we saw from the 

NDP for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen this government in 

action. Cuts to the vulnerable in the inner cities, cuts to 

children, cuts to vulnerable workers, meanwhile giving their 

friends cushy jobs and pay increases. Mr. Speaker, if this 

provision now before the legislature had been in place, we 

might very well never have known about the salary increases 

they‟ve given to their political staff. We would‟ve never known 

about the $60,000 salary increase they‟ve given to their 

hand-picked appointee, Mr. Ken Love of the Labour Relations 

Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this kind of change is intolerable to Saskatchewan 

people. It is the fundamental breaking of an election promise. It 

is anything but accountable. It is a massive step backwards in 

accountability. Mr. Speaker, I say again to the Premier: will he 

simply admit this is a mistake? Will he withdraw this piece of 

legislation, even before it receives second reading? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I think 

increasingly there is anecdotal and empirical evidence of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan responding to the new 

government. I know not very long ago there was a public 

opinion poll published in a daily newspaper that indicated that 

the people of the province seemed to be pleased with, certainly 

approving the progress that this government is making to date. 

 

That is true of the anecdotal evidence we see including the 

kinds of interest we have in Saskatchewan Party events right 

across this province. And maybe the reason, Mr. Speaker, is 

precisely because this government already has been more 

accountable than that party ever was when they sat here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Maybe it‟s because in only five months 60 

promises have been kept by this government, 40 in the budget 

alone, Mr. Speaker. Maybe it‟s because the people of this 

province welcome the fact that they now have a government 

that does exactly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — When members are prepared to come to 

order, we will proceed. Before orders of the day . . . Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. What is your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the 

point of order, all members in the House are assumed to be 

honourable and to be treated as such. During question period, 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Walsh Acres, after her last 

question, from her seat accused the Minister of the Environment 

of lying. She directed her words and quote, “Thanks for lying” 

to the minister and I clearly heard those twice, Mr. Speaker. I 

would ask that the member for Regina Walsh Acres rise in her 

place, withdraw those offensive remarks, and unequivocally 

apologize. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to withdraw those remarks 

and extend my apologies. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. Before orders of the day, I would like to lay on the table 

the report of the Provincial Ombudsman for 2007. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Appropriateness of Ministerial Statement 

 

The Speaker: — As well I‟d like to give a statement. Before 

orders of the day, I wish to address a concern regarding the 

appropriateness of statements made by the Minister of the 

Environment during yesterday‟s proceedings. 

 

The minister‟s comments outlined a number of initiatives 

undertaken by the government in the environmental field and 

noted that April 22 was marked around the world as Earth Day. 

The comments were made during the period reserved for 

ministerial statements. 

 

In reviewing the statement made by the minister, I find that it 

did not announce any new policy, initiatives, or programs as 

required by the practices of this Assembly. Instead the 

initiatives identified had been previously announced either 

during the Speech from the Throne, the presentation of the 

budget, or in a separate event. 

 

I remind members of my statement of December 19 in which I 

outlined the Assembly‟s practice regarding statements by 

individual members and by ministers. At that time, the period 

set aside for ministerial statements was described as an 

opportunity for ministers to advise the Assembly of matters 

relating to government policy, ministerial action, and to 

announce a new direction or program. Ministers are not 

permitted to use this period to comment on matters that have 

previously been announced or to make congratulatory 

messages. 

 

Members will appreciate the difficulty faced by the Speaker in 

determining the appropriateness of a ministerial statement as it 

is being delivered. Often it is only once a statement is well 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

under way or has been completed that I may identify whether or 

not a new policy or direction has been announced. 

Compounding the difficulty of the Speaker is the need to ensure 

fairness to the opposition by affording their representative an 

equal opportunity to respond. 

 

In reviewing the record, I find that the Environment minister‟s 

statement did not meet the requirements for a ministerial 

statement. It could, however, have been made by seeking leave 

prior to orders of the day. In the future I have cautioned 

ministers to ensure that they choose the appropriate time to 

deliver their statements. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

have the opportunity to move second reading of Bill 34, The 

Graduate Retention Program Act. The Act will provide 

authority for the introduction of the graduate retention program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, around the world and across Canada people are 

increasingly sensing the change in Saskatchewan. Once again 

our province is seen increasingly as a land of opportunity, a 

place where each new day brings with it a renewed sense of 

confidence, of sustaining prosperity, of sharing the benefits of 

this prosperity with the peoples of our province, and learning 

lessons from other jurisdictions about fostering this growth and 

channelling it. The Globe and Mail recently reported that 

Saskatchewan is the new it province. And the government is 

working to sustain this growth for the benefit of our people. 

 

To capitalize on our economic buoyancy, we need to retain and 

attract more people with skills and education to help meet our 

current and future labour market shortages, to grow our 

economy, and help to ensure that our communities are 

increasingly dynamic and diverse. We must work hard to meet 

our talent challenge in a more substantive way. 

 

As part of our 2007 election campaign, we promised to launch 

the most aggressive youth retention plan in Canada. And today 

we take another step forward in keeping this important promise. 

Further, as part of our ‟08-09 provincial budget, our 

government announced the graduate retention program, which 

will rebate the tuition of certificate, diploma, three- and 

four-year undergraduate post-secondary degrees, and 

journeypersons who graduated from a Saskatchewan 

post-secondary institution and who stay in the province for 

seven years after graduation. 

 

Eligible graduates will also include those from out-of-province 

health education programs where the Government of 

Saskatchewan has purchased seats and who move back to 

Saskatchewan. Some of these approved programs include 

optometry at the University of Waterloo, sonography at the 

Southern Alberta Institute of Technology, respiratory therapy at 

the Southern Alberta Institute of Technology, MRI [magnetic 

resonance imaging] at the Northern Alberta Institute of 

Technology, and nuclear medicine at the Southern Alberta 

Institute of Technology. 

 

The graduate retention program is the most aggressive youth 

retention program in the country, Mr. Speaker, rebating up to 

$20,000 per post-secondary graduate. We estimate that 

approximately 9,000 graduates per year will receive a graduate 

retention program certificate. That is 9,000 graduates per year 

with the incentive and financial footing to help invest both 

professionally and personally right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The program also creates a tremendous value-added proposition 

for our post-secondary institutions, Mr. Speaker, as they work 

and need to continue their work diligently and creatively and 

ideally co-operatively to help recruit students from outside the 

province. 

 

The careers are here, Mr. Speaker. The lifestyle is here. The 

quality of life is here. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is where it‟s 

at. Again, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill 34, The 

Graduate Retention Program Act as yet another promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour has moved second reading of Bill No. 

34, The Graduate Retention Program Act. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 34 essentially 

replaces the graduate tax exemption put forward by the previous 

administration. Now the graduate tax exemption was widely 

available to all graduates. It was easy to understand by those 

graduates. And it was available both to graduates inside and 

outside the province. Additionally, the benefits for the program 

were essentially universal regardless of the program which you 

graduated from. 

 

Several constituents have written to me and called my office 

lamenting the changes to these programs. Obviously they‟re 

wondering why they have decreased funding available to them 

as an incentive to stay in the province due to the introduction of 

Bill 34. 

 

Now this plan does not include exemptions or incentives for 

graduate students, which I find strange. These are the most 

highly trained, specialized graduates in our province, and yet 

we don‟t seem to want to incent them to stay. It doesn‟t make 

any sense. Additionally 99 per cent of graduates from outside 

our province will not be eligible. That‟s not a way to attract a 

workforce to our province and especially a generally young 

workforce. 

 

This new legislation heavily favours university students over 

trades and tech school grads, which flies in the face directly of 

the labour shortages that we currently have in our province. If 

you look at where the shortages are in labour, they‟re most 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1071 

high, most intense in tech grads and trade schools graduates. So 

it doesn‟t make any sense that you would punish those folks and 

not incent them to stay. 

 

On top of all this, Mr. Speaker, there‟s nothing in their policy 

addressing affordability and accessibility in any of these 

programs, which is an upfront measure to ensure that people are 

enabled to attend university in order to graduate from these 

programs. 

 

So with these items, I‟d like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? Somebody say no? I think I heard a no. All 

those in favour, say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed? The motion carries. 

 

Why is the member from Saskatchewan Rivers on her feet? 

 

Ms. Wilson: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatchewan Rivers has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Seated in the west gallery are three gentlemen 

from my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. We‟re going to 

meet later with the member and the minister of Kindersley. 

Their names are Ken Hodgson, Neil Otte, and Tom Plishka. So 

I‟d like you to welcome them to the Assembly please. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 31 — The Executive Government 

Administration Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

House today to move second reading of The Executive 

Government Administration Act. One of the principal purposes 

of this legislation is to bring together into one statute the 

provisions which relate to the executive government of the 

province. To that end The Government Organization Act and 

the Executive Council provisions of The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act, 2007 are being consolidated and the 

duplicate provisions are being removed. 

 

The second principle guiding this legislation is based upon 

updating process and ensuring a consistent application of policy 

as it relates to the administration of the executive government. 

To that end, this Bill amends those provisions around the 

appointment of legislative secretaries by removing the 

unnecessary step of reappointment at the end of each calendar 

year. In addition, Mr. Speaker, we are codifying the practice of 

incumbents in these positions serving either with or without 

remuneration. 

 

The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991 will be repealed and the 

provisions of this Act have been incorporated into the new 

legislation. This amendment will place in one statute the 

responsibility that members of the Executive Council must 

fulfill in not only tabling annual reports, but in tabling the 

numerous other documents which are required by statute in a 

timely and transparent fashion. 

 

This legislation amends provisions concerning how advisory 

committees are established. Under the current provisions of The 

Government Organization Act, ministers have the ability to 

establish advisory committees if the work of the committee will 

be completed in less than a year, and cabinet appoints advisory 

committees if the committee is for a year or more. The 

proposed amendment will require that all advisory committees 

are appointed by cabinet to ensure proper control in a potential 

growth of these types of committees. 

 

Amendments are being advanced in this Bill which will see an 

adjustment to the thresholds related to grants and financial 

assistance measures. In relationship to grants, the provision to 

require an order in council for a grant has been removed. This 

provides greater flexibilities for managers within ministries in 

dealing with stakeholders. 

 

This is the same for raising the threshold for an order in council 

from $50,000 to $350,000 as it relates to financial assistance. 

Hon. members will also notice that in the consequential 

amendments contained in the Bill that other figures of $150,000 

and $250,000 are also used. These figures are specific to the 

statute in question and in one case provides continuity 

throughout the statute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while these are major modifications to the 

administration of government, I want to assure the members 

that the internal mechanisms of oversight and monitoring 

undertaken by Treasury Board and other offices, including this 

House, remain intact. Indeed the legislation provides the ability 

for the minister to set any terms and conditions on the grant or 

financial assistance provided. And cabinet still retains the 

ability, as it does today should the need arise, to review and 

indeed stop a measure if it is no longer in the public interest. 

 

The only item that is being removed is the need to generate an 

order in council. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Federal-Provincial Agreements Act is being 

repealed, and the provisions are being incorporated into this 

legislation as part IV. Through this action, all of the general 

overarching provisions related to agreements will be contained 

in one statute. 

 

Section 9.2 of The Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural 

Revitalization Act related to international aid is being 

incorporated into this legislation as well. This provision was 

moved in the reforms of 1983 from the then Department of 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

Intergovernmental Affairs. This amendment brings the 

provisions under the auspices of Executive Council and 

supports its central function in all matters involving 

relationships with other governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like now to turn to a couple of other major 

areas as it relates to the consequential amendments contained in 

this legislation. 

 

This legislation concludes the removal from statute of 

individual ministerial Acts. Provisions which are duplicate to 

The Executive Government Administration Act, except in the 

areas of agriculture and health, will be repealed. Those 

provisions which are unique to specific ministries have been 

retained. 

 

In The Department of Urban Affairs Act, The Department of 

Rural Development Act, The Northern Affairs Act, and The 

Rural Development Act, these provisions have been combined 

to create the communities development Act. The purpose 

behind this consolidation, Mr. Speaker, is that many provisions 

were identical or dependent upon each other in support of 

programs administered by these former departments, and now 

administered by the Ministry of Municipal Affairs. It was felt 

that these provisions should be consolidated into one statute in 

order to remove that duplication. 

 

The Financial Administration Act is amended to disestablish the 

Investment Board and flow these powers to Treasury Board. 

Hon. members will note that amendments have been proposed 

in relation to Treasury Board. These amendments provide 

greater flexibility in the membership of the board and respond 

to the provisions of section V of the Act, thereby always 

ensuring that the Minister of Finance is always present during 

the deliberations of this cabinet committee. 

 

The remaining amendments provide administrative clarity 

and/or name changes as a result of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of the 

government administration Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 31, The Executive Government 

Administration Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased 

this afternoon to enter into debate on this very important piece 

of legislation. Mr. Speaker, there is nothing more important to 

the people of Saskatchewan than accountability from their 

elected representatives. And, Mr. Speaker, we all owe a debt of 

accountability to those who elect us, and we have a 

responsibility to be transparent in all that we do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see in this piece of legislation a change that 

fundamentally decreases the ability of the opposition to hold the 

government accountable, and that in turn, Mr. Speaker, does not 

allow the public to understand necessarily what the government 

is doing as they make decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s been a threshold that every decision that 

spend money over $50,000 had to be approved by cabinet. And 

thus was approved by an order in council which was published 

publicly so that the opposition could get it, the media could get 

it. And in fact then through that process, Mr. Speaker, the 

general public became aware of how the government was 

operating their business. 

 

We see today an amendment in this piece of legislation to move 

that to $350,000, Mr. Speaker, seven times the current amount, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what does that do, what does that do 

practically? What it does, Mr. Speaker, is it delays the ability of 

the opposition and the media and those that are interested to 

become knowledgeable about what the government is doing for 

up to a year, Mr. Speaker, for up to a year, when we‟d see it 

printed in the records of the last year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So how can the government then do, or pardon me, how can the 

opposition then do its job properly in holding the government 

accountable for decisions? How can they challenge the 

decisions of government? How can the people of Saskatchewan 

know what their government is doing, as they‟re doing it, Mr. 

Speaker? The process though, was in place, was reasonable. 

Any decision or expenditure over $50,000 went to the cabinet, 

Mr. Speaker, and was passed through an order in council. Now, 

$350,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s review what other provinces are doing. Because I think 

that‟s very, very important as you try to put this particular 

change in context, Mr. Speaker. Let‟s start with the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker. When the federal government came 

into power — the new federal government in Ottawa, the 

Stephen Harper Conservative government, in their 

accountability Act — they put in place that every expenditure 

over $10,000, Mr. Speaker, every expenditure over $10,000 

would be immediately reported, Mr. Speaker, so that the 

opposition could in fact hold the government accountable 

through that, so the media and the public became aware of those 

expenditures, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what the federal government 

did in order to try to make their accountability stronger, Mr. 

Speaker — much different than the direction taken by the 

government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let‟s talk about what happens in the province to the west of us 

now in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in Alberta every 

expenditure over $1 is made public immediately, Mr. Speaker 

— Mr. Speaker, every expenditure over $1. That‟s what the 

Government of Alberta to the west of us does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what does the province to east of us do, Manitoba, Mr. 

Speaker? They have the same threshold we previously had or 

we have today, before the members opposite are proposing the 

change that they‟re making, Mr. Speaker. Every expenditure at 

$50,000 or above had to be reported through an order in 

council, making it the knowledge of both the opposition, the 

general public, and the media, Mr. Speaker, thereby allowing 

those individuals to challenge a particular expenditure, to make 

the government rethink an action that they‟re planning, Mr. 

Speaker. But you had the ability to do something when it‟s in 

the stage that you may be able to change something or make a 

difference, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you move that level to $350,000, many, many sizeable 

contracts will never be brought before this Assembly or be able 

to be spoke of by members on this side of the House because 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

we won‟t be made aware of them for a considerable period of 

time, Mr. Speaker — contracts that involve payments to 

individuals, Mr. Speaker; contracts making payments to 

agencies, Mr. Speaker. All of which should be allowed to be 

scrutinized by both the opposition and the general public, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So what does this in essence do, Mr. Speaker? It takes away the 

transparency, the operation of government and allows the 

government to do things that they don‟t want us to know. They 

don‟t want the opposition to know, and they don‟t want the 

general public to know, Mr. Speaker. And at some point in the 

future, we may find out if we ask the right questions in 

estimates or ask the right questions during Public Accounts, Mr. 

Speaker, but there isn‟t the transparency that allows for the 

level of accountability that the people of this province both 

deserve and want, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why would this government be going in a direction totally 

opposite of other governments in Canada, Mr. Speaker? As 

other governments have talked about increasing accountability, 

Mr. Speaker, they‟ve gone in the opposite direction. They‟ve in 

fact tightened it up and reported even smaller amounts than 

$50,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is a move in the opposite 

direction to the trend across this country. And, Mr. Speaker, 

why is that? What are the members opposite trying to hide from 

the public? What are they trying to hide from the opposition, 

Mr. Speaker? Because if they don‟t have anything to hide, Mr. 

Speaker, why change it? Why change it? Why would you not 

want to keep it at a norm that the country would accept, that this 

province has accepted, and is transparent enough to allow the 

opposition both to do its job and the media to also scrutinize 

those expenditures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We don‟t see any explanation for it, Mr. Speaker. What we see 

is a significant change, one that makes it much more difficult if 

not impossible for the opposition to perform their function, Mr. 

Speaker, which is a very important function under our 

parliamentary system. The role of the opposition to hold the 

government accountable for its actions is fundamental to the 

role of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. And this change is taking 

away and eroding that responsibility put on the opposition by 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. And this erosion of 

accountability and transparency, Mr. Speaker, is one that will 

fundamentally, fundamentally hurt the people of the province 

and the opposition. 

 

And how, how do I believe that‟s going to happen, Mr. 

Speaker? Well, Mr. Speaker, today you could give an individual 

a contract of $340,000, Mr. Speaker, and we wouldn‟t become 

aware of that contract for a year. So that person could get 

$340,000, Mr. Speaker, and we have no way of questioning 

whether people are getting value for their money, Mr. Speaker. 

We have no way of questioning whether it‟s an appropriate 

contract. We have no way of saying . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I am finding it a little difficult 

to catch the comments of the member from Regina Dewdney. 

And I‟d just ask for members just to lower the level a little bit 

while you‟re consulting with other members. The member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, this is about fundamental accountability, Mr. Speaker. 

And what are they afraid of, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The indications are that the Premier has said that it‟s too much 

work to have OCs at $50,000 levels, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to tell you very clearly and the members 

opposite that, you know, transparency and accountability does 

require work. But we, we have a fundamental responsibility to 

the people of this province to do what‟s necessary in our jobs to 

provide that level of accountability for those people, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what we have today is a government that‟s lazy. We have a 

government that says they don‟t want to do their jobs because 

it‟s too difficult. It‟s too much work, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

they need to fundamentally rethink this. 

 

They‟re going in a direction opposite to the norms of Canada, 

opposite to the norms of other governments in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, where there has been a push across 

this county for more transparency and more accountability, we 

have a government in Saskatchewan that‟s moving in the 

opposite direction. 

 

And what, and what did the Leader of the Government say, the 

Premier? He said it‟s because it‟s too much work, Mr. Speaker. 

He says it‟s too much work. Well, Mr. Speaker, accountability 

is work, Mr. Speaker. And that is one of the most fundamental 

responsibilities of any government — to be accountable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have — as I indicated earlier — the 

federal government going to $10,000. We have the province of 

Alberta reporting anything over $1, Mr. Speaker. And we have 

the province of Manitoba at the same level we are today at 

$50,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental mistake. This is a bad, bad 

mistake, Mr. Speaker, and this is something that should be 

reconsidered. It‟s something should be reconsidered 

immediately, Mr. Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan will not 

agree with this, Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite need 

some time, the members opposite need some time to reconsider 

this rash, unthought through, this unthought through direction, 

Mr. Speaker. And we‟re not even sure the members on the 

opposite side on the backbench even knew that they were 

moving in a direction contrary to what the Canadian norms are, 

Mr. Speaker, or their own platform as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think because of the seriousness of this Bill 

and because the members opposite need some time to 

reconsider this ill-thought-through move, Mr. Speaker, that at 

this time, we‟d like to adjourn debate to give them time to think 

about their mistake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of the debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 32 — The Executive Government Administration 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 apportant 

des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Executive Government Administration Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my privilege to rise in 

the House today to move second reading of The Executive 

Government Administration Consequential Amendment Act, 

2008. As with the consequential amendments contained in Bill 

31, these amendments provide basic wording changes as a 

result of The Executive Government Administration Act. 

 

I would note for the information of hon. members that the 

amendment to The Evidence Act is being undertaken since 

many jurisdictions in Canada have ceased to have a cabinet 

minister known as the Provincial Secretary. Indeed it is my 

understanding that Nova Scotia through the Minister of Justice 

and Saskatchewan through The Provincial Secretary‟s Act have 

retained the office. Other provinces use the term keeper of the 

great seal. This is the reason for that amendment. 

 

The second area that I would like to draw to the attention of the 

hon. members are the changes proposed to The Legislative 

Assembly and Executive Council Act, 2007. Through this 

consequential amendment, the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan will truly have its own legislation with the 

removal of the Executive Council provisions into Bill 31. 

 

With those brief remarks, Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to move 

second reading of The Executive Government Administration 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 32, The Executive Government 

Administration Consequential Amendment Act, 2008. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased 

once again to get up and talk about Bill 31 and the 

consequential amendments that come as a result in Bill 32. Mr. 

Speaker, Bill 31 is a fundamental mistake, and if the 

government does the right thing and withdraws Bill 31, we 

won‟t need Bill 32, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to talk a little bit about Bill 31 and the impact on the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of 

things contained in that Bill. I‟ve dealt with the change from 

50,000 to $350,000 as the expenditure level which would 

require cabinet approval and an OC which would make that 

expenditure public knowledge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in an era where provinces are going in the 

opposite direction and having a greater level of accountability 

and greater reporting of expenditures as they make them, Mr. 

Speaker, we have Saskatchewan going contrary to the Canadian 

norms and in fact increasing the amount not by doubling it, not 

by tripling it, Mr. Speaker, but seven times, seven times the 

amount that was previously approved, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this can lead to a number of things including financial 

troubles, problems with accountability, funding, Mr. Speaker, 

and drags out significantly the period of time in which people 

can be held accountable for those expenditures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But this Bill also contains a number of other provisions. Bill 31 

allows you to open trade missions and offices in jurisdictions in 

Canada and outside Canada, Mr. Speaker. It allows this to be 

done very quickly with little or no public consultation, Mr. 

Speaker, and once again this is something that should have the 

level of scrutiny that would be required by an order in council, 

Mr. Speaker, and it would not necessarily be required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to consider very carefully whether we 

want to go down the road at giving individual ministers powers 

to spend money up to $350,000 without cabinet scrutiny and 

without public scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 

contrary to what‟s going on in Canada. This is contrary to good 

public administration. It‟s contrary to accountability and 

transparency, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s contrary to good business 

practice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, in proposing this 

amendment, haven‟t looked at what‟s going on in other 

provinces obviously, or they would know what‟s going on in 

the province of Alberta, the province of Manitoba, what the 

federal government is doing, Mr. Speaker. And they‟re going 

just contrary to the entire direction other jurisdictions are going. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what did the Premier say when he was asked 

about this very issue in a scrum? He said it‟s because it‟s too 

much work, Mr. Speaker. It‟s too much work to have to have an 

order in council for every $50,000 expenditure. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, there is nothing worse than a lazy government, Mr. 

Speaker. There is nothing worse than a lazy government and a 

government that‟s so lazy that it doesn‟t want to have levels of 

transparency and accountability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s fundamentally wrong, Mr. Speaker, because citizens of 

Saskatchewan have a right to know how their government‟s 

expending money, Mr. Speaker, and they have a right to know 

in a timely manner. And this Bill takes that right away from the 

public of Saskatchewan. It takes it away from the media, Mr. 

Speaker, who would make the public of Saskatchewan aware of 

such poor expenditures, Mr. Speaker. And it takes away the 

right of this opposition to hold them accountable for their 

actions, Mr. Speaker, in a timely manner where you can make a 

difference in that action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, because Bill 32 is consequential amendments 

as a result of Bill 31, Mr. Speaker, I hope we never, ever have 

to vote on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because the right thing to do, 

the proper thing to do, Mr. Speaker, is to withdraw Bill 31, Mr. 

Speaker, and to allow the members opposite to consider this 

foolhardy idea, Mr. Speaker, and to allow the members in the 

backbench who may not have been aware about this idea and 

what direction it was going in, Mr. Speaker, to consider and 

look at it and to examine what it means to the people of this 

province and what it means to accountability and transparency 

and how it breaks a fundamental promise in their own election 

platform, Mr. Speaker. 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

In order to do that, Mr. Speaker, we need to adjourn this debate 

at this time, on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, to give them chance to 

withdraw it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 35 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it‟s obvious to all the people in Saskatchewan who are 

interested in this particular Bill, the amendments to The Income 

Tax Act, that those members of the public that have availed 

themselves of a copy of the Bill online at 

www.legassembly.sk.ca, they‟ll know that this is an extremely 

technical Bill full of formulas that can only be understood by 

someone who specializes in algebra or someone who 

specializes in tax law, very complicated. 

 

But the Bill gives effect to three specific items. One is a 

disability-related income tax credit to increase the caregiver tax 

credit, the infirm dependent tax credit, the disability tax credit, 

to increase the amount that‟s available as a tax credit for people 

that fall in those categories. We support that. We have no 

quarrel with those changes. The other two aspects of the Bill in 

fact relate to pieces of legislation that are before the Legislative 

Assembly: one that was just dealt with, the graduate retention 

program; the other, The Active Families Benefit Act or Bill. 

 

With respect to the graduate retention program, the policy 

issues are being and will be discussed in the Legislative 

Assembly and the appropriate committee as to the problems, 

strengths, weaknesses with the graduate retention program. And 

this Bill simply deals with technical aspects as to how that 

program or proposed program will relate to The Income Tax 

Act. 

 

Having said that, I do want to mention a couple of concerns 

with the graduate retention program and the sense that this is a 

program that is inward looking. And I‟m surprised that the 

government would feature a program that wants to help students 

but is in fact very inward looking in terms of it being eligible 

only for students who graduate in the main from Saskatchewan 

universities. 

Some specific programs outside of Saskatchewan . . . We would 

have thought that given skills shortages in Saskatchewan, given 

always a need to attract young people to come to Saskatchewan 

from other parts of the country, that this particular graduate 

retention program would have gone further to provide this 

opportunity to reduce your tuition fees for young people from 

across the country, not just those who graduate from 

Saskatchewan universities. Because at the end of the day, we do 

want to attract young people to move to Saskatchewan from 

other jurisdictions. And this Bill frankly just doesn‟t do that. 

 

The other comment that has been made — and will be explored 

both in the committee that‟s dealing with this particular Act, 

also will be dealt with in the committee that‟s dealing with the 

income tax amendment — is the complexity of the program in 

terms of how it is that young people qualify, Mr. Speaker. And 

if I could just state that again, there are great complexities with 

respect to this particular Bill as to how it is that graduates will 

be able to access these funds over a period of seven years. And 

we‟ll want to ask questions about the complexity of this 

program. 

 

The third item that‟s proposed to be changed in The Income 

Tax Act as a result of a new initiative of the government is The 

Active Families Benefit Act, where the government is 

proposing to provide a $150 benefit to all families who have 

children enrolled in sports and activities. It‟s not clear yet what 

sports and activities that will include. That‟s something that will 

be dealt with during the course of examination of the Bill itself 

that deals with the active families benefit. 

 

But there is a question here about what is the government‟s 

intention, and what is it the government is hoping to achieve. 

And when we look through the minister‟s comments when she 

provided her remarks on second reading, and those are the 

remarks that at the end of the day we have to refer to if we try to 

understand what it is the government is seeking to accomplish 

with a piece of legislation. 

 

You will know, Mr. Speaker, that these are the remarks that if a 

piece of legislation is ever referred to the courts and the courts 

try to understand what it is that the government is attempting to 

do, what the government‟s objectives are with respect to a piece 

of legislation, the judges will always refer to second reading 

comments by the government as to what the government had in 

mind when this legislation was put forward. 

 

And it‟s interesting to see that when this piece of legislation 

was put forward, the minister‟s first comments are that this “. . . 

will encourage healthy, active families through culture, sport, 

and recreational activities.” And one of the questions that we 

will have is, how will the government know? How will the 

government know that it is in fact encouraging healthy, active 

families through culture, sport, and recreational activities? How 

will the government know whether this particular piece of 

legislation will in fact be encouraging more children? 

 

You know, in a day and age where there‟s greater 

accountability, greater focus on performance, greater focus on 

outcomes of legislation, and greater focus on outcomes of 

changes in budgets, you know, the public will be wanting to 

ask, what are the outcomes that the government expects from 

this piece of legislation? How many more children will become 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

actively involved in culture, sport, and recreational activities as 

a result of this piece of legislation? That‟s a question that the 

public will be asking. That is a question that we also will be 

asking, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you can see, I‟ve focused a lot on questions as 

opposed to debate, and therefore I‟m suggesting that the 

appropriate venue to in fact deal with these questions will be in 

the appropriate committees of the Legislative Assembly. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister Responsible for Crown Corporations 

that Bill No. 35, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To the Crown and Central Agencies 

Committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 38 — The 

Corporate Capital Tax Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

This particular Bill, The Corporation Capital Tax Act, proposes 

to increase the threshold of funds in terms of paid-up capital of 

a financial institution that would qualify a financial institution 

as a small financial institution subject to The Corporation 

Capital Tax Act. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has a percentage capital tax 

on the paid-up capital in financial institutions. That rate is 3.25 

per cent. It was after July 1, 1999 for financial institutions but a 

separate rate was put into play for small financial institutions. 

My understanding is that that particular rate applies to only one 

financial institution that operates in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This is a change that‟s consistent with changes that had been 

made in the past. We see no real reason to oppose this Bill. 

Certainly we‟ll have some questions about what the appropriate 

threshold might be for a small financial institution, a threshold 

that was at one point oh, I believe in the hundreds of thousands 

of dollars, Mr. Speaker, and is now a threshold of $1.5 billion. I 

think to most of the general public $1.5 billion is not small 

potatoes and so we certainly may have questions about how 

long a special rate should be in effect for what is called a small 

financial institution. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, we‟re prepared to deal further 

with this Bill in the appropriate committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Crown Corporations that Bill No. 38, 

The Corporate Capital Tax Act be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 29 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 29 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the opportunity to engage in debate and pass along some 

comments and some assessment to Bill 29, The Education 

Amendment Act. This is a . . . Mr. Speaker, I could argue that I 

think that there wasn‟t a more, a piece of legislation with higher 

expectations on it than this Act right here, something that‟s 

really, really, really important to many, many homes, many 

communities, many students, many families across this 

province. 

 

This piece of legislation has been highly touted for some time, 

Mr. Speaker, by the members opposite. I guess as a quick 

assessment, it‟s absolutely underwhelming in achieving the goal 

or the principle for which the members opposite suggested that 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

this Act would, what it would offer the people of the province. 

It fails on so many levels. Mr. Speaker, we hear the members 

opposite speak quite often about campaign promises made, 

campaign promises delivered. Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess I‟d 

want to argue that we see a lot of low bars here, Mr. Speaker. 

We see a lot of low bars. And this one here is another example 

of a very low bar. 

 

But the unfortunate circumstance, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

expectations on this government, on this issue were really high. 

And it‟s a delicate issue, and it‟s a challenging one. But it‟s one 

that could have been addressed by this government, and the bar 

would have been set a little bit higher. And if they would have 

held true to what they had stated before, they would have made 

it over a high bar, and they would have been able to call it a 

promise made. At this point, you know, they set an awfully low 

bar, one which I could step over, Mr. Speaker, just like that 

without much preparation, without much due diligence. And it 

fails to deliver this promise. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s also important to mention that 

the minister dealing with this legislation, that‟s created this 

legislation has all the knowledge in the world to address this 

issue in the way that the Sask Party had suggested that they 

would. He has all the knowledge in the world. He‟s met with 

the groups many times, knows their concerns, and he chose not 

to follow through with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s important that I talk about the resources that our province 

has to deliver on this, the promises of the members opposite, of 

the Saskatchewan Party. They have all the resources in the 

world, Mr. Speaker, to address the issues of school closures. 

They chose, they chose again, Mr. Speaker, to not follow 

through with allocating those resources. And, Mr. Speaker, our 

minister opposite, our Minister of Education, our Saskatchewan 

Party government, has all the authority in the world and they 

chose again, Mr. Speaker . . . to fail the promises for which they 

placed to the people of our province on the issue of school 

closures. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, our minister has the knowledge. Our minister 

has the resources. Our minister has the authority. He‟s failed on 

those pieces right there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I hear a 

member opposite saying, well the minister doesn‟t have the 

authority. Well I would argue that, through legislation, the 

minister could create the authority. He has all the authority in 

the world to set forth the legislation, what we‟re looking at here 

today. 

 

The Sask Party led people to believe in this province that they 

had a plan to address the issue of school closures, and we‟re 

seeing here now that it certainly isn‟t much of a plan, Mr. 

Speaker. The Sask Party offered a whole lot of self-righteous 

rhetoric for some time, and it‟s boiled down to something really 

simple here now, and Mr. Speaker, at least they‟ve recognized 

how simple it‟s become. And I quote from their news release, 

we feel “. . . it important to make sure the process boards of 

education follow to close rural schools is consistent . . .”  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s a long way from the lofty goals and 

the lofty promises that were once spouted by the members 

opposite, and it again shows the failed promise that that‟s 

evident here. When in opposition the Saskatchewan Party 

members were aggressive. And they talked an awful lot, Mr. 

Speaker, about how schools shouldn‟t close. Now that they‟re 

government, they‟re tweaking a process, playing with some of 

the ends, but in the end, Mr. Speaker, a lot of communities, a lot 

of families are really disappointed with this legislation. 

 

The members opposite sometimes talk about hope, Mr. Speaker. 

They talked lots about it in their campaign. I think that the 

people across this province right now are realizing that this 

hope was more hype, Mr. Speaker. The hope was hype, and 

they failed to deliver on the hope message that they had 

delivered. This Bill simply just lets communities down, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So if we‟re just going to recap over things a little bit, their 

position in opposition was they were against school closures. 

They suggested quite clearly that they had a vision and a plan to 

address them. They offered to many . . . They criss-crossed the 

province talking to communities, speaking to all the different 

groups who had these concerns, letting them know that they‟ve 

been heard, and that they would be able to move forward with a 

viable plan. This simply hasn‟t happened. They offered hope 

that school closures would be staved off, possibly reopen. 

Hasn‟t happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many voters had extremely high expectations of the 

Saskatchewan Party with regard to school closures, but 

rightfully so, Mr. Speaker. These high expectations were there 

rightfully so. They were there because our now Minister of 

Finance laid out clear expectations of what he would deliver, 

because our Premier laid out plans saying that he would help, 

because most recently we‟ve had our Premier and a high-profile 

member of the cabinet sharing that they had a plan. So those 

high expectations aren‟t because those communities are fool 

heartedly fool hearted. It‟s because they‟ve been betrayed on 

some promises. 

 

I guess I‟d like to bring in a couple other resources just to take a 

look and see what some of the other groups are saying here. But 

I have one here from the Leader-Post here today. And I think 

that the title here says, “Education minister flunks the test.” 

Now this is written by Dawn Reich, a concerned citizen within 

the province. And this comes from April 23, here today, from 

the Leader-Post. I‟m just going to read a little excerpt from this, 

Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Throughout many legislative assembly sessions, our 

current education minister, Ken Krawetz, has quoted 

Hansard transcripts in the House during debate to support 

his position. 

 

Below is a quote to remind the Saskatchewan Party 

government of the passion for taxpayers that was 

displayed in the past by our current minister of education. 

 

“Mr. Krawetz: — [this is his message] Madam Minister, 

you and I both agree on the need for school boards to have 

autonomy from government, but the ultimate authority 

should always lie in the hands of the taxpayers — the 

people who pay the bill . . . 

 

“The Saskatchewan Party believes taxpayers should have 

the same right to reverse the decisions of school boards if 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

they do not have the support of the public . . . I gave notice 

of a private members‟ Bill that would allow voters to force 

a binding referendum on a school board decision by 

gathering enough names on a petition.” 

 

I go on, or Mr. Krawetz goes on: 

 

“All we‟re saying is that taxpayers should have the same 

authority over school board decisions. After all, school 

boards collect as much or more in taxes as municipalities.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, speaking again to . . . the people of our 

province aren‟t fool hearted. They had rightful high 

expectations, ones which have not been followed through by 

our current minister, by our current ministry, by our current 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

I look back, Mr. Speaker, to some quotes around from our 

current Premier here. And I‟m going to quote from the Moose 

Jaw Times-Herald, April 18, 2007. So this is only one year ago 

— I know the minister opposite‟s worried about dates here — 

so this is one year ago. And this is our now Premier, and this is 

last year, and this is our Premier, now Premier speaking and 

being quoted, Moose Jaw Times-Herald. And I‟m going to 

quote this: 

 

Wall said the party would end closure for most of 50 

schools by designating funds to schools of opportunity and 

schools of necessity. 

 

Schools of opportunity would be schools where local 

leaders and business identify pending development that 

needs schools to attract population. Schools of necessity 

are schools where “too much time is spent on the bus.” 

 

Wall said that instead of spending more money on busing 

“we think the money should go to classrooms, more 

teachers.” 

 

Well again, Mr. Speaker, the people, the families, the 

communities in Saskatchewan aren‟t fool hearted. They‟re 

incredibly intelligent, and their high expectations were there for 

the right reasons. I‟ll maybe touch on another piece here of why 

these expectations should be high, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m going to quote an article here from June 22, 2007. The 

article title is “Sask Party plans deal with rural school 

divisions.” This was in The StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

going to quote our now Minister of Finance: 

 

“We‟ve outlined a number of criteria that we are going to 

insist on as the new government that school divisions have 

to meet in order to consider significant change of status of 

schools, in particular, closures.” 

 

That was our critic of Education in opposition. He‟s now our 

Minister of Finance. And again, high expectations offered to the 

people of our province. They aren‟t fool hearted, Mr. Speaker. 

The Saskatchewan Party government just simply hasn‟t 

followed through with those promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to look at another piece of information, 

and this would be June 21, 2007. And this is a Saskatchewan 

Party caucus news release. And I quote, “Saskatchewan Party 

Learning Critic Rod Gantefoer today said trustees need new 

tools to give communities the opportunity to keep their schools 

open.” I go on. He goes on: 

 

“These communities need to have discussions about 

complimentary uses for school buildings, whether as 

libraries, seniors‟ centres, town offices and medical 

centres. Trustees also need an enhanced set of standards 

and criteria for school closures, tools that are not yet 

available and will be provided.” 

 

Gantefoer said he understands that keeping schools slated 

for closure open will cost money, and promised those 

funds will be paid-out retroactively, should the 

Saskatchewan Party form government. 

 

“There needs to be a mechanism available to offer 

transitional funds to school boards who want to explore 

their options, and that‟s what I‟m offering [here] today,” 

Gantefoer said. 

 

And I‟ll end quoting that piece of literature, but, retroactively, 

Mr. Speaker. I mean this completely flies in the face again. Not 

only were expectations really high, not only did they fail to 

deliver meaningful changes to the Act that they had promised, 

but this is a, I mean completely, 360 degree reversal here. 

Retroactively. Well I think the families and the citizens and the 

students within Eyebrow would be interested in seeing this 

comment again. Now it‟s just not, it‟s just not a good, good 

practice, Mr. Speaker, to say something very clear that you‟re 

going to do and blatantly defy your promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s been suggested by the members 

opposite that it‟s rather fool heartedly that communities expect 

schools to be, school closures to be staved off or to remain 

open, but again I‟ll use another piece of evidence here to show 

that, that the people of our province and the communities within 

our province aren‟t fool hearted, that they are incredibly 

intelligent and those high expectations were there for all the 

right reasons, and I quote “. . . the official opposition at least 

has a plan that the people of this province can rely on . . .” 

 

Now that‟s our now Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker. He‟s 

definitely in a position of influence here right now within his 

caucus and unfortunately failing to deliver on those promises. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those high expectations come right from the 

top. They come right from the top, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When I talk about the top of government, we talk about our 

Premier, and we were quoting quotes that were one year old, six 

months old, but we‟ll get into something more recent here and 

we‟ll go back to February, the start of February, the end of 

January. It‟s some comments that were made in the Southwest 

Booster on February 1. Title is “Wall keeping promises in 

supporting schools.” Well this is a good thing, Mr. Speaker. At 

least one would think when your Premier very blatantly is very 

supportive of keeping schools open, we should have trust in our 

Premier, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll quote a little bit from this, this article. 

I quote: 

 

“We have not been able to change the Act. That‟ll be 

happening in the spring.” 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

However, Wall feels that they have been clear on what the 

upcoming changes are. 

 

“We have called for a much more rigorous process, when 

we were in opposition we called for a much more rigorous 

process before a decision could be taken to close a school, 

because once you close a school it‟s almost irrevocable. 

How do you re-open them? So are all the questions being 

asked around economic opportunity? We‟re going to work 

on our designation about what we call schools of 

opportunity, which would preclude closure if they receive 

that designation.” 

 

“And then there‟s remote schools. At some point you‟re 

going to ask kids to be on a bus for too long, and so 

decisions need to be made on that basis. So we haven‟t 

changed that. We‟re still committed to those.” 

 

Wall said this work is currently being done by Education 

Minister Ken Krawetz who is working towards spring 

legislation changes [from the article]. 

 

Well . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . yes, that‟s right, Mr. 

Speaker. Well, well, well. We have seen these changes, and 

they‟re underwhelming. They‟re not effective. And they‟ve let 

down people across our province. And I‟ll, I think I‟ll talk a 

little bit more about . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The minister 

opposite is talking about, well wait till we see them all. And I 

know that‟s no solace for families in Climax or Richmound or 

Eyebrow. And they‟re not waiting to see more; they‟re waiting 

to watch their school close here this spring. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So I guess I would urge the minister opposite, who says he‟s got 

great plans coming forward, that he should put his plan forward. 

I guess I urge the minister if he wants to shout opposite, that he 

stand up in these chambers and that he put forward his 

legislative plans that are going to offer promises which he 

shouts from his chair. Because we know one thing about Sask 

Party promises, Mr. Speaker: they‟re not worth much. 

 

And so we wonder again about why there was high expectations 

about school closures, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll take another quote here 

from the DiscoverMooseJaw site. This was on February 1, 

2008, and this is our Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

The criteria are being flushed out now and I‟m not sure of 

exactly what they‟ll be yet but, in the next few days, I 

understand the Minister of Education will have those 

criteria out to the boards and they‟ll be laid out in detail 

and the boards will have a good idea on how to apply them 

. . . 

 

This was our now minister . . . well this was the Minister of 

Enterprise of Innovation. This is from February 1. He is the 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. So, Mr. Speaker, it 

definitely misleads the public. It definitely causes high 

expectations on this government, and again, rightfully so. 

 

I‟m going to share one more piece here, Mr. Speaker. And this 

is coming from canada.com, and this is on the date of Tuesday, 

March 11 from the article “Decision day on school closures,” 

and this is a quote here: 

 

Krawetz explained that he and Premier Brad Wall have 

been in contact with the school divisions in their 

constituencies of Yorkton and Swift Current. However, as 

education minister, Krawetz said he did not send out 

notice to every school division because word of the 

changes had spread. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, hoping that the word would spread isn‟t 

good enough. You know, as opposition, as members of public, 

communities, there‟s too many people in the dark. You can‟t 

simply expect that from the members opposite that the word 

will spread. 

 

And I tell you when you‟re looking at communication on such a 

delicate and important issue — possibly the most important 

issue to many families, many students, many communities here 

today — we see selective communication. We see inequitable 

communication, and we see communication that simply hasn‟t 

been fair. 

 

For the minister and our Premier to be communicating so 

selectively, Mr. Speaker, while communities and community 

groups are active and fighting for their schools to be open, 

that‟s not fair, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not fair to the groups working 

to keep those schools open. And it‟s not fair, Mr. Speaker, to 

the school boards engaged in those delicate and difficult 

processes where they‟re trying to engage the public throughout 

that time. Offering false hope is not a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to speak a little bit now, and I guess I‟m 

not going to speak and pass my own assessments on things at 

this point but I‟m going to look a little bit at some of the third 

party assessments of what these changes to the Act are going to 

mean. 

 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association say, well we can 

live with it in essence. SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] president David Marit is really upset with 

it. He‟s concerned with the lack of appeal process. He would 

desire to see more time for consultation, and he‟s very clear that 

our current government was very well aware of their needs. 

 

We look at groups that are fighting to keep schools open. 

We‟ve got Save Our Schools and RealRenewal, and they just 

simply say it‟s too short of a time period. And they‟re 

concerned about this urban-rural divide which could be 

addressed numerous ways. Funding would definitely be one of 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

School boards have the challenge of inadequate funding and 

there‟s some third party quotes around that, Mr. Speaker. So 

I‟m going to, I guess, take you directly to a few of these quotes. 

And from the Leader-Post on April 15, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going 

to quote, “School act change draws criticism” is the article. And 

I‟m going to quote Todd Lewis. I start quoting here now: 

 

Todd Lewis, spokesman for a group of residents that 

formed Save Our Schools, said a school year is not enough 

time to determine a school‟s fate, and had called [for] a 

two-year review process. 

 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

“We‟re into a situation here where there‟s a list of schools 

that are up for closure and we‟re fiddling away with the 

edges,” said Lewis. 

 

“The clock is ticking away here and (communities) are not 

seeing any satisfaction out of these changes.” 

 

I‟m going to move down in the article, and I‟m going to begin 

again: 

 

But David Marit, president of the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities, questioned the value 

of school review committees when they don‟t have any 

power. 

 

. . . “We‟re upset with the whole thing,” Marit said. 

 

“When you look at what‟s happening out in rural 

Saskatchewan we‟re seeing a boom like we‟ve never seen 

before,” Marit said. “Why would they even want to be 

considering closing rural schools?” 

 

So that‟s some third party assessment of this Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Go on to some other pieces here. The title‟s interesting in this 

one, Mr. Speaker. It‟s from the Leader-Post, Friday, April 18. 

The title, “An „F‟ for Sask. Party.” An F, Mr. Speaker. An F 

would indicate they failed, and this is the Ministry of 

Education. They know what F‟s are. 

 

I‟ll move down into the, into the article here, Mr. Speaker, and 

I‟ll quote: 

 

“The issue is that the reality is unchanged. Schools that 

were going to be closing yesterday are still going to be 

closing today,” said Trish Elliott with Real Renewal. 

 

I‟ll move on to a quote here from Mr. Lewis: 

 

“We‟re just at a loss to wonder where a lot of the things 

they spoke about a year ago . . . [were or] . . . 

 

I‟m going to start that over, Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 

 

“We‟re just at a loss to wonder where a lot of the things 

they spoke about a year ago, where are those promises 

now?” . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — One thing before an election. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — That‟s right. One thing before an 

election, Mr. Speaker. One thing for quite a bit of time to get on 

the record before an election. Something completely different 

afterwards. 

 

I‟ll pull out a title here from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] news on April 17. The title — pretty big bold 

letters here — is “School closure law called broken promise.” 

Well it‟s factual reporting; that‟s what many are calling it. I‟ll 

move on into the article here, and I‟ll quote: 

 

However, it won‟t affect the current school year and it 

only applies to rural school divisions. 

That‟s disappointing to Trish Elliott, who represents Real 

Renewal, a group opposed to school closures in Regina. 

 

“It‟s a lot of broken promises instead of hope,” she said. 

 

And I‟ll stop quoting from that article, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟ll move on to one I alluded to here today, but the title‟s 

definitely worth mentioning again. And that‟s today, Mr. 

Speaker, April 23, here in the Leader-Post — big bold letters — 

“Education minister flunks the test.” 

 

I‟m going to move on, Mr. Speaker. There‟s many ways that 

school closures can be addressed. Funding‟s a big part as well 

and, Mr. Speaker, we‟re seeing inadequate funding across the 

board here in Saskatchewan. In essence 20 out of 28 school 

divisions have received status quo or less funding here this year, 

and that‟s certainly not going to allow school divisions to 

respond to the needs of school closures, the diverse needs of 

education within our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know we‟ve seen some pretty clear quotes on this as well. And 

I think I‟m going to touch base in a moment here on some of 

those from board Chair Gord Stewart from Prairie South. But 

I‟m also going to mention at the same time here, Mr. Speaker, 

they failed to follow through on their promises on the Act. They 

failed to deliver adequate funding, with 20 out of 28 school 

divisions receiving status quo or less. 

 

And they‟ve off-loaded, Mr. Speaker, a very, very important 

tool to rural Saskatchewan in accessing education in the 

correspondence school and technology supported learning. To 

off-load this on to divisions, Mr. Speaker, at this time is nothing 

more than a further burden on school divisions. They‟ve been 

speaking out on this. They‟re concerned with it. Mr. Speaker, 

they need the resources and they need a plan from this ministry. 

I hope we see one soon on that end. 

 

But I will touch base on those quotes, Mr. Speaker, from Gord 

Stewart of Prairie South. And these were released in a 

memorandum on April 9, 2008. And I‟ll quote from the actual 

memorandum: “Rhetoric about „saving‟ rural schools is just that 

. . .” 

 

I‟ll move down a little bit, Mr. Speaker, so we can save time: 

 

With only $1 million set aside in the budget, funding for 

“schools of opportunities” appears to be a band-aid 

solution at best, and, at worst, a red herring for the public. 

It gives the appearance of supporting all rural schools, 

while allowing the government to avoid responsibility for 

funding them at a level that would encourage and allow 

long-term sustainability. 

 

I‟m going to go on, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Talk is cheap. Education is not. It‟s time to put the money 

where the campaign promises were and level the playing 

field for rural school divisions like ours. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what I‟ve intended to do here today or set out 

to do is to share not my assessments as opposition here but the 

assessment of citizens of our province, groups which are 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

committed to educational excellence in our province. And that‟s 

another example right there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the actual amendment changes, 

they actually reflect the common practice of many boards, many 

school divisions for some time, Mr. Speaker. And I guess in 

reflecting what‟s already been going on and what‟s already 

been done is really dismissive of those school boards to have 

laid something out with high expectations, certainly said to 

school boards across this province that you haven‟t done 

enough in the past, that you‟ve failed on that end. 

 

I know here in Regina it‟s been an ugly year both for school 

board officials and also for communities with the high hopes 

that they had, Mr. Speaker, and the dismissive kind of 

comments around the efforts of school boards. And now to see 

an Act that completely fails to deliver on the promises that the 

Sask Party had granted for so long, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pretty 

big failure, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s a shame. 

 

I do have a couple more comments here, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The minister is interested in me 

going back to mention one of his quotes here and he was quoted 

from 1998 so it‟s important that he‟s aware or that the province 

is aware that that‟s right. The Sask Party has long, long, long, 

long been strong on the record against school closures, all the 

way from 1998 all the way up until the election and even some 

of their ministers and even our Premier since the election. 

 

These amendments will do little to keep schools from the 

chopping block, Mr. Speaker. While the government has well 

over $1 billion in the bank, enough money to fund pretty much 

anything they have in mind, the Sask Party is doing next to 

nothing for schools of opportunity and schools of necessity. 

One million dollars is a pittance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There‟s a few other 

conversations going on. I would ask the members to take them 

behind the bar. I‟m having a little hard time hearing the member 

that has the floor. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I guess if the members 

opposite are passionate about this issue, I guess I will remind 

them that communities, families across this province are 

passionate as well and I urge them to stand up — not just to 

banter but to stand up and make those changes for which they 

promised. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party has set aside only $1 million in this 

budget for schools of opportunity. That‟s a pittance, Mr. 

Speaker, a pittance — only enough to fully fund three such 

schools. That doesn‟t sound like much of an opportunity for 

Saskatchewan school children. It falls short of the quotes I was 

using before of our Premier back two months ago here down in 

his constituency. 

 

The revised education Act makes no mention of schools of 

necessity, not at all. In fact schools of necessity have now been 

brought in as a nameplate and they take over the remote school 

status that we had in place before, Mr. Speaker. But schools of 

necessity were suggested to be something different. Again there 

were some things — kind of an element of hope — behind their 

words in schools of necessity. And now again we‟ve seen that 

those are simply just hype, Mr. Speaker. They‟ve adopted what 

we were doing, put a new name on it. 

 

You know, we talked about the Saskatchewan School Boards 

Association. They have expressed concerns that the provincial 

criteria may not work well for all boards and that the stringent 

criteria could hamper a board‟s day-to-day operations. 

 

So we have stakeholders across the board, Mr. Speaker, who 

aren‟t happy. SARM is disappointed; SOS, Save Our Schools is 

disappointed; and RealRenewal is very disappointed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It is my hope, Mr. Speaker, I guess, that the Sask Party will 

respond to these concerns because they do have the time and I 

mentioned before that our minister has the knowledge, our 

minister has the resources, Mr. Speaker — we sure have the 

resources in our province — and the minister has the authority 

to do some things about this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And at the very least as a member of opposition I ask the 

minister and the current government to follow through on the 

commitments they made prior to being elected. And I guess I 

would challenge the members opposite and I challenge the 

ministry to maybe take a page out of the ministry of 

municipalities‟ book here, and take a look and say, you‟re right, 

we failed. We failed miserably. We need a heck of a lot more 

money for municipalities, which by the way certainly isn‟t 

enough here in Regina, Saskatoon, Yorkton, and across the 

board. 

 

[15:30] 

 

But just like the minister of municipalities, the Minister of 

Education has failed families, communities across the province 

on the topic of school closures. And I think right now our 

minister has time to rally and to speak to his cabinet and make 

sure that those funds are invested in a similar way that the 

minister from municipalities happened. I challenge the minister 

to step up and to make sure that that happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many, many, many more questions about 

this Act, and I guess more than anything, its intent, Mr. 

Speaker. So at this point here right now I am going to refer or 

move this Bill to committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is the motion by 

the Minister of Education that Bill No. 29, The Education 

Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I‟ll recognize the Minister of Education. 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 29, The 

Education Amendment Act, 2008, be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 25 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is indeed a pleasure to enter into this debate. This is an 

important piece of legislation. Whenever we amend significant 

environmental protection Acts like The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, we have to be careful about making sure we‟re 

doing the right thing. And so we‟ll have many questions on this, 

but first of all I do want to say and I do want to go on record 

that I am disappointed on this, in this Act. 

 

This was an opportunity to make significant headway in terms 

of protecting habitat in this province, and in fact it looks like 

we‟re taking away habitat. In fact there‟s a net loss and not 

making a significant gain. We often hear the minister talk about 

going green. And I was just listening to the previous speaker 

talk about hype. And this seems to be the theme of this 

government — a lot of hype but not a lot of action. 

 

And here you have a case of an amendment to an Act taking 

away land that is very, very important. The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act is a significant piece because we know in the 

South, southern Saskatchewan, that so much land has been lost 

to agriculture throughout the past many decades. And in fact, I 

understand in five years we lost 2 million acres of natural 

landscape. This is significant. And because of that, we saw this 

Act being created. 

 

And so we see the situation today. It seems like a relatively 

straightforward piece of legislation but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there are a lot of questions. And a lot of people get disappointed 

when we talk about the good things that are happening in 

Saskatchewan. But we have to say that, I have to say that . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. If you have 

conversations, take them behind the bar. I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s an important debate that we‟re having here today on 

wildlife habitat protection. And I am sure the members do want 

to hear this. And we have a situation where, you know, we have 

Saskatchewan‟s wildlife populations living on far less than 

one-quarter of their original habitat. 

 

In Saskatchewan, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act protects 

over 3 million acres of uplands and wetlands in its natural state. 

And this represents one-third of the wildlife habitat in the 

agricultural region. This sounds impressive. It is a good start. 

But there are some significant questions. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last night we talked in 

estimates, the Environment estimates, about what is the 

progress being made under the biodiversity action plan, 

something that was started in 2004, goes for five years to 2009. 

How are we doing in that area, in that objectives about 

representative area networks, making sure that we designate and 

protect certain pieces of land in this province so that there is a 

natural diversity for our wildlife and for species at risk? And 

this is very, very important. 

 

And so it‟s a question of hype. Are they going to really deliver 

or are they going to quietly do other things while running under 

a banner of times past when we were making significant, 

significant gains? 

 

We are at about 9 per cent of protected lands in this province. 

Our goal is 12 per cent. And that‟s very, very important. 

Twelve per cent is the United Nations target. We should be 

reaching that, and we should be reaching it as quickly as we 

can. But we‟re only at 9 per cent, and we see legislation like 

this where we‟re taking steps backwards, steps backwards, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And that is of great concern. 

 

Of course there are some questions that we have, and we‟ll have 

these in committee. And we expect good answers on that. We 

expect to be talking about each parcel of land. Why are they 

taking them out? We‟re happy to see land going in. We‟ll talk 

about that too because we want to make sure the land is 

representative — not just any piece of land, but land that is 

representative of the area. When we‟re trading pieces of land 

back and forth, they‟ve got to be of equal value. And the value 

that we‟re going to be looking at is the biodiversity value. 

That‟s very, very important. 

 

And the second question we‟re going to have is, what about the 

consultations? You know it‟s one thing, and we‟ve seen this so 

much from this government in terms, when they use the word 

consultations, it can be my way or the highway — no 

consultations. You have to accidentally find out about things on 

the website. Unless you‟re being very vigilant about finding out 

about consultations, you will not find out. 

 

And then on the other hand they have the Cadillac of 

consultations — what‟s happening around the insurance, crop 

insurance program — something that‟s very good to see. But 

why aren‟t they using that model for other consultations? That‟s 

the bar, and we expect to see that in all sorts of things. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are questions that we have about 

this very important piece of legislation, so at this point I‟d like 

to move adjournment of this debate. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — . . . has moved adjournment. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

Bill No. 27 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. D‟Autremont that Bill No. 27 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008/Loi 

de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 

boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, going through this Bill in some detail, and it‟s very 

technical and in some cases it will change . . . it‟s purely 

housekeeping, but there are a couple of areas that go beyond 

what we have done in the province before. The you-brew and 

you-vin operations are new additions. There are a couple of 

provinces that have moved in this direction and have these 

types of operations. The minister was quite supportive when he 

went out and made the announcement, which is good, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I know that there are provinces other than Saskatchewan 

that have these operations. I believe there‟s three, and there has 

been a number of concerns in the regulation area and whether 

the regulations are difficult to enforce. So there‟s been a 

number of provinces that haven‟t gone in this direction. 

 

A number of other pieces that are contained within the 

legislation itself are housekeeping, and while there are some 

questions that we have on the legislation itself, Mr. Speaker, I 

would at this time like to move Bill No. 27 to committee so that 

we can get into more detailed discussions with the minister and 

SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] on exact 

interpretation and intention of the legislative changes that are 

proposed here. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that Bill 

No. 27 be moved to committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Question. Is the Assembly ready for 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Question. The question before the 

Assembly is a motion by the Minister for Gaming that Bill No. 

27, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 27, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008 be 

referred to the Crowns committee. 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 24 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to rise 

and speak to this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I have a new name for this 

Bill, and it would be called the oops Bill. They didn‟t get it 

right the first time, so this is the cleanup that is required. This 

Bill is proof positive that Justice did not draft this Bill because 

the Justice ministry just doesn‟t make these kinds of mistakes. 

The logic defies reason, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party is on record stating that these changes to Labour 

Relations Board where firing the Chair despite the fact that his 

term was up in the fall, and reducing the number of Vice-Chairs 

from two to one, and yet claiming that the Labour Relations 

Board will be delivering quicker decisions — it defies all 

reason, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it defies the logic given that, combined with the 

other amendments being made to The Trade Union Act, that 

there will be likely an increase in activity at the Labour 

Relations Board. At a time when the province needs to embrace 

each and every worker or potential worker in our province and 

needs to entice workers from outside the province, this 

government has taken a stable, fair, and balanced labour 

environment and in the Premier‟s own terminology, declared 

war on working people of this province. 

 

There was no impediment to the growth and vibrancy of this 

province because of The Trade Union Act. Who was 

complaining about needing these changes, Mr. Speaker? The 

answer, Mr. Speaker, is simply based in ideology. 

 

A member of the transition team, Doug Emsley, has had a 

number of experiences with the Labour Relations Board that he 

would, I‟m sure, view as unfavourable. Was this payback by a 

member of the transition team with respect to the dealings with 

the Labour Relations Board? 

 

Yet another member of the transition team, Ken Love, ended up 

being part of the decision-making process that saw the Chair of 

the Labour Relations Board and the Vice-Chairs -- Jay Seibel 

was the Chair, and the two Vice-Chairs — being fired only to 

be replaced by Ken Love himself at a cost of $60,000 more per 

year. 

 

These may be dismissed as coincidences by the government, 

but the people of Saskatchewan are saying, no way. These are 

way more than coincidences; this is an all-out attack. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as if these situations aren‟t surprising or 

suspicious enough, let‟s look at the ads for the Vice-Chair 

position. When the Vice-Chair position was posted on 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2008 

November 15, 2006, the qualifications for the Vice-Chair 

position were that you will have . . . It reads, quote: 

 

You will have five or more years of litigation experience 

in the area of labour law and extensive experience with 

administration tribunals; extensive knowledge of labour 

legislation; [and] training and experience in mediation and 

conciliation practices. 

 

The ad for April 12, 2008 for the current Vice-Chair which is 

being sought by the current government reads that: 

 

The successful candidate will have a law degree and a 

minimum of five years of experience as a lawyer. 

 

So no longer are we asking for litigation experience in the area 

of labour law. We are now simply looking for someone who has 

a law degree with a minimum of five years experience as a 

lawyer. They still need a knowledge of administrative tribunal 

process and labour law issues, but again, what else is missing, 

Mr. Speaker? Well look at that, the fact that the past ads read 

that the qualified candidate had to have training and experience 

in mediation and conciliation practices is now absent from the 

ad altogether. So we are looking for people now, Mr. Speaker, 

as successful candidates for the Vice-Chair of Labour Relations 

Board with far less limited qualification experiences than ever 

were before, Mr. Speaker. And would this even be coming to 

the Public Service Commission if it weren‟t for the opposition‟s 

outrage at the fact that this might be another appointed position 

as was the Chair of the Labour Relations Board. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Sask Party‟s political interference of the Labour Relations 

Board is not only a frontal attack on labour; it is a frontal attack 

on democracy and democratic institutions. The Saskatchewan 

Party‟s attitude of, well we won and now you have to do what 

we say, simply smacks of a schoolyard bully, Mr. Speaker. As a 

matter of fact, I believe that it was the Planet S newspaper that 

even said that. The Saskatchewan Party political meddling with 

the Labour Relations Board is so troubling, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Canadian Association of Labour Lawyers felt compelled to 

send a letter to the Premier and the Minister of Labour spelling 

out their concerns, and that is quite substantial, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Firing the Chair and two Vice-Chairs of Labour Relations 

Board without cause and replacing the Chair with a 

Saskatchewan Party insider, no less a member of the transition 

team or an advisor to the transition team, and at a huge salary 

increase is cynical, self-serving, and irresponsible government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Along with Bills 5 and 6, this amendment to The Trade Union 

Act is part of a multi-pronged attack by the Saskatchewan Party 

government on Saskatchewan working people. But should we 

be surprised, Mr. Speaker? We shouldn‟t be surprised, Mr. 

Speaker. We shouldn‟t be surprised because this is what the 

Sask Party government has — Sask Party, I apologize — Sask 

Party has been saying all along for as long as I‟ve been reading 

about what they‟ve been saying on the issues of working people 

in this province, on labour in this province. And certainly since 

I‟ve been an elected member sitting in the Chamber since 

November 2003, that‟s all we‟ve heard. And now we have the 

proof. 

 

The Sask Party has never hidden its dislike of labour. These 

attacks on working people are precisely what the Sask Party has 

said it would do except for one exception. The exception, of 

course, would be Bill 5. That would be the flip-flop of the Sask 

Party. That would be the saying one thing and doing another. 

That would be the Minister of Health saying, we don‟t need to 

put this into legislation; we can simply negotiate these things. 

And the Premier‟s saying the same thing, that essential services 

doesn‟t need to be legislated; it can be negotiated. And it should 

be negotiated. 

 

But what did they do once they got elected, Mr. Speaker? It was 

one of the first things they did was to legislate essential services 

legislation and do it to the greatest degree. In defending the 

director of communications in anti-labour comments that she 

made on the now infamous videotape of the Premier, that were 

really anti-labour and would be considered draconian, well 

guess what word, among others, labour is using to describe 

these changes that are being made to the labour laws in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

This and its other attacks on labour is the Sask Party pursuing 

its right wing ideology at the expense of Saskatchewan people. 

Not just labour, Mr. Speaker, it‟s at the expense of 

Saskatchewan working people. And not even necessarily the 

people that are working now, but the people that need to be 

enticed to work in this province because the one thing we know 

for sure from any consultations that have ever taken place with 

business and labour, is that we are suffering a labour shortage. 

We are suffering a crisis in terms of labour and the amount of 

labour that we have. And not only are we suffering that, Mr. 

Speaker, but so is every other province as Saskatchewan. 

 

So we have to be highly competitive for labour in this province, 

because every other province is looking at doing the same thing. 

And creating a war with working people or creating a war with 

the people who are not yet working, Mr. Speaker, is no way to 

entice working people to this province. 

 

And there‟s an old expression, Mr. Speaker, that is, if it ain‟t 

broke, don‟t fix it. Well, Mr. Speaker, the system wasn‟t broke. 

The system was working very well, thank you very much. 

There were no unbalances in the system. As a matter of fact, it‟s 

now being said by some members of the business community 

that there was balance before and there was balance when the 

NDP put these things into legislation. 

 

And when the Sask Party comes in, they create unbalance. They 

create war. They create strife. They create misery. They create a 

situation where we might be suffering in terms of our province 

moving forward as a booming economy, might be suffering 

because of the war they‟re creating with working people. 

 

It‟s now being said in the business community that the NDP had 

to create a balanced . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — It‟s now being said by the business community, 

Mr. Speaker, that the NDP had a balanced labour environment. 



April 23, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

And it‟s now being said by some members of the business 

community . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, they laugh. They laugh 

hysterically. They don‟t just laugh, but they laugh hysterically. 

So I wonder if the working people of this province will find it 

humorous. They laugh hysterically at the situation that they are 

now imposing upon the working people in this province in 

terms of protections that they now enjoy. 

 

Are they going to be laughing at occupational health and safety 

standards along the way? Are they going to be laughing at other 

standards that protect the workers in this province along the 

way? I guess that remains to be seen, but we certainly see how 

they‟re laughing at the working people in this province right 

now with their hysterical antics across the way, Mr. Speaker. 

How sad is all I can say. 

 

So let me get back to the point I was making. The point is there 

are now members in the business community who are saying 

that the NDP created a balance to the labour environment in this 

province. Things were moving forward beautifully in this 

province. We‟ve seen nothing but progress, progress, progress 

over many years. We are now enjoying the booming economy 

situation that we have. Everything is running tickety-boo and 

these people in the business . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — And these people in the business community, 

Mr. Speaker, are now saying, here we have the Sask Party 

government and what are they doing? They are creating, they 

are creating strife. They are creating, well quite frankly, a toxic 

labour environment. They are creating a situation that is going 

to have to be corrected by an NDP government when it gets 

back in power, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what members of the 

business community are saying now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟m having great difficulty hearing out 

of my left ear when my right ear can‟t really understand what‟s 

going on. I recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 

know there‟s a tactic that is used when someone doesn‟t want to 

hear what someone else is saying. They simply get louder. So I 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that we can continue on in a meaningful 

dialogue so that the opposition can . . . I mean, sorry, that the 

government, my apologies, will actually hear the words of what 

is being said to us by the working people of this province, 

because — as it was when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker 

— people speak to government. People speak to the opposition. 

And we are getting these reports, and these reports need to be 

heard by the government as well. And heaven forbid if they 

decide that they don‟t want to listen to them, and they don‟t 

won‟t to heed them because quite frankly it will only be to their 

harm. 

 

There is also situations, Mr. Speaker, where as I said the Labour 

Relations Board is likely to see more activity. When you make 

changes to the labour relations Act, and especially the sweeping 

changes that are — The Trade Union Act, I‟m sorry — that are 

currently coming forward, there is going to be increased 

activity. I fail to understand and not just myself, Mr. Speaker. 

The community fails to understand how those decisions are 

going to be rendered in a timely fashion and not just in a timely 

fashion, but the government is actually claiming that these 

decisions are going to be rendered very quickly. 

 

When you have a situation when you have one less Vice-Chair 

on the Labour Relations Board, that is confusing to many, many 

people, Mr. Speaker. Unless of course the sentiment is that the 

Labour Relations Board is truly now going to be a biased entity, 

and that if any claims that come forward with respect to unfair 

labour practices on behalf of a union or unfair labour practices 

on behalf of a worker, in terms of being coerced or any of those 

types of employer communications, unless all of those are 

simply going to be rubber-stamped and denied, Mr. Speaker, 

then I guess those things can be processed much more quickly if 

there isn‟t thoughtful process given to the decision making that 

is being done. But I guess that‟ll be remain to be seen in terms 

of the amount of things that will be carried forward in terms of 

decisions that are rendered by the Labour Relations Board. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, misguided and simple-minded 

Sask Party ideology will stifle, actually stifle economic growth 

by causing labour unrest and fostering an adversarial 

relationship between business and labour in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. I pray, I pray it isn‟t so. I pray that things will go 

forward the way they are now, but I fear the worst, Mr. 

Speaker. My hope is being dwindled. I fear the worst simply 

because of the way they reacted, the government reacted today 

to my comments. I fear the worst that what I predict will come 

true. And I would now at this time like to adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to allow the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

continue with its work this afternoon, I move that this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that this 

House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This House stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 10 a.m. to allow for the work of committees. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:56.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1061 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1061 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1061 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1061 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1061 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1061 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Recognizing Administrative Professionals 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1062 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1062 

 Moose Jaw High School Drama Festival 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1062 

 2008 Premier’s Dinner 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1062 

 Crocus Co-op Celebrates Anniversary 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

 Dress For Success Suit Drive 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

 Disposal of Records 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1063 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Measures to Assist Low-Income Workers 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1064 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1064 

 Water Quality 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1065 

 Investment Strategy 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1066 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1067 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1067 

 Accountability and Transparency 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1067 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1068 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1069 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1069 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1069 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Appropriateness of Ministerial Statement 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1069 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 34 — The Graduate Retention Program Act 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1070 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1070 

 Bill No. 31 — The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1071 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1072 

 Bill No. 32 — The Executive Government Administration Consequential Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 apportant des modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Executive Government Administration Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1074 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1074 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 35 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1075 



 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 1076 

 Bill No. 38 — The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1076 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 1076 

 Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1076 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 1082 

 Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1082 

 Bill No. 27 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1083 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 1083 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1083 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


