




















































Hansard: April 14, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 25A  MONDAY, APRIL 14, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 817 

 April 14, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

seated in the west gallery today are representatives from 

police-based victims services programs in Saskatchewan, and I 

will ask them to stand up as I introduce them. Pat Thiele is the 

director of victims services, and Dwight Lawrence is the 

program manager for victims services. 

 

This is, Mr. Speaker, Victims of Crime Awareness Week, and 

we have some volunteers with us today — Gerry Peppler of 

Yorkton and Jean Carroll of Saskatoon. Each have 15 years of 

volunteer service. They have been with the program since it 

began. 

 

Those here today who have given 10 years of volunteer service 

are Margaret Minski of North Battleford, Brenda Nicholls and 

Peggy Johnson of Moose Jaw, Prudence McKenzie and Rhonda 

Durand of Prince Albert, and Doug Haroldson of Maple Creek. 

 

I will have more to say later on, Mr. Speaker, in a ministerial 

statement about victims service and the volunteers who help to 

deliver its services to their communities. I‟d like to ask all 

members to join with me in making these particular individuals 

feel welcome in their legislature today. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I stand to present a petition to the House on behalf of 

my Moose Jaw constituents that speaks to the support and 

increase to health services in our area of Five Hills. And the 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of my constituents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I present petitions today in 

opposition to the government‟s Bill 5, The Public Service 

Essential Services Act, and Bill 6, An Act to amend The Trade 

Union Act. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents of Moose Jaw, 

Martensville, Langham, and Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have some pages 

of petitions signed by citizens concerned about the Sask Party 

government‟s decision to withdraw funding from Station 20. 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately restore funding to the Station 20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Saskatchewan Skills Canada Competition Winners  

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today it‟s my pleasure to acknowledge a group of 

Moose Jaw students who recently came home with medals from 

the 10th annual Saskatchewan Skills Canada competition held 

in Saskatoon. Three young competitors from Peacock 

Collegiate came home with gold medals: Brock Paul in auto 

body repair, Marc St. Marie in electronics, and Samantha Pirie 

in job interview category. Central Collegiate‟s Jordon Westre 

finished first in Web design. All four of these students earned 

spots on the provincial Skills Canada team and will compete at 

the national competition in May in Calgary. 

 

Other medal winners were Peacock‟s Laura Simpson and Dani 

Van Tassel, who won silver medals in TV/video production; 

Megan Bieber, with a bronze medal for information technology 

office software applications; and Justin Hender, with a bronze 

medal in mechanical computer-aided diagram drafting. 

 

Six SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] Palliser students took home medals in 

post-secondary events also. Palliser Campus swept the 

architectural computer-aided drafting category with Ben Vetter 

winning gold, David Watt with silver, and Eric Morrison with 

bronze. Matthew Dawson and Andrew Hamilton won silver 

medals in the carpentry and electrical wiring divisions. 

 

Jennie Jenson of the Academies Career Training Centre won a 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

bronze in the aesthetics division. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 

congratulating these very talented young Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Adopt a Member of the Legislative Assembly  

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I would like to say 

a few words about an experience I had over the weekend. 

 

On Saturday afternoon I had the opportunity to visit a family in 

my constituency as part of the Adopt an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] initiative through the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living. 

 

The Adopt an MLA initiative began in 2004 and was created to 

build relationships between families and their elected 

representatives. The goal is for the MLA to really understand 

more about the intellectual disabilities and the realities some 

families face because of these disabilities. It also reconnects 

families to the political process by building a personal 

relationship with their MLA. 

 

Maxine and Duncan South and their son, Jeremy South, invited 

me to their home to discuss an issue of great importance to 

them — Jeremy‟s independence. 

 

Jeremy is a 30-year-old man with Down‟s syndrome. He lives a 

very active life that includes working at the Lutheran Sunset 

Home. He lives with his parents and over the past few months 

he has expressed a desire for more independence. Maxine and 

Duncan fully support Jeremy‟s dream and believe that his goal 

can be met with the proper supervision and safe housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to have participated in this 

program and I urge all other MLAs to participate as well. I am 

honoured that the South family invited me into their home and 

thank them for the hospitality they provided. I look forward to 

maintaining the relationship we have forged. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

North Saskatoon Business Association 

Discusses Bills 5 and 6 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate 

Shirley Ryan and the North Saskatoon Business Association for 

holding a luncheon last Friday at Prairieland Exhibition in 

Saskatoon where a panel addressed the content, rationale, and 

impact on business for Bills 5 and 6. 

 

The panel speakers were Mr. Ted Koskie of Koskie Helms; Dr. 

William Albritton, dean of Medicine; and Mr. David Dutchak, 

president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

Mr. Speaker, it is important to note the North Saskatoon 

Business Association held this business luncheon to allow their 

stakeholders an opportunity to have discussions and open 

dialogue on this very important issue. Stakeholders have 

repeatedly requested the opportunity to hold broad public 

consultations with the government on this issue and have not 

yet had the opportunity to do so despite the government‟s 

position that they have already occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were several government MLAs who were 

present at the panel discussion who also applauded the North 

Saskatoon Business Association for holding open debate on 

Bills 5 and 6. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour attended the luncheon and 

also commented that it was important to have a healthy debate 

over Bills 5 and 6 despite his reluctance to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would submit that public consultations are 

crucial for democracy as it gives all of our citizens the 

opportunity to speak, and not just the chosen few who agree 

with the Premier‟s philosophy. Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the 

government MLAs on their position that it‟s important to have 

open debate on Bills 5 and 6 because any legislation should be 

able to withstand the light of public scrutiny. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

MacKenzie Art Gallery Art in Bloom Event  

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over this weekend I, 

along with the member of Regina Wascana Plains, was able to 

attend and participate in the Norman MacKenzie Art Gallery 

15th Art in Bloom event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this event is a celebration of spring and creativity 

and volunteerism. Mr. Speaker, this event is hosted and 

organized by over 300 volunteers as a way to raise funds to 

bring more local, national, and international art to our city and 

province. The wonderful volunteers were able to bring over 800 

viewers over two days and raise over 8,000 this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the gallery works tirelessly to enhance our 

province and educate our youth. And, Mr. Speaker, the money 

raised from Art in Bloom event will go towards education 

programs and the acquisition of new, quality works of art. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the gallery belongs to the people of Saskatchewan, 

and I would like to invite all members of the Assembly to take 

time out of their day to attend the Norman MacKenzie Art 

Gallery, especially this week, because this is the last week of 

the wonderful Warhol exhibit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the arts are a wonderful part of our heritage and it 

was a pleasure to attend. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

Methadone Assisted Recovery Program Graduation  

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, April 4, a very special 

graduation was held in Prince Albert. The program is called 

Skills Unlimited III and is run by the Prince Albert Methadone 

assisted recovery program. The program is designed to help 

drug addicts who are on the methadone program integrate back 

into work by giving them the support and necessary tools to 

succeed. 

 

Eight graduating students participated in the ceremony on the 

4th. Mr. Speaker, all eight students are now employed, a 100 

per cent succession program. 

 

All of the students have struggled with drug addiction and all 

with the horrors that come with it. Just a short time ago these 

students felt there was no hope for them. This program has 

changed all of that, Mr. Speaker. The students now know they 

have a bright future in front of them. 

 

This was a pilot project. It was a partnership between the 

Jubilation Program, Dr. Leo Lanoi, and the Western office of 

the Canadian Training Institute. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all 

members join with me in congratulating the graduates of the 

Skills Unlimited III program and acknowledging the work and 

dedication of John Fryster, executive director of the Jubilation 

Program, and his wife Hanalore. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Constituents Receive Samuel McLeod Legacy Award 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

Wednesday evening the Prince Albert Chamber of Commerce 

hosted the Samuel McLeod Business Awards. The awards are 

in place to celebrate and recognize business excellence in P.A. 

[Prince Albert] over the past year. I would like to congratulate 

two constituents of mine, Ed and Anne Dymterko, on being 

honoured as winners of the Samuel McLeod Legacy Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1976 Ed and Anne started up a excavating 

company on a small loan and some faith. The simple 

philosophy, work hard and be good, led this company to 

becoming one of the biggest and best known excavating 

companies in Prince Albert and the lakeland area today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, community involvement is paramount to the 

success of any city, and it is always good to see local businesses 

get involved. The Dymterkos are a fine example of this. Their 

dedication to this community has been shown over the years 

through participation in the Kelly Dymterko AA Memorial 

Hockey Tournament, Habitat for Humanity, the Art Hauser 

Centre, and the expansion of St. Mary‟s High School. The 

long-standing success of their business is truly a testament to 

their leadership within the business community. The year marks 

the 32nd anniversary of Dymterko Enterprises. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

congratulating Ed and Anne Dymterko for being a true legacy 

in the Prince Albert business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Scott Collegiate Dinner Theatre  

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The past 

Thursday night the member for Regina South and I were part of 

a packed house in attendance at a Scott Collegiate dinner theatre 

production, “Eat Your Words.” 

 

From a delicious gourmet meal to the excellent collective play, 

Looking In, Looking Out to the kicking rhymes of the three fine 

MCs [master of ceremonies] in “So Far, So Good ” to the great 

silent auction to the stirring dinner music to the excellent art 

work and design of the night‟s program itself, all of these things 

came together in a wonderful production, and everyone in 

attendance knew they were there for something very special. 

 

And what made the night so special? For starters it was the 

students and staff themselves who had put in a ton of effort, 

energy, and creativity to make it all happen. They used the night 

to say something strong and true about our shared home, north 

central. They spoke about tragedy and heart-wrenching social 

problems. But they also spoke of pride and belonging and 

community. 

 

They said a lot, Mr. Speaker, and they said it with a humour, 

passion, and fierce hope and, most importantly, they showed us 

the great things that these young people can achieve if they 

believe and if they are believed in. 

 

To all who made the night such a great success, to students like 

MC Shone Sparvier and Kashayla Checkosis, to the all-star 

Scott teachers directly involved, Raegan Vollman, Kelley 

Christopherson, Janine Taylor, Jennie Davies, and Chris 

Beingessner and Jeff Smysniuk, keep up the great work. Bravo. 

You should all be very proud. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing With Municipalities  

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when I asked previously of the minister about the 

chorus of municipalities proposing large property tax hikes, the 

minister said he needed to give me a lesson. I can assure the 

minister that his flippant answers and lame attempts at humour 

are doing nothing to address the concerns of Saskatoon 

ratepayers who are facing an 8.6 per cent property tax increase. 

This minister does nothing while more and more municipalities 

are facing large property tax hikes. 

 

To the minister: will he commit today to put additional funding 

into municipalities so they can avoid massive tax increases? 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member‟s 

question is surprising, to say the least. The reason that we have 

the situation with respect to property taxes that we do today is 

16 years of flippant answers from the former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask, I would ask members to 

be a little careful of the type of words they use. It just creates 

animosity in the House. The minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The other 

thing that needs to be remembered, of course, is the historic 

framework agreement that was signed last week with the federal 

government. This commits the federal government to providing 

$635 million for infrastructure programs to the province of 

Saskatchewan. That‟s going to go a long way to help the 

property tax concerns of all municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, an infrastructure program does 

not address operating costs or the property tax issues that 

municipalities face. And we‟re looking at increases being 

proposed in Saskatoon of nearly 9 per cent and some taxpayers 

facing even higher rate increases, those in Yorkton who are 

facing 9.8 per cent hike. And just down the road in Melville, 

citizens were facing a 7.5 per cent increase, so their council cut 

some programs, and now the tax hike will be around 5 per cent. 

To the minister, will he finally admit his budget is failing 

municipalities and taxpayers, and commit to sharing some of 

his billion dollar surplus with taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the hon. 

member opposite is not aware of the fact, but it‟s simply the 

truth that an enormous part of the property tax revenues that 

cities, towns, and villages receive have to be expended on 

infrastructure. So it is impossible to avoid the fact that $635 

million coming into the province, specifically designed to aid 

with infrastructure projects, will inevitably help municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well just to remind the minister, the 

infrastructure program is spread over seven years. That‟s a long 

time for municipalities to wait. And in the meantime‟ we‟ve got 

Saskatoon coming in at an 8.6 per cent increase, Yorkton at 9.8 

per cent, Melville at 5 per cent or more after a number of cuts. 

We also have Regina proposing 3.9 per cent increase, Moose 

Jaw at 3.6 per cent, Prince Albert, 5.3, and North Battleford 

coming in at a 6 or 7 per cent increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while the minister sits on $1 billion, taxpayers are 

going to be digging a little deeper to pay for the minister‟s 

incompetence. To the minister, this list is a clear sign that the 

minister and his budget have failed the people of Saskatchewan. 

Will he commit to fix his underfunding before more 

Saskatchewan families are on the hook for bigger property tax 

bills? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve reminded the hon. 

member opposite again and again and again, we wouldn‟t even 

be in this situation if her former government had not clawed 

back $300 million out of the revenue-sharing agreement during 

the course of the 1990s. Year after year after year, they clawed 

back more and more money until finally they had half the 

number of dollars going to municipalities. That‟s the start of 

this whole problem. Again, Mr. Speaker, they broke it; we‟re 

fixing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll remind the member 

opposite that they have $1.3 billion in surplus sitting in cash in 

the bank and are still refusing to help municipalities. 

 

Now the minister likes to think he‟s got it right, and that‟s what 

he keeps telling us. Even though that the provincial coffers are 

overflowing, the minister and that Premier have no problem 

telling taxpayers that we have to pay more. While they run 

around taking credit for the province‟s prosperity, they‟re 

failing to share it with the very people who are responsible for 

Saskatchewan‟s growth — the men and women who are the 

backbone of our province. 

 

To the minister: how does he defend the shameful neglect of the 

municipal taxpayers at a time of unprecedented prosperity? Will 

he admit that he got it wrong and commit today to sharing the 

wealth with Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the 

hon. member opposite conveniently forgets time and time again 

is that their government had 16 years to get it right with respect 

to revenue sharing. They didn‟t fix it. We‟re fixing it. We‟re 

getting it right. They dropped the ball. We‟re going to carry it 

across the finish line and get a touchdown. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Funding for School Divisions  

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party 

government has made plenty of promises to commit to funding 

rural school divisions and addressing the challenge of school 

closures. Now the people of Prairie South School Division are 

finding out just how empty Sask Party promises are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Prairie South taxpayers already pay the highest 

mill rate in the province, but the Sask Party government has 

responded by reducing funding to Prairie South by over $1 

million. In a recent statement on behalf of the division, board 

Chair Gord Stewart points out that, and I quote, “Rhetoric about 

„saving‟ rural schools is just that . . .”  

 

To the minister: why are you forcing the people of Prairie 

South, who already pay a higher mill rate than anywhere else in 

the province, to pay far more? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that 

question. As you can tell, my voice may not last, and I‟ll try to 

give an answer if possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over a number of years the former government 

downloaded onto the school boards. It‟s no secret that in 

Saskatchewan taxpayers who are landowners pay the highest 

amount to support education in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. So 

as a result, the province has made an attempt to look at tax 

rebates. It‟s made an attempt to look at how we fund education. 

Equity is very, very important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there have been phase 1 and phase 2 of the foundation 

operating grant. There have been reviews. And they‟ve started 

on that process. Unfortunately there are a few school divisions 

like Prairie South who have a very significant declining 

enrolment. And that is one of the causes that has resulted in less 

tax dollars. And I‟ll try to get into a few more, Mr. Speaker, as 

soon as he asks the next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s more than just a few 

school divisions. This budget places the burden of tax increases 

on far too many in this province. Instead of addressing the real 

problems that taxpayers are facing, the Saskatchewan Party 

paraded around the province unfairly raising people‟s 

expectations. As board Chair of the Prairie South School 

Division, Gord Stewart, has said, and I quote: 

 

With only 1 million . . . set aside in this budget, funding 

for “schools of opportunities” appears to be a band-aid 

solution at best, and, at worst, a red herring for the public. 

It gives the appearance of supporting all rural schools, 

while allowing the government to avoid responsibility for 

funding them at a level that would encourage and allow 

long-term sustainability.  

 

To the minister: why, with $1 billion in the bank, is the Sask 

Party government failing to accept its responsibility to fund 

schools adequately, and why is it forcing tax increases upon its 

residents? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Education budget has increased 

by almost 25 per cent — a phenomenal amount. I think that 

shows . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — That clearly shows this government‟s 

commitment to education and ensuring that we produce the best 

education possible. Mr. Speaker, the schools of opportunity 

have been discussed for about a year and a half already. We 

indicated when we were still in opposition that there was a need 

to address a situation where a community may be able to look at 

growth, may be able to look at the potential of a school 

increasing. And as a result of that, we have had a committee 

that has been working for the last three months to not only 

produce the changes, Mr. Speaker, that you‟re going to see 

today in The Education Act regarding the consultation process 

for school closures or grade discontinuance, but there is also 

going to be regulations that will put in place the opportunity for 

communities to apply for schools of opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, after factoring in the 

teachers‟ collective bargaining costs, many school divisions 

have lost significant funding. Mr. Speaker, talk is fine, but 

money‟s better. Northwest has effectively lost almost 11 per 

cent, the same in Prairie South, and at Sun West almost 17.5 per 

cent. Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. Again as Mr. Gord 

Stewart says: 

 

Talk is cheap. Education is not. It‟s time to put the money 

where the campaign promises were and level the playing 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

field for rural school divisions like ours.  

 

To the minister: does the minister stand by his budget — a 

budget that hampers the ability of so many school divisions to 

deliver quality education, and it raises the taxes across this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this government and I as the Minister of 

Education are extremely proud of this budget for education, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are situations like the Prairie South 

School Division. Now I want to clarify, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there are five school divisions that will in fact be 

receiving less grant this year than they did last. Mr. Speaker, 

that information is on the website. It was put on the website 

immediately after budget. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It would be appropriate 

to allow the minister to respond that the minister could 

conclude his remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there are a number of factors that affect those five school 

divisions that are going to receive less grant. The other school 

divisions, the other 23, are in fact receiving more grant — in 

some cases significantly more. 

 

The member opposite has to review the foundation operating 

grant. The member opposite needs to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Please allow the minister . . . 

Member from Regina Rosemont will allow for a response 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the factors are there. 

There are vulnerability factors. There are distance factors. There 

are transportation factors, and there are school enrolment 

factors, Mr. Speaker. One of the concerns is that that school 

division has had an enrolment decline of 275, Mr. Speaker. That 

is significant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Confidential Documents 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday we found out the 

Regina Police Service has concluded their investigation into the 

matter of unauthorized removal of confidential documents. I 

quote from the news release, quote, “When these two police 

reports were tabled in the Saskatchewan Legislature and 

appeared on the public website of a political party in April 

2007, the Regina Police Service began an investigation into 

how the reports were . . . made public.” The release goes on to 

say that the Regina Police Service had identified a suspect in 

the matter, but the matter has concluded pending further 

evidence. 

 

It‟s clear police believe they can identify who gave the 

documents to the Saskatchewan Party, but they cannot press 

any charges without more information, information that only 

the suspect and the Sask Party government know. 

 

To the government: who provided the unauthorized documents 

to the Sask Party? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, during the tenure of the 

previous administration, a system was developed where if there 

was a complaint made regarding a member of the legislature or 

caucus, the matter was investigated independently. And upon 

conclusion of the investigation, the investigation file was 

referred out of province — in most cases to the province of 

Alberta — so it could be looked at independently. 

 

I‟m surprised that the member would actually ask this question 

because that‟s exactly what happened in this particular case. It‟s 

exactly what happened earlier with the matter that rose prior to 

the last election, Mr. Speaker, and the process was followed. I 

think it‟s imperative for members of the public to have 

confidence in the members of the legislature. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, justice must not only be done; it must be seen to be 

done. And the absolute independence must be maintained. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Exactly, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 

Minister of Justice knows the answer to my question. I‟m not 

sure the people of Saskatchewan believe that the members of 

the Saskatchewan Party are being entirely co-operative on this 

matter. Last year on May 1, the now Deputy Premier had this to 

say when the documents came into the Saskatchewan Party‟s 

possession, quote, “The information has come into our 

possession during this legislative session that we are in this 

spring.”  

 

But it turns out the Deputy Premier had trouble counting, Mr. 

Speaker, because after the police started their investigation, the 

now Premier came out and he had this to say, quote, “. . . I 

don‟t know the exact date, but I believe it was April of 2006.” 

So the Deputy Premier said the documents were obtained in 

2007, and the Premier said they were obtained in 2006. 

 

Who was telling the truth, Mr. Speaker? And what did the Sask 

Party tell the police when they investigated this matter? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 823 

The Speaker: — I recognize the government House deputy 

leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

last year on May 8, 2007, in an interview that I gave with 

CJME, I answered this way, and I‟ll repeat. I quote, “Our chief 

of staff had in fact received the brown envelope a while back in 

the spring of 2006.” Mr. Speaker, I put that on the record on 

May 8, 2007, almost a year ago. Mr. Speaker, the envelope was 

in the mailbox of the chief of staff at his home. 

 

We have communicated that information to the police. We have 

co-operated fully, unlike that former government who had to 

admit, had to admit that for 16 years they failed to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan about a fraud activity, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s the reality, and that‟s the truth about that former 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier has 

had two different stories on this. His first story was it was found 

in the spring of 2007. A later story said it was found in spring of 

2006. His first story it was found in a brown envelope in the 

caucus office. The second story it‟s found in a brown envelope 

in the caucus director‟s mailbox. 

 

To the Deputy Premier: when was he telling the truth? Did the 

documents arrive in Reg Downs‟s mailbox? Or did they arrive 

at the caucus office as he once said? And what did the Sask 

Party tell the police when they investigated this matter? And 

how does the Sask Party explain the media being misled? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the deputy leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the very first time that I had questions in a scrum in the rotunda, 

I didn‟t have all the information as to when that package was 

there. And I did state that I thought it had just been received 

within our caucus office. Mr. Speaker, that was not fact. And in 

fact very shortly I met with the media and I said no, that is not 

true, that in fact the envelope came into our hands in the spring 

of 2006, Mr. Speaker. I clarified that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record what the former 

government did back in 1994, and it states this. The report also 

said that on September 20, 1994, quote: “Lorjé advised that it 

was the intention of caucus to conceal the fact that Lord had 

committed the fraud.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was an admission by that former government 

that in fact fraud had occurred and they were going to conceal 

it, Mr. Speaker. That is the position that they took. Our position 

was to co-operate fully with the investigation and with police. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Essential Services Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week we 

learned that not only does the emperor not have any clothes, but 

he‟s also not wearing any underwear. 

 

The Minister of Labour has been telling members of the public 

for months that his essential services legislation is moderate and 

middle of the road. Well guess what, Mr. Speaker? The minister 

was asked point-blank by reporters on Monday whether there 

were any jurisdictions in Canada with the broader definition of 

who would be deemed essential services. The minister adopted 

his patented deer-in-the-headlights look and admitted he 

couldn‟t answer the question. 

 

He‟s now had a weekend to study up. Can the minister now tell 

us if any Canadian jurisdiction has broader legislation? And can 

he explain why we‟d even believe him at this time? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I can‟t speak to 

the wardrobe questions that the member opposite is referring to. 

But, you know, Mr. Speaker, I think probably the question may 

be better posed to one of his colleagues, to the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow, because apparently she had a discussion 

last week, Mr. Speaker. In fact she apparently chatted with Mr. 

John Boyd, Mr. Speaker. And you know, Mr. Speaker, when 

she asked apparently if the legislation is moderate, Mr. Boyd 

indeed said, yes it is. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we can‟t figure out is, is there such 

disarray or disorganization on that side of the House that 

they‟re not communicating with one another, Mr. Speaker, 

about the moderation of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last fall the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] asked the Minister of Labour whether 

teachers, police officers, firefighters, and other sectors would 

fall under his essential services Bill. The minister‟s response, he 

immediately accused the NDP of inciting unnecessary fear, but 

it turns out that the fear was well founded. Either the minister 

has no idea who will be included in the essential services 

regulation or he‟s just not telling. 

 

To the minister: will he table his regulations and finally put to 

rest the question of who, who is in and who is out? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Before I call on the minister, I 

just want to remind members that when they‟re placing the 

question, place it through the Chair. Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the essential 

service legislation that Saskatchewan is moving forward on, 

catching up with the rest of the country, Mr. Speaker, has four 

key criteria, Mr. Speaker, and that is we can look at ensuring 

the protection of life; we can ensure the protection of property, 

Mr. Speaker; ensure the protection of the environment; and 

ensure the operation of the courts, Mr. Speaker. Those are the 

core elements of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

From there, Mr. Speaker, we went out. We had consultations, 

Mr. Speaker, and as a result of that, we heard some very 

compelling cases about how some other organizations, for 

instance community-based organizations, in fact want to be 

included under this legislation. During the NSBA‟s [North 

Saskatoon Business Association] presentation last week, what 

we did see is an individual come forward and ask specifically 

that a community-based organization that looks after those with, 

with severe disabilities actually be, be covered under this 

legislation. 

 

The key question remains, Mr. Speaker, are the members 

opposite going to be voting in favour of essential service 

legislation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad the minister was 

listening when he attended the NSBA function and also that 

many of his stakeholders who he has said are calling on public 

consultations. But, Mr. Speaker, on Thursday afternoon while 

the minister was dodging questions in the rotunda, some of his 

colleagues might have let the cat out of the bag. Under 

questioning in the Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice, the Minister of Tourism told the NDP that 45 officials 

would be deemed essential. In the Economy Committee, the 

Minister of Energy and Resources explained that “. . . all areas 

of the government are looking through to determine whether or 

not the essential services legislation would have any impact 

upon that particular ministry.”  

 

To the minister, we have asked him to table his regulations; he 

refused. Can he at the very least tell the people of this province 

which civil servants are deemed essential? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province can know that in fact we‟re going to make sure that if 

snowstorms are coming, that the highways are cleared. We‟re 

going to make sure that if there‟s a strike at the University of 

Saskatchewan or elsewhere, that parents can take their kids to 

get the medical treatment that they need. That‟s what we‟re 

going to be doing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to ensure that our legislation, 

which again we have not seen that the members on that side 

actually have any statement whether they‟re going to be 

supporting or not . . . Mr. Speaker, as we look across Canada, 

we see that every province in Canada either has it in place or 

has it tabled. Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is we need to 

ensure that the public safety is guaranteed in Saskatchewan and 

at the same time it‟s balanced with the right to strike. 

 

What we can say, Mr. Speaker, is that in some provinces, Mr. 

Speaker, the right to strike has been taken away, and that‟s one 

of the key criterions where we can turn and say, this is a very 

moderate of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — The Minister of Labour has spent four 

months explaining that he doesn‟t need to send Bills 5 and 6 to 

public hearings because they are meant simply to bring 

Saskatchewan to the Canadian norm. It turns out now that he‟s 

not so sure. He still can‟t really tell us how his legislation 

compares to other jurisdictions. He still can‟t say who‟s in and 

who‟s out, and he has shown over and over again that he can‟t 

answer simple questions about his own legislation. The 

members opposite, once so quick to call for public 

consultations, have now fallen silent. 

 

To the minister: why won‟t he clear up the confusion? Why 

won‟t he finally agree to follow the Minister of Agriculture‟s 

lead and hold public hearings on such a vital issue? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the key question is as we 

look at the essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker, will the 

members opposite be voting for or against it, Mr. Speaker? And 

you know, Mr. Speaker, as we look at some of the recent 

campaign contributions to individual members, Mr. Speaker, 

$281,000 to members opposite, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps that 

number offers us greater insight to the opposition to this Bill 

than anything that‟s being asked, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. Order. I 

recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 825 

Volunteers Recognized During 

Victims of Crime Awareness Week  

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

rise today to inform this House that April 13 to 19 is Victims of 

Crime Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. This year‟s theme is 

Finding the Way Together. 

 

Victims of crime and traumatic events can feel lost and unable 

to cope with what has happened to them. Many need help in 

finding their way in the criminal justice system. Mr. Speaker, 

we have many dedicated people working in victims services 

programs across our province and who have been here to help 

their victims find the way. 

 

Victims services helps victims involved in the criminal justice 

system in Saskatchewan by providing a range of programs and 

services throughout the province. These include the victims 

compensation restitution program, specialized victims services 

programs that focus on assisting victims of domestic violence or 

sexual assault, Aboriginal family violence programs, the victim 

impact statement program, the victim witness programs that are 

available at regional prosecution offices, and police-based 

programs that are available to approximately 87 per cent of 

Saskatchewan‟s population. 

 

Victims of Crime Awareness Week is our opportunity to 

recognize the important contribution of the more than 300 

caring victims services volunteers that operate out of 18 

police-based programs in our province. These individuals play a 

key role to ensure that victims of violent crime receive 

information and support immediately after a crime and 

throughout the criminal justice process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m honoured to stand in the House today and 

recognize the following individuals who have provided 15 years 

of volunteer service to victims services programs in 

Saskatchewan: Linda Anweiler, Jean Carroll, Barry Shillington, 

and Rob Quayle, all from Saskatoon, as well as Gerry Peppler 

from Yorkton. These people have been involved in the program 

since its inception 15 years ago and have played an important 

role in the growth of the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s also my privilege to recognize volunteers who 

have provided 10 years of service. They are Susan Resler of 

Bienfait, Kathy Button of Carrot River; Lynn Baillie, Lucille 

Rezansoff, and Anita Klochko of Kamsack; Doug Haroldson of 

Maple Creek, Diane Petkau of Meadow Lake, Brenda Nicholls 

and Peggy Johnson of Moose Jaw, Margaret Minski of North 

Battleford; Pat Norten-Stoutonburg, Prudence McKenzie, 

Jacquie Dobrowolski, Audrey Neubuhr, and Rhonda Durand, 

all of Prince Albert; and Andrea Staples and Jean Homstol of 

Tisdale. All of these dedicated volunteers have given their time 

and energy in their communities, supporting victims in 

programs throughout the province. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, a little bit later today I will have the opportunity to 

join a number of these volunteers and present them with gifts 

commemorating their 10- and 15-year anniversaries of service 

to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will ask all members to join me in expressing 

our sincere appreciation of these very dedicated individuals and 

to all of our victims services volunteers for their many years of 

service to the people of their communities. I thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to join with the 

Minister of Justice in congratulating the individuals who are 

here today as volunteers but also to go through our annual 

recognition of the victims services program in the province in a 

very formal way. 

 

I think in all of our communities across this province, 

individuals are acknowledging the victims services program as 

they use it on a day-to-day basis. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

my predecessor, Mr. Mitchell, who started this program, and 

then all of the number of years that I worked with this, and then 

the people who succeeded me as attorney general — all of us 

felt this was an extremely important program that went out and 

worked carefully with the police and the court systems and the 

people in the local communities. 

 

And it would not have worked at all if we did not have the 

volunteers that we have in the program today. And so anything 

that we can do as members of the legislature to affirm all of 

these people in our local communities, I strongly suggest that 

we all do that because we never know who of our family or 

friends may require some of the calm, careful, patient advice 

from the victims services people when something fairly bad 

happens to them. 

 

So I want to say thank you very much on behalf of all of the 

people of Saskatchewan to the administrators of the victims 

services program and especially to the volunteers who work 

right across the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées 

et des jeux de hasard  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D‟Autremont: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Je 

propose Projet de Loi n
o
 27, Loi modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard, 

modifiant la loi intitulée The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2002 et modifiant la Loi de 2005, modifiant la 

Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et 

des jeux de hasard. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 27, 

An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 



826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

1997, to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2002 and to amend The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Amendment Act, 2005.] 

 

I move that Bill No. 27, An Act to Amend the Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act, 1997, to amend The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 and to amend The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2005 be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Government Services has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 27, The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Amendment Act be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. D‟Autremont: — Session prochaine. [Translation: 

Next sitting.] Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Vital Statistics Administration 

Transfer Act  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

28, The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Corporations that first reading of Bill 

No. 28, The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act be now 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 

2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l‟éducation  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 29, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that first reading of Bill No. 29, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 30 — The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would move that Bill No. 30, The Statutes and Regulations 

Revision Act, be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 30, The Statutes and Regulations Revision 

Act. Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, with leave, to introduce a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave. I‟m informed he doesn‟t need leave. You can . . . 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

On Thursday last during the 75-minute debate, there was a 

question put to the member from Saskatoon Eastview by the 

Minister of Health. 

 

And in the member‟s response the member said the following, 

among other things, referring to the Minister of Health: “If he 

drives,” and I quote, “If he drives down 20th Street, if he‟s only 

looking for Liquor Board stores, that‟s a comment on his 

capacity, not ours.”  



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 827 

And further in that debate, in response to a question by the 

member from Batoche, the member from Saskatoon Eastview 

also said and I quote: “I guess the members in the Sask Party 

only are interested in liquor stores.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that these kinds of comments are 

unfortunate and they make implications on the character of 

members in this House. And I would ask that member to 

withdraw those remarks and apologize. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise to provide some advice on the 

point of order. The member opposite had not provided me with 

an indication of what his point of order might be today and I 

appreciate that. 

 

I listened carefully to what his point of order was and, Mr. 

Speaker, I think you have no choice in this matter but to rule 

that in fact the exchange that took place was an exchange of 

debate. What the member said can be argued, and the members 

opposite are in fact arguing the point. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to 

you that in fact there is no point of order here, and the 

Legislative Assembly should go back to its normal business for 

the day. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the Government House Leader for 

raising the point of order and the Opposition House Leader for a 

response. And given the fact that I believe the Speaker needs to 

do further in-depth review, and review the comments before 

making a recommendation that would be deemed suitable to the 

House. So the Speaker will review the comments and come 

back with a response to the point of order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 5 — The Public 

Service Essential Services Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 

early speakers on this Bill — which I‟m clearly one, Mr. 

Speaker, of the earliest speakers on this Bill — have a couple of 

difficulties. First of all, there is a crying need in the case of Bill 

5 — if no other Bill but certainly Bill 5 — for public hearings, 

Mr. Speaker, and the public itself feels this need. Various 

community groups are holding informal discussions, inviting 

speakers to address them, and we heard about one of those 

discussions in a member statement today. 

This is a Bill that has been described as among the broadest in 

the country in the case of essential services, and not by 

members of the opposition alone in any case, Mr. Speaker, and 

not by the labour movement alone, Mr. Speaker, but by officials 

of the ministry responsible. Officials of the Government of 

Saskatchewan have said that this is the broadest, or amongst the 

broadest piece of legislation in the country. 

 

This is not a debate, Mr. Speaker, about essential services. We 

have had back-to-work legislation in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It‟s been brought in by Conservative 

governments. It‟s been brought in by Liberal governments. It‟s 

been brought in by New Democratic Party governments. 

 

Sometimes services are deemed to be essential, Mr. Speaker. 

They are essential and they have to be performed and they 

cannot not be performed because there is a work stoppage or 

there is a labour disagreement at the time. That‟s almost not a 

debatable principle, Mr. Speaker. It certainly can‟t be debated 

by, seriously, by any party that‟s formed the government in this 

province because all those parties in government have had on 

occasion, when necessary, when pressed by necessity, to bring 

in what‟s called back-to-work legislation that recognizes that 

certain services are essential. And some services that are not 

essential perhaps in July are essential in February, Mr. Speaker, 

which the Minister of Labour, I think, needs to recognize when 

he continues to resist the call for public hearings. 

 

And he did that again today in question period, Mr. Speaker, 

and he did so because well, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn‟t want to 

have somebody killed by a blizzard on a public highway in 

Saskatchewan because we didn‟t have essential services 

legislation. Well that‟s never been the choice, Mr. Speaker. The 

choice is quite different than that because we have not had 

essential services legislation, Mr. Speaker, in the past. We have 

not had it and yet we have had the ability to either negotiate, 

and where we cannot negotiate, order back people to work 

where required. 

 

I was minister responsible for SaskPower in 2003, 2004. We 

were in negotiations as a Crown with the employees, 

particularly the electrical workers in SaskPower. Every now and 

then somebody, I think on the labour side, would raise the 

spectre of a work stoppage because the Crown management in 

their view wasn‟t negotiating seriously. And the press would 

come to the minister and say, what‟s going to happen if there‟s 

a strike at SaskPower? 

 

And I would always say, on every single occasion, that the 

people of Saskatchewan can be assured that . . . And they know 

the history, Mr. Speaker. They know the history of what 

happens when there‟s a work stoppage of electrical workers at 

SaskPower. The people of Saskatchewan can be assured that the 

lights and heat are going to stay on. 

 

Now I don‟t think that the leadership of IBEW [International 

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] particularly liked those 

comments. As a matter of fact I know they did not, Mr. 

Speaker. They didn‟t particularly like those comments, but they 

reflected the reality of the situation, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

legislation isn‟t necessary for a government to fulfill its 

responsibilities to keep the light and power on. Nobody doubted 

the resolve of the previous government and the resolve of the 



828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

minister, who happened to be me at the time, to ensure that that 

was the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do not need sweeping legislation that enables a government 

to deem anybody an essential service by regulation, which is 

what this legislation appears to do, Mr. Speaker. The Minister 

of Labour shakes his head no from his chair, but that‟s not 

exactly on the record, Mr. Speaker. And he could put himself 

on the record on that kind of point at public hearings — which 

takes me back to his argument against public hearings. 

 

[11:00] 

 

While we are dithering, while we are dithering over this 

legislation, and because we have no other tools . . . Now, Mr. 

Speaker, we clearly have other tools. They have been used. 

They have been used in the past and they could be used again. 

But while we are dithering over the summer, discussing what is 

meant by the most broad legislation in the country, somebody 

might be killed by a blizzard in July. That is the Minister of 

Labour‟s serious contention. 

 

Perhaps that was a danger . . . Although it wasn‟t really a 

danger because that contract wasn‟t going to come up this 

winter, and it is not going to come up next winter either, Mr. 

Speaker. But while the government declined to take an 

opportunity to debate this legislation in December or to discuss 

it at public hearings over the winter, I guess we had a few 

blizzards, Mr. Speaker, and we may actually have a blizzard or 

two before they can possibly hope to pass this legislation and 

enact it. But by the time that public hearings would be taking 

place, Mr. Speaker, well we‟ve never had a blizzard in July yet. 

 

And there‟s obviously a desire on the part of not just labour 

because they did not hold that discussion that was referred to in 

the member‟s statement earlier — that was held by a business 

association — obviously a desire to discuss what this legislation 

means and to learn what it means. 

 

And ministers who ask, with the exception of the Minister of 

Tourism who actually had a number — so I can‟t believe other 

ministers don‟t have a number — the Minister of Tourism had a 

number of people in her ministry who would be affected by this 

legislation. She said, in estimates, 45. Other ministers claim not 

to have a number. Well that‟s even more telling if it‟s true, Mr. 

Speaker. Ministers don‟t know how this legislation affects their 

ministries, Mr. Speaker. That review hasn‟t taken place yet. 

They don‟t know or they won‟t say. 

 

Well if they don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, how do municipalities 

know how this legislation affects them? How do other 

organizations that might be deemed to have essential services 

— as now almost any organization in the province can be, Mr. 

Speaker — know how this legislation affects them? The 

government hasn‟t allegedly, purportedly, supposedly 

conducted their review, with the exception of one fairly 

forthright minister in estimates who says, well I know the 

number; it‟s 45. 

 

So the first problem with debating this Bill for an early speaker 

— and I think I‟m the first speaker on the opposition side to 

address the Bill — is that the government doesn‟t want the 

public to know what the Bill means and we haven‟t had the 

public consultation, public hearings, that people might expect 

that we would have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second issue for an early speaker on this Bill, and perhaps 

any speaker in the House, Mr. Speaker, is this: the government 

has indicated that there‟ll be changes to the Bill, but no one 

outside government has been told what these changes are. So 

it‟s my responsibility to stand up, Mr. Speaker, and speak about 

a proposed piece of legislation, but this is not the legislation the 

government intends to pass, supposedly. 

 

One of the other things that the minister says, while providing 

information to the policy community and the continuum of 

dialogue and raising key questions as he does, one of the things 

that he says in response to criticism of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, is, 

well we‟re going to be making amendments. So you can believe 

or hope that whatever concerns you have about this Bill will be 

addressed by our amendments, but we‟re not going to tell you 

what the amendments are. 

 

So cold comfort, Mr. Speaker, I think, to say that, well this is 

not the legislation that we‟re actually wanting to enact; that‟s 

different legislation than the legislation that we‟ve actually put 

in the front of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the government should responsibly do — 

and I appreciate that we‟ve had a long debate about their 

inability to manage their legislative agenda — but what the 

government should responsibly do is withdraw the legislation 

that they don‟t intend to enact, and introduce legislation that 

they do intend to enact, and consult the public about that 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, oh well we have no time for that, would say the Minister 

of Labour. We have this urgent danger of a blizzard in July and 

we can‟t possibly do that. But in fact they could, Mr. Speaker. 

If they want to acknowledge that they‟ve overreached, that the 

legislation is overly broad — which they seemed to have 

wanted to imply by suggesting that they have amendments — 

then they should bring forward the actual legislation. 

 

And instead of making this a debate or trying to make this a 

debate about what it cannot possibly be, and that is whether 

there are services that are essential that must carry on during 

work stoppages, and as I said, Mr. Speaker, no one‟s going to 

debate that. 

 

NDP governments have had a history of sending people back to 

work when they were performing essential services. But a 

member opposite asks what I‟m going to vote for. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, nobody wants to tell anybody what this is. 

Nobody wants to be forthright about how many government 

employees are affected. Nobody wants to be forthright about 

what amendments are proposed. Nobody wants to be forthright, 

I think, about why they want this legislation to be passed this 

spring, why it cannot wait for public hearings, but I think I‟ll 

come to that. 

 

The government‟s reply that the principles of the legislation are 

to be debated and second reading is just for that purpose is 

really no real response because the principles of the legislation 

go to its breadth. Is everybody . . . Is it a matter of principle that 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 829 

anybody who works in the province of Saskatchewan working 

essential service? Is that the principle in this legislation? 

 

That may appear to be the principle in this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. The government doesn‟t really intend that. Well there 

needs to be some clarification and there needs to be some 

discussion about what the government‟s actual intent is. 

 

That no one‟s life should be endangered because of a work 

stoppage is not really debatable, Mr. Speaker. That is not the 

principle up for debate. The principle that‟s up for debate is not 

motherhood and apple pie, Mr. Speaker, it is real issues, and it 

is a set of principles around the extent of government power. 

 

And I would return just briefly by allusion, Mr. Speaker, to the 

debate that we had about the government‟s unilateral change of 

the rules. It‟s really about the extent of the power of the 

government in respect to the power of the legislature, at least in 

part, Mr. Speaker. Here we have a piece of legislation that is so 

broad, that could include anybody, Mr. Speaker, and who is 

touched and when they are touched is therefore determined by 

regulation which is therefore determined by cabinet — which is 

not debated in this legislature. 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, a strike had taken place in 2004 by IBEW, and 

had been necessary to send them back to work, and that had 

been felt to be necessary by the members of the legislature, and 

that had happened, Mr. Speaker, that would have been debated, 

that specific back-to-work legislation would have been debated 

in this legislature by members of the government, by members 

of the opposition, by all members of the Legislative Assembly, 

whether that was essential — who had to be sent back, how 

many, and which specific individuals had to go back to work. 

 

That will never be debated again, as I understand the legislation 

that‟s before us. Cabinet will meet and decide, oh these people 

are an essential service — back to work. These people are an 

essential service — back to work. No legislation saying, well 

we don‟t just mean police officers. We don‟t just mean 

firefighters. We don‟t just mean health care workers. We mean 

whoever we think we can send back to work today by cabinet 

order. Not to be debated in the legislature. Not to be discussed 

in public. 

 

And again centralizing power in the government and the 

balance of power between the government and the legislature is 

one issue, Mr. Speaker. Balance of power between government 

as management and its employees is another, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think maybe we start to get to some of the government‟s 

motivation around this Bill. 

 

But for the sake of centralizing the power in the government to 

declare anybody essential — you know, zap you‟re essential; 

zap you‟re essential; zap you‟re essential by government order 

— in order to have that power, Mr. Speaker, we now have, 

before they do that, before they do that they have set out the 

legislation, but no discussion in the public about how this is 

actually going to work. And the government does not want the 

benefit of any public discussion about how this is going to 

work, Mr. Speaker. They‟re going to have a complex and 

time-consuming designation process. And if that doesn‟t work, 

well then the employer — and particularly the government 

employer — zap you‟re essential. Zap you‟re essential, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If they believe that that is not how it works, Mr. Speaker, there 

are people out there who certainly do. And if they really want, 

if they really want people to be protected from that abuse of 

power, maybe they should go to people and ask them, what 

would you see as actual, real protection against that exercise of 

government power, Mr. Speaker? But that‟s the last thing they 

want to do. They are doing everything around how this 

legislature debates this matter to avoid that discussion. And it 

appears, Mr. Speaker, that they will be successful in doing that. 

 

Now how does the legislation that the government is actually 

going to propose at some point in time — I suppose when this 

matter gets to committee, Mr. Speaker — affect these same 

principles? And does it do it as effectively in the same way? Is 

it an improvement over what we‟ve now seen? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we don‟t know. 

 

We don‟t know what the proposed amendments are. We don‟t 

know what the changes are. We‟ve heard talk about them for 

some good deal of time, but we‟re being asked to debate this 

matter in a vacuum nonetheless. I could probably spend more 

time discussing provisions of Bill 5, which I will later learn the 

government is no longer committed to, Mr. Speaker, or the 

government‟s not committed to them. Tell me now, Mr. 

Speaker. Tell me now, and I won‟t spend the time in this 

legislature debating matters that are set out in the Bill that in 

fact the government does not propose to proceed with. 

 

In fact it is now clear that the government now knows what 

amendments they will propose, or is not clear that they actually 

know. I mean it‟s talking about amendments, but it‟s not clear 

they actually know what they are. Maybe some of them know, 

but the Minister of Labour doesn‟t know what they are. 

 

We proceeded that way in the past, Mr. Speaker, where it‟s 

become clear decisions have been made, but the minister 

responsible hasn‟t yet been told what they are, Mr. Speaker. 

And that may be why the Minister of Labour is not forthcoming 

on what the changes are. He is still, weeks after this legislation 

has been introduced, waiting for his briefing on the changes. 

 

But the government should not suggest the legislature cannot 

discuss these provisions of a Bill because those provisions may 

or may not continue to be there. The government cannot insist, 

as the government has, that the only debate be essentially, if 

you will pardon the pun, Mr. Speaker, on the the title of the 

Bill. 

 

But that‟s the position that they put members of this Legislative 

Assembly in, Mr. Speaker, where really we have the title of the 

Bill, and the Minister of Labour will only defend this. He‟ll 

only defend the concept that there are essential services and 

those essential services should continue despite a work 

stoppage. That‟s his only defence of the Bill, and that‟s what he 

says the debate‟s about, and that‟s what he says the vote‟s 

about. And that is not true, Mr. Speaker, because that is simply 

not debatable that there are essential services and that they 

should continue at least soon after a work stoppage, that they 

should be re-continued at . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d just like to remind members, 



830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

when a member‟s on their feet, I know that other members have 

the desire to communicate with each other. But if we could just 

tone down and talk a lot quieter, it‟d be a lot easier to hear the 

member who has been recognized presenting, making their 

speech or their comments to the Assembly. So if members 

could keep that in mind, that‟d be greatly appreciated. Thank 

you. Member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The only 

responsible course of action for a government — that now 

appreciates that the Bill needs substantial amendments, the Bill 

is overly broad, and a government that might remain unsure as 

to what their amendments are — is to withdraw Bill No. 5 and 

to write a Bill that the government will stand by and therefore a 

Bill that we can legitimately debate in the legislature. 

 

Unless the government seriously believes that someone might 

be killed by a blizzard in July, as the Minister of Labour alluded 

to, the government should withdraw the Bill it no longer 

supports, Mr. Speaker. The government simply wants to be able 

to order nurses back to work this spring; then, Mr. Speaker, the 

government should say so. If that‟s what the legislation‟s about 

is — the ability to order the nurses back to work without having 

to recall the legislature to do so — then the government should 

say so, Mr. Speaker. The government should be honest about 

the purpose for this Bill. But if this legislation is about larger 

issues, then the government should withdraw this Bill and bring 

the Bill forward that they are willing to support, not just in 

committee but in second reading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

I want to cite a bit of a comment that was made about Bill No. 5 

on April 11, Mr. Speaker. All these comments are from The 

StarPhoenix, and I‟ll try to attribute the comments to the correct 

person. They‟re in a number of different articles and columns. 

 

Mr. Mandryk, who writes for the Leader-Post and The 

StarPhoenix, had this to say about the Bill that‟s currently 

before the House, Bill No. 5, and I quote: 

 

People smarter [than I am] on these matters . . . insist that 

free collective bargaining is far better served when there 

are no intervening government restrictions. In British 

Columbia, for example, observers say essential services 

legislation has, demonstrably, caused longer strikes — 

especially in . . . [the health care sector], where there have 

been lockouts by employers and unions choosing to strike 

because they know their members will [continue to] work 

while others viewed as non-essential walk the picket line. 

Moreover, the union hostility that essential services 

legislation has now stirred up is about the last thing the 

Saskatchewan government needs when it‟s trying to 

attract health professionals such as nurses.  

 

End quote, Mr. Speaker. And here in Saskatchewan, we have a 

government that could have looked at the effect of essential 

services legislation across the country and said, well you know 

essential services legislation has actually proven to be a barrier 

to growth, and the government doesn‟t like barriers to growth. 

You think they would have looked at that, Mr. Speaker, but no. 

The conclusion is if essential services legislation causes longer 

strikes in British Columbia, then we need something even more 

far-reaching in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It sort of belies . . . 

it defies understanding as to how they can arrive at that 

conclusion. 

 

Mr. Mandryk goes on to say, quote: 

 

We were also one of two jurisdictions that didn‟t have 

legislated essential . . . [services] because the NDP 

government‟s position . . . [the Saskatchewan Party‟s 

stated position before the election was similar] was that 

these were issues best worked . . . [out by negotiators for 

both parties] at contract time.  

 

And in fact that was the position of the New Democratic Party. 

That was the position of the Saskatchewan Party. Neither of 

those parties took the position that essential services didn‟t 

exist. There was no such thing as essential services. And neither 

of those parties ruled out back-to-work legislation when it was 

necessary. Both the Conservative Party, when it was in power, 

and the New Democratic Party sometimes found, reluctantly, 

that such things were required. 

 

Saskatchewan is not, according to Mr. Mandryk, the only 

jurisdiction without essential services, but I will concede that it 

is relatively rare in the country. And the reason that that is the 

case, Mr. Speaker, well it just sounds so gosh darn good. It just 

does. I mean, the Minister of Labour makes his point. I mean, 

how can you be against it? I mean, next to motherhood and 

apple pie, how can you be against essential services? I mean, 

isn‟t it just the most sensible thing that, you know, if you have a 

blizzard, you don‟t want everybody that clears the highways off 

on strike, even in a July blizzard the Minister of Labour 

obviously believes in. You don‟t want everybody off on strike 

and somebody getting killed on the roads. Well who can be 

against that? 

 

So you can understand how jurisdiction after jurisdiction after 

jurisdiction, even jurisdictions that don‟t want to use it and 

don‟t ever use it, find themselves with essential services 

legislation. And then the clear following question that comes 

after that is, well how could you possibly repeal essential 

services legislation? Even essential services legislation like 

British Columbia‟s, and I expect Saskatchewan‟s when we have 

this regime, actually make strikes longer. I mean, how can you 

be against essential services legislation? It‟s just so gosh golly 

darn good. 

 

And that‟s why we‟re in this situation, Mr. Speaker, because it 

politically it sounds good. It‟s politics, Mr. Speaker, but there is 

no argument that‟s actually going to improve the growth 

climate in the province, which relies to a certain extent on 

labour peace, labour peace which I think the government thinks 

they can impose, but other jurisdictions have learned that you 

cannot, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it doesn‟t actually improve the provision of services as, 

say, the British Columbia experience has taught at least Mr. 

Mandryk, if it hasn‟t taught any member of the government. 

Mr. Mandryk goes on to say: 

 

And despite the government‟s insistence that this essential 

service legislation will be “middle of the road”, we also 

know this week (through the NDP‟s release of . . . [an 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 831 

axed information response] it got through the Canadian 

Union of Public Employees) the labour ministry legal 

counsel described the legislation as “quite broad” and that 

a departmental policy director (who coincidently, was let 

go in the January round of transition firings) wrote a note 

. . . [that called it] “likely the broadest application in 

Canada”.  

 

End of the full quote, Mr. Speaker. So think what we had is a 

new government who got about 50 per cent of the vote, a little 

bit more, in the election, two-thirds of the seats in the 

legislature — let‟s see how much we can get — and actually 

instructed somebody . . . It‟s not clear to me who, Mr. Speaker. 

Until I see the side-by-sides on the legislation actually drafted 

by the Department of Justice, I won‟t be convinced that it was 

actually the Ministry of Justice that did it. Until the government 

tables those, I‟m not sure I believe that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But whoever drafted this legislation was told to draft the most 

broad, draconian, ham-fisted legislation in the country and see 

how much we have to back down, Mr. Speaker. I mean that‟s 

clear. That‟s clear. That‟s what happened. See how much we 

have to back down, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re trying to keep that 

by avoiding public hearings. By avoiding discussion on this 

Bill, they‟re trying to keep the backing down on this to an 

absolute minimum. 

 

On the same day in The StarPhoenix, April 11, 2008, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s an article by Angela Hall. And in that article, 

minister . . . Sorry Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour is 

quoted as saying, and I quote here, quote: 

 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour Minister 

Rob Norris continued to insist his government‟s proposed 

essential services legislation is “moderate.”  

 

However, the minister acknowledged that regulations . . . 

that will further determine the scope of the legislation may 

not be known until later this year.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while I was saying that this legislation has the 

effect of giving the government the power to say, zap you‟re 

essential, zap you‟re essential, zap you‟re essential, the Minister 

of Labour was, the Minister of Labour was shaking his head no, 

no, no, you‟re wrong. But of course that‟s exactly what he told 

The StarPhoenix on Friday, Mr. Speaker, or on Thursday for 

Friday‟s paper. Again a quote from the article, quote: 

 

The bill states government, Crown corporations, health 

employers, universities and SIAST and municipalities will 

be affected by the legislation.  

 

But the government‟s regulation making powers means 

the legislation could also apply to community-based 

organizations (CBOs), private nursing homes and private 

ambulance services.  

 

Okay. Now again, Mr. Speaker, when I‟m saying that the 

government by regulation, in cabinet, without ever coming to 

the legislature, can say, zap you‟re essential, zap you‟re 

essential, zap you‟re essential — reach outside of health care, 

reach outside the police, reach outside of firefighters to 

community-based organizations, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Labour shakes his head, oh no, no, no, no. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes I wonder if the Minister of Labour 

knows what his Bill says. I mean maybe the value, maybe the 

value of public hearings or public consultations is the minister 

may not change anything in the Bill, but at least the minister 

might learn what the Bill says, which the minister clearly has 

not learned as of this date. 

 

And then I quote from the same article: 

 

Mary Ann Wellsch, director of legal policy and legislation 

in the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour, said it‟s difficult to say exactly how the scope of 

Saskatchewan‟s essential services legislation stacks up 

against other provinces.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the government doesn‟t want to talk about how 

broad its legislation is. The government doesn‟t know at this 

point in April, Mr. Speaker, how the legislation that they 

introduced in December, that they said they‟d been working on 

for months and months and months — while the current 

Premier and the current Health minister were saying they were 

doing no such thing — the government today or at least Friday 

or at least Thursday of last week doesn‟t know how this 

compares, they say, to legislation in other provinces, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I don‟t think anybody needs public hearings 

more than the minister and his officials because they obviously 

don‟t know what the legislation says, and they don‟t know what 

effect the legislation will have. Or at least that‟s what they say 

publicly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if they‟re in that situation, then I think they need to have 

some discussion. And they need to have discussions both with 

business and with labour and with community-based 

organizations and with private nursing homes and with private 

ambulance services, Mr. Speaker, with universities and with 

SIAST as to what this legislation means to them. The 

government doesn‟t seem to know, so how can they possibly be 

advising? 

 

Also on Friday April 11, 2008, in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, 

concern expressed by the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses about 

essential services Bill. The government, I think, wants to deny 

that the urgency about this legislation is about improving their 

bargaining position with health care unions, and particularly 

with the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. I think the leadership 

of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses is a touch skeptical, Mr. 

Speaker, to say the least. In the article, which is by James 

Wood, I quote, “. . . another thorn in the union‟s side is Bill 5, 

the essential services legislation, which the government plans to 

have passed, . . . [receive] royal assent and [be] in effect by the 

time the legislature‟s spring sitting ends on May 15.”  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we certainly know that. I mean the whole 

rules of the legislature were changed, so the government could 

effect that enactment, despite the fact that they could have done 

it if they‟d just taken the advice of their officials on their 

legislative agenda. 

 

I again quote from the article: 

 

Government house leader Rod Gantefoer denied this week 



832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

the government‟s desire to get essential services 

legislation passed this spring had anything to do with the 

four major health-care contracts — SUN, CUPE, SEIU 

and SGEU — that expired at the end of March. 

 

Well no of course not, Mr. Speaker. They‟re not concerned 

about the fact that they had these major union contracts expiring 

within the last few weeks. What they‟re concerned about, Mr. 

Speaker, is this blizzard in July. I don‟t know. Which is more 

credible, Mr. Speaker — the blizzard that the Minister of 

Labour keeps talking about or the fact that they are now in 

negotiations with major health care cost drivers and government 

cost drivers in this province? 

 

The president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Rosalee 

Longmoore, isn‟t buying the Government House Leader‟s 

argument. And I quote: 

 

Longmoore isn‟t buying that argument however. 

 

While the union is hoping an agreement can be reached at 

the bargaining table, the bill does loom in the background. 

 

While the union‟s goal has been to have a tentative deal in 

place by its annual meeting in late April, [quote] “clearly 

that is not going to happen,” said Longmoore. 

 

The article goes on the say, quote, “However, if an agreement 

isn‟t reached, the employer has the ability to designate essential 

employees, with the only recourse an appeal to the 

Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board.” 

 

Well I think SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] is starting to 

see a little bit of a strategy here, Mr. Speaker. And sometimes 

on this side of the House, well, they don‟t look all that strategic. 

They look a little bumbling. And I think SUN is starting to see a 

little bit of a strategy here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well one of our first priority Bills has to be essential services 

legislation, and we have to get that passed. It doesn‟t matter 

what we have to do to the rules of the legislature or the rights of 

the opposition. We have to get that passed by May 15. And 

since that‟s going to be interpreted by the Labour Relations 

Board, well we have to get rid of the members of the Labour 

Relations Board that were hired by an open, competitive 

process and appoint somebody in whom we have absolute 

confidence on how they interpret the legislation — is already 

interpreting this legislation as if it was in effect, I think is what 

he has said. And just to be on the safe side, Mr. Speaker, we 

have to increase his salary by 50 percent. 

 

So I think that, you know, SUN is starting to see a little strategy 

here. Maybe they‟re being a little bit suspicious, but time will 

tell. The article, and it goes on to say, and I quote, 

 

Longmoore said the union believes the employer will 

designate almost all classifications and nurses as essential. 

 

While SUN was one union that met with the government, 

she said public hearings should be held on the bill. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll only say in respect to that, that she is not 

alone. 

[11:30] 

 

The article then goes on to quote her: 

 

“Our facts were presented. I would not characterize it as 

consultation. To me, consultation would have happened 

. . . before the legislation was ever introduced,” said 

Longmoore. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker — and this must be so comforting to 

the members of all unions, all workers in Saskatchewan outside 

of SUN — and I quote, “McMorris said again Thursday specific 

unions were not being targeted by the legislation.” And that‟s 

my point — cold comfort that, Mr. Speaker. That‟s exactly my 

point. Zap, you‟re essential. Zap, you‟re essential. Zap, you‟re 

essential. Zap, you‟re essential. That‟s what the minister says. 

That‟s what the officials say. That‟s the effect of this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yes. So, Mr. Speaker, we have before us a Bill that the 

government itself, or at least the minister himself, doesn‟t seem 

to understand. And it reads differently than the minister holds 

out, that everyone, everyone — not just labour — wants and 

needs to see discussed. We have time to discuss it. 

 

You know, if I hear the Minister of Labour one more time say, 

we need this legislation because we don‟t want anybody killed 

in a blizzard, well that gets a little bit more unrealistic as you 

get into May, Mr. Speaker. By the time this legislation‟s 

enacted, May 15, it isn‟t very realistic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why we could not have public hearings this summer — as 

called for by the president of SUN and others — is completely 

unclear, except, except unless the president of SUN is right and 

this is all about being able to order her members back to work if 

they stand up for their rights in the negotiation with the 

government. 

 

And you have to kind of have some sympathy with her position, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s a lot more coherent than the story we‟re told 

by the Minister of Labour. I mean, the politicization of the 

Labour Relations Board and the changing of the rules of this 

legislature so they can get essential services legislation passed 

by May 15, you know, all works fairly well according to her 

theory and doesn‟t really do much to support the Minister of 

Labour‟s purported concern that we‟re going to have a blizzard 

in July. 

 

So why not public hearings, Mr. Speaker? Well the government 

can‟t wait. The government can‟t wait. The government can‟t 

wait to hear from people. Why? Why won‟t they tell us what‟s 

in this legislation, Mr. Speaker? Well that‟s a little bit less clear. 

I suppose we‟ll find out from them eventually what this 

legislation actually means. But I‟ll be very surprised, Mr. 

Speaker, if they‟re willing to take away what they so clearly 

want. And that is, by cabinet order without ever discussing it 

again in this legislature, the ability to call any service provided 

by any person employed in the province of Saskatchewan an 

essential service deemed by the government to be so. That‟s 

what they don‟t want to lose. They don‟t want to lose that 

power, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a power they should not have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 833 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this afternoon or this morning, pardon me, to 

enter into the debate on this very important piece of legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re debating Bill No. 5, An Act respecting 

Essential Public Services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have before us a Bill that has had very little or 

no consultation, very little or no debate in the public, and very 

few people actually understand the true depth and breadth that 

this legislation would undertake, Mr. Speaker. And there are 

many questioning today the need for such a broad, sweeping 

piece of legislation. 

 

In fact prior to the election, prior to November 7, 2007, Mr. 

Speaker, members opposite didn‟t in any way articulate a need 

for such a sweeping legislation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they said 

just the opposite, that such legislation wasn‟t needed prior to an 

election, Mr. Speaker. And that came from several members, 

but most notably two of the key members of the now 

Saskatchewan Party cabinet. 

 

The former critic for Health and now the Minister of Health 

said, prior to the election, that there was no need for essential 

service legislation and no intent to move forward with such 

legislation. Now, Mr. Speaker, that comes from the Minister of 

Health — the minister that then he was the critic responsible for 

Health and now the Minister of Health — the area in which 

most notably the members opposite talk about when they talk 

about the need for essential services. It‟s odd that their then 

critic — the member from Indian Head-Milestone — the critic 

for Health, saw no need for essential services. In fact they had 

no intention to move forward with essential services, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We also heard that same line of response from the then Leader 

of the Opposition, now the Premier. They, prior to an election, 

indicated very, very clearly that they saw no need for essential 

service legislation, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, exactly 

days — just barely days — after an election, Mr. Speaker, we 

start to hear that one of their priorities would be essential 

service legislation, Mr. Speaker. Did we see, did we see any 

mention of essential service legislation in their platform? No, 

Mr. Speaker, we didn‟t. So did they put this important issue, 

what they say is such an important public issue — did they put 

it before the people for the people to pass judgment, Mr. 

Speaker? No, they didn‟t. 

 

Did they say they‟d do it before an election? No, they wouldn‟t 

say that, Mr. Speaker. So right off the bat, Mr. Speaker, that 

leaves a number of very serious questions about this particular 

piece of legislation, their desire not to speak about it before an 

election because they knew that there would be people who 

would obviously have strong opinions on this particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what‟s even more detrimental to the process 

than not talking about it before an election and saying you 

wouldn‟t do it before an election and doing it immediately after 

an election, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that today we have a piece 

of legislation before us that hasn‟t had the opportunity to go for 

broad public consultations — consultations with the trade 

unions of our province, consultations with the business 

community of our province, and, Mr. Speaker, even 

consultations with the academic community within our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation will have 

difficulty being judged on its own merits because of the process 

that was used to get to this point. And, Mr. Speaker, whenever a 

piece of legislation is talked about prior to an election, and it‟s 

said, well no, it isn‟t necessary; it won‟t happen — and then 

happens immediately after election, of course there is 

suspicions around that piece of legislation. 

 

When that piece of legislation is introduced in November and 

the members of the opposition are asking for it to go out for 

public consultations over December, January, and February, 

March, Mr. Speaker, and the government of the day refuses to 

send it out for public consultations, it adds even more 

scepticism to the process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And further, Mr. Speaker, when we then have a process in place 

where you can have debate in the legislature on the legislation 

— and again we‟re asking for public consultations — when the 

government moves to pressure that these Bills be pushed 

through in this session, Mr. Speaker, without all the debate and 

consultations that we as an opposition would like to be able to 

have with the stakeholders throughout the province, it even 

brings up more questions. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it‟s kind of funny that, Mr. Speaker, that 

other people out there in the public, including the North 

Saskatoon Business Association, find the need to have public 

consultations, Mr. Speaker, to have public meetings talking 

about this legislation to allow people from the public to know 

about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we were asking for, as an opposition, was 

the opportunity to take this Bill out as part of one of our 

committees of the legislature — which incidentally has four 

members of the government and two members of the opposition 

on it — take this piece of legislation out for public hearings. 

Allow the people of the province — whether they be from 

labour, business, academic community, or just citizens at large 

— to make submissions to the committee about the legislation, 

about the intent, about the purpose of such legislation, and to 

take all those ideas, all that information back, Mr. Speaker, and 

then in the aftermath of such broad consultations, look at this 

piece of legislation and say, does it accomplish what we want to 

accomplish? 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the things we‟re not sure about is what 

this piece of legislation wants to accomplish because we‟ve had 

a minister who has been very vague in what he will answer 

about this piece of legislation. He‟s been very broad in his 

answers. He won‟t answer specific information when asked 

about this piece of legislation. And in fact there is some 

question how well he actually understands it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would appear that this piece of legislation 

wasn‟t drafted by the minister, his officials in the department, 

or for that matter, by the Department of Justice. Although we 

hear that it is, Mr. Speaker, we know that an outside lawyer was 



834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

hired by the Department of Labour, by the minister as a 

consultant shortly after the election, and it‟s our belief that this 

piece of legislation was drafted by that individual. It definitely 

has a flavour of that particular individual‟s bent on labour 

relations issues, Mr. Speaker, and we do know, from musings 

from others, that this piece of legislation had a great deal of 

influence by this individual; it was not written by this particular 

individual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a election on November 7, 2007. We had a 

change in government. This is one of the first Acts of the new 

government to indicate that they were going to move forward 

with this legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, they didn‟t take the 

opportunity they had from the period from November 20, 22 

through . . . November 20, pardon me, when the fall session 

ended and this spring, which is about three and a half months, 

to take this piece of legislation and others — they may be very 

contentious, but at the same time may be very complicated and 

have a large number of stakeholders who‟d like to have input 

into it — out for consultation so that then people would in fact 

have the ability to have input prior to the drafting and 

finalization of this very complex piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. No, the minister and the government wouldn‟t afford 

the members of the opposition and the committee the 

opportunity to take this piece of legislation out for 

consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so what do we have? We have a piece of 

legislation that‟s going to restrict the ability of public service 

workers, health care workers, Crown corporation workers, and 

many others‟ abilities to strike, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

balancing tools between an employer and the employee is the 

ability of the employer to impose certain things, but of course 

the ability of the employees to not like those ideas, Mr. 

Speaker, and ultimately during the collective bargaining process 

is if they can‟t come to an agreement, to withdraw their service, 

their labour. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill takes away that ability from several 

thousand — in fact, Mr. Speaker, tens of thousands — of public 

sector workers in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, part of the problem is we don‟t know who all will have 

the right to strike being taken away from them, Mr. Speaker, 

because the devil is always in the detail. Mr. Speaker, we don‟t 

have the detail today. We have a very broad piece of legislation 

that can encompass not only those who are employed directly in 

the public sector of Saskatchewan but anybody else the 

government chooses — and I want to say this very clearly — 

anybody else that the government would choose to include in 

this piece of legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know what their intent is. When 

you ask questions, you don‟t get definitive answers. When you 

ask questions, you get broad maybes — under some 

circumstances, perhaps. 

 

We had the minister today use the example of highway workers, 

Mr. Speaker. Well maybe in the middle of a snowstorm, 

highway workers in one part of the province where the 

snowstorm is going on would be essential. But would highway 

workers in other parts of the province where there‟s no storm be 

essential? Or, Mr. Speaker, in the summer when there is no 

dangerous snowstorms, are those same highway workers an 

essential service, Mr. Speaker? Those are all very interesting 

questions. 

 

And then you have to ask, is it all highways workers in that 

area? Or is it a number of highway workers so management 

have to fill in the, backfill for a number of positions, which is 

normally what would happen when labour was withdrawn in a 

particular situation? Those are all questions that there have been 

no answers to to date, Mr. Speaker, and no indication from the 

government what those answers would be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this particular piece of legislation 

we don‟t know what the intent is. It‟s clear that the intent is to 

provide essential services. But is that every employee? And I‟ll 

use another example, Mr. Speaker. Is that every employee in a 

correctional facility or every employee in a young offenders 

facility? Or is it every nurse in a hospital or is it only a certain 

number of nurses to provide the minimal basic needs of those 

institutions, Mr. Speaker? Those are all questions that are 

unanswered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation could in essence say that 

nobody in the health care sector in any position has the right to 

strike, Mr. Speaker. It may well say or may well have the final 

implication of saying that government employees don‟t have 

the right to strike if in any way that they have to be replaced by 

somebody else that would cost additional money to the 

employer. We don‟t know what the intent of this particular 

legislation is, Mr. Speaker, and nobody‟s going to clarify that. 

Nobody‟s willing to make it more clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

All we know is that if we have a government who wanted to 

make every single public worker essential, they could, Mr. 

Speaker. They could, using this piece of legislation. So where‟s 

the balance, Mr. Speaker? It‟s very difficult to understand 

where the balance is when nobody will talk about what this 

legislation means. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in estimates when we asked in various 

departments what it would mean, some ministers would answer; 

others wouldn‟t. When I asked the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services, his department told me what they 

considered essential services. When I asked the Minister of 

Corrections and Public Safety . . . Both of these were last 

Thursday, Mr. Speaker, and when some departments tell me 

that they‟ve had this consideration and they‟ve determined it, 

then I, I‟m pretty sure that the government as a whole has 

determined it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when I asked the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, 

he wouldn‟t tell me. Is that because every single employee is an 

essential service? That‟s why he wouldn‟t want to tell me until 

after he‟s passed the legislation so he wouldn‟t create unrest in 

those, in those employees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we need to have straightforward answers so we understand 

what is, what the implications of this legislation are. And to 

date, Mr. Speaker, we haven‟t been able to get those 

straightforward answers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know this: this legislation is the broadest 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 835 

in Canada. Its application doesn‟t only apply to the public 

sector, Mr. Speaker, but could apply to anybody through an 

addition in regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to point this out to the general public, Mr. Speaker, 

things that the public would not understand. One of the things 

that, by doing it by regulation, Mr. Speaker, it does not allow, 

does not allow for debate in this House on the expansion of 

who‟s included, Mr. Speaker, because regulations don‟t have to 

come to this House for debate, Mr. Speaker. They‟re passed by 

the government in secrecy and then they‟re, they become law, 

Mr. Speaker, when they‟re signed through an order in council 

and they become law. Now of course they‟re posted and then 

you can raise the issue in the media or in the public, Mr. 

Speaker, but it‟s an after-effect — it‟s already law. It‟s already 

in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the very important details about this legislation and about 

the implications of this legislation aren‟t even debatable, Mr. 

Speaker. We don‟t have the opportunity to sit down and say, 

yes it works; no it doesn‟t work; could it work better, Mr. 

Speaker, because the very details of this legislation will be done 

through regulation and they‟re not debatable in this House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I‟d like to point out this, Mr. Speaker. We keep hearing about 

amendments. Mr. Speaker, the minister responsible, the 

Minister of Labour, says that there will be amendments to the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, but he hasn‟t provided those amendments to 

us. So here we‟re sitting debating a piece of legislation that he 

already knows is inadequate, Mr. Speaker. We‟re here debating 

a piece of legislation that the minister‟s already determined is 

inadequate and that he has to amend, and he won‟t provide the 

amendments to us, Mr. Speaker. That is what he needs to do. If 

he wants this legislation to have a meaningful debate, he needs 

to provide those amendments to the opposition. He‟s already 

taken a Bill out or he‟s already working on a Bill that he‟s 

determined is inadequate, that he has to amend. But we‟re here 

debating this without knowing what those amendments are. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, should he not provide those amendments to 

the opposition, Mr. Speaker? To the stakeholders, so they know 

what his true intent is. But what he‟s trying to do here with this 

piece of legislation is keep us from understanding what his true 

intent is and ram this Bill through without meaningful debate, 

Mr. Speaker. If we had those amendments today, we would 

have a better understanding of what his intent is. But because 

we don‟t have those amendments, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have a 

clear indication of what the minister‟s intent is. And we‟d like 

to have that because I‟d like to be having a debate about 

something we know about, instead of something that‟s an 

unknown, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the regular process is that the minister can 

make those amendments in committee and other places. But he 

can willingly provide that type of information to the opposition. 

And knowing how contentious this Bill might be and the need 

for broader public consultation — our desire to have broader 

public consultations — why would he not provide those 

amendments to us? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes to intent. It goes to how this whole process 

has unfolded, Mr. Speaker. And that makes a number of people 

— including many people in both the labour and business 

communities out there — uncertain because we don‟t know 

what the minister intends. We know what he‟s got in this Bill. 

But he‟s already himself determined it‟s not adequate, that he 

needs to make amendments. 

 

So please, we call upon the minister to share those amendments 

with us. It shouldn‟t be that difficult. They shouldn‟t be that 

difficult to share with members of the opposition, so that we 

can actually be debating something that‟s real, something that is 

more understandable than what we have before us. Because we 

have a Bill right before us today, Mr. Speaker, that we know the 

minister intends to amend. Well if he shared those amendments 

with us, then we could all be talking from the same information 

base, Mr. Speaker. We‟d all understand exactly what he intends 

to do. But without that, Mr. Speaker, we‟re guessing at what his 

amendments are. 

 

Maybe his amendments are things we want to see, Mr. Speaker. 

Maybe they‟re good amendments. Maybe they‟d make this 

piece of legislation better, Mr. Speaker. But we haven‟t seen 

them, so how do we know, Mr. Speaker? We cannot pass 

judgment on something we don‟t know, Mr. Speaker. We 

cannot pass judgment on amendments we have yet to see. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s very, very important that the minister 

both table those amendments for the entire House to see, for all 

the members of the legislature to see, if he intends to make 

amendments. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, we need to see what his regulations 

say. Mr. Speaker, he can‟t say he‟s going to pass this very 

broad-sweeping, all-encompassing piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and then go away in the middle of the night, pass a 

series of regulations, Mr. Speaker, that may have major 

implications on this particular piece of legislation, without any 

debate, without any understanding, without the ability of the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, to hold them accountable for what 

they intend to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to know 

what their government intends to do. And we as the opposition 

are there to represent the people of the province and to ensure 

that that information is made public so that people get the 

opportunity to see what the government‟s intent is, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had some ministries being very open and 

honest last week about what they saw as essential within our 

departments. We had others, we had others, including the 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, wouldn‟t tell us. 

Would not tell us. When asked directly in committee he said he 

didn‟t know; they hadn‟t determined it yet. They wouldn‟t tell, 

Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members if they have 

issues to discuss between themselves to either go behind the bar 

or just outside of the Chamber so that the member who has been 

recognized can be heard. I recognize the member from 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s always 

nice to have time to talk about these very important Bills in the 

House, and I‟m glad that you‟re ensuring that that time is 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

provided to us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so some departments were willing to tell us 

what they saw as essential services. Others weren‟t. So we 

don‟t know what the intent even of different ministries are 

within the government. And without that type of knowledge and 

without being able to provide that to the people of 

Saskatchewan, how do we adequately represent them in 

ensuring that this Bill is the best that it can be, that we provide 

the best possible legislation for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we requested public consultations, we could 

have went out, as I indicated earlier, in the early months of 

2008, and held public consultations across the province or just 

simply here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, and had others come to the 

legislature, and would have been in a position to know exactly 

what the people of Saskatchewan really thought about essential 

service legislation and what they wanted seen, what they would 

like to see in essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker. Because 

to say essential service legislation is supported by 60, 70, 80 per 

cent of the public is, like my colleague said, motherhood and 

apple pie, Mr. Speaker, because who would not want to ensure 

their own safety, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And we as legislatures all want — legislators; pardon me — all 

want to ensure the safety of the public, Mr. Speaker. But so do 

the workers, Mr. Speaker. And we saw that during the last 

public service strike. When we had a major storm coming 

forward, the highways workers voluntarily went back to work. 

Those highways workers work in those communities where 

those families are from, Mr. Speaker. Do you think that they 

want to see somebody injured or a fatality on those highways, 

Mr. Speaker? Those are people who are their neighbours, their 

friends, people they work with, they live with every day, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Government employees, nurses, health care workers, Mr. 

Speaker, Crown employees, they don‟t want to see anybody 

injured or at risk as a result of strike action, Mr. Speaker. And 

when it‟s been necessary, Mr. Speaker, they have stepped up to 

the plate, generally, and made sure, Mr. Speaker, that those 

essential services were in place. 

 

And when that hasn‟t happened, Mr. Speaker, and when that 

hasn‟t happened, when the government has determined that for 

reasons there is a risk to the public, whether it be in the 

provisions of ensuring electrical transmission and electrical 

utility being available for all Saskatchewan residents, Mr. 

Speaker, there are times when a government has had to step in 

and use back-to-work legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the use of back-to-work legislation requires 

debate in this House. It allows the members of the legislature to 

question whether or not the particular legislation moving 

forward is the appropriate solution to the problem. It‟s debated. 

There‟s the opportunity for public debate on the issue, Mr. 

Speaker, as we debate it in this House. 

 

This legislation takes all that away, Mr. Speaker. It allows the 

government to actually impose, actually impose the equivalent 

of back-to-work legislation before you even have the strike, Mr. 

Speaker; and secondly, without any debate, without any public 

airing of the problem, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve 

been part of a government that‟s used back-to-work legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. And when it‟s necessary, back-to-work legislation 

is necessary. 

 

But it has the additional scrutiny, Mr. Speaker, of debate in this 

House. Additional scrutiny of public recognition of the issue 

through the debate in this House, Mr. Speaker. It isn‟t simply a 

piece of legislation where at the end of the day you can 

designate employees as essential services and there is no ability, 

Mr. Speaker, there is no ability to change that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a process in there saying you can 

appeal it to the Labour Relations Board. But for the general 

public I‟d like to let people understand that if you‟re a public 

employee in the province of Saskatchewan, your employer is 

ultimately the government. Whether it be through a second 

party agency or not, your employer, the funder is ultimately the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan also appoints the Chair of 

the Labour Relations Board and the Vice-Chairs of the Labour 

Relations Board, and they have the ability to fire them. So, Mr. 

Speaker, you‟ve got the employer passing judgment over 

themselves. 

 

So how do you get fairness? How do you even get the 

resemblance of fairness in the general public, Mr. Speaker? 

How do you get any sense of justice or fairness in a system 

where the very employer appoints the people who would pass 

judgment over whether or not what‟s deemed essential service 

is fair or not? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what would make this piece of legislation much 

better — much, much better — would be if there were an 

independent third party adjudicate it who had the ability to 

adjudicate whether it‟s fair, Mr. Speaker. We see today a 

government that fired the Chair and the Vice-Chairs of the 

Labour Relations Board and put in place a lawyer, a friend of 

theirs who worked on their transition team, Mr. Speaker, and 

has very little or no experience in labour relations issues 

whatsoever and what he has had has been in relation to 

employers, Mr. Speaker, very slanted toward employers. So 

he‟s going to have the ability to pass judgment over what 

should be essential service and what shouldn‟t be in each and 

every bargaining unit and each and every work unit, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what would make the balance in this piece 

of legislation much more balanced and much more fair would 

be if in fact there was a third party independent individual or 

perhaps a party that was agreed to year by year by the 

Federation of Labour and the government, an individual who 

would oversee these types of disputes rather than it be the Chair 

of the Labour Relations Board whose own employment is 

dependent upon the goodwill of the government. 

 

And we‟ve seen this, Mr. Speaker. This is not myth. This is not 

myth. We have a government that has just fired the Chair and 

Vice-Chairs of the Labour Relations Board, and if they got a 

decision they did not like from a future Chair, they could fire 

him, Mr. Speaker. They could fire him, Mr. Speaker. And not 

only could they, we‟ve seen the direct — direct — associated, 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen a Chair and Vice-Chair fired, Mr. 

Speaker. Not only can they do it, they‟ve done it. So how, when 

you have an agent of the employer determining what the 

balance is, Mr. Speaker, can you ever get true balance? 

 

So one of the things that would make this piece of legislation 

more fair and more balanced is a third party, independent 

appeal process, somebody who isn‟t influenced by the 

government so directly, somebody whose own employment and 

financial well-being isn‟t directly affected by the employer who 

has the ability, Mr. Speaker, to take that away from him. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now what do we do when you have a piece of 

legislation that may well be intended for good intent, but 

doesn‟t meet the needs? It isn‟t adequate. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Well even the minister thinks it‟s not adequate because he‟s 

proposing amendments but refuses to share those amendments 

with us, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, what we‟d like to see is 

those amendments come forward. We‟d like to have the 

opportunity for those amendments to be seen, to be aired, and 

so that we‟re talking about from an informed point of view, Mr. 

Speaker, with all the information in front of us. 

 

It‟s not good enough for just the minister to fully understand 

what he intends to do. We need to understand that in order to 

have meaningful and informed debate, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

what this Assembly‟s all about. It‟s about having informed and 

meaningful debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so what do we have here? We have a piece of 

legislation that‟s all-encompassing, all-encompassing, Mr. 

Speaker. It can mean anything that the government wants it to 

mean as far as public sector workers and those employed by the 

government, those who are employed through third parties that 

the government may fund. Or for that matter, Mr. Speaker, 

there is no guarantee that it doesn‟t start to affect private sector 

employees that the government may have some interest in. And 

that could be some workers who chose to strike, which might 

have some impact on the economy, or might have some impact 

on the social delivery system through third party agencies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what does that mean? It means we don‟t 

know what we‟re debating because we don‟t have the 

amendments, we don‟t have the regulations, and we don‟t have, 

most importantly, an understanding from the minister of what 

he intends. What‟s his intent with this legislation? And if we 

had that clear meaning, Mr. Speaker, that clear intent, then in 

fact we‟d be in a much better position to know whether or not 

we could or wouldn‟t support this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well one of the 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, says I‟m just too suspicious. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the whole process has led to that suspicion. 

That whole process has led to that suspicion, Mr. Speaker. The 

fact that before an election they said it wasn‟t necessary, and 

after, they table legislation. The fact that we asked for 

consultations in November; they won‟t do it, Mr. Speaker. They 

don‟t want to hold broad public consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we asked the same thing this spring, they 

don‟t want to do it. When they won‟t give us the amendments, 

Mr. Speaker, when they won‟t talk about what‟s in the 

regulations and, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, when the 

minister can‟t answer a question factually, Mr. Speaker — 

whether he doesn‟t know the facts, Mr. Speaker, he doesn‟t 

know the answers, or he doesn‟t want to. 

 

But regardless, Mr. Speaker, we can‟t get the answers we need. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that causes a great deal of concern. Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this piece of legislation . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I know you‟re not falling asleep. I know you‟re 

paying attention — some of the members opposite may not be 

— but thank you very much for your due diligence, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have before us is a piece of legislation 

that has significant implications, but without the types of the 

consultations and debate that we need to have with all the 

information in front of us, it makes it very difficult to pass 

judgment on. Even those stakeholders in both business and 

labour and the academic community outside in the general 

public, Mr. Speaker, can‟t pass judgment on what they don‟t 

know or don‟t see, Mr. Speaker. So until the minister tables his 

amendments, until the minister lets us know what his intent is, 

and until we see the regulations and what that implies, Mr. 

Speaker, we cannot pass meaningful judgment on this particular 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so without those things the minister has left us 

trying to debate something without all the facts. Mr. Speaker, 

you‟d think he‟d want us to have an informed debate. You‟d 

think he‟d want the public to be better informed, Mr. Speaker, 

so that we in fact can talk about these things in a way that 

means something to both the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and to the general public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at this legislation, no public 

consultations, very narrow consultations by the minister, and a 

number of letters sent out he says — meetings with a few 

people. But, Mr. Speaker, unless you sit down with exactly 

what the minister intends, you have the actual amendments he‟s 

willing to put forward, and you know what he intends to do 

with the regulations, Mr. Speaker, we‟re all guessing. So 

foremost and most important, Mr. Speaker, we‟re asking the 

minister to table both his amendments and his regulations so 

that we can have a meaningful debate about this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier today, who in the public and who 

in this House would not want to have our public safety 

protected? There isn‟t a citizen alive who would not want to 

have their public safety protected. But, Mr. Speaker, we think 

there is a better way to do it than this particular Bill. 

 

One of the very clear things that would make it better is if we 

had an independent appeal process, other than the Labour 

Relations Board who the government has already demonstrated 

that they‟re prepared to fire the Chair if they don‟t like the 

Chair. Mr. Speaker, if they don‟t like the outcomes, they are 

prepared to get rid of somebody, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can‟t have that. You cannot have an appeal process where 

the head of the appeal process is afraid of the employer. 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Because it‟s a unique situation, Mr. Speaker, not found in most 

labour relations environments when the employer is actually the 

government and the employer actually controls the appeal 

mechanism, Mr. Speaker. So is there independence of appeal? 

Is there true fairness and balance in the process, Mr. Speaker? 

That‟s all questionable. 

 

So rather than have that question hung over everybody‟s heads 

and rather than have fights over whether the system is fair or 

not, why don‟t we look at an independent appeal system where 

somebody who isn‟t answerable to the government gets to 

appeal what‟s fair and what isn‟t fair, Mr. Speaker? That would 

make this piece of legislation better, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

just one of many examples where I think we can indicate that 

we can make this legislation better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s no doubt the government has the majority, 

has the ability to pass legislation. But they should want to pass 

the very best legislation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we want 

them to pass the very best possible legislation, and we want 

them to do it, Mr. Speaker, after consulting with the public. 

 

All we‟re asking here is, Mr. Speaker, is that the government 

rethink the process and agree to take this Bill out through a 

committee process over the summer for public consultations, 

Mr. Speaker, so that both members of the general public, Mr. 

Speaker, members from the trade union movement, members of 

business have the opportunity to speak, to speak to this Bill, to 

be heard, so that they have a chance to ask the minister 

questions, ask the committee, make presentations to the 

committee, but a chance to understand what the minister‟s 

intent is, Mr. Speaker, because today we don‟t have the 

amendments; today we don‟t have the regulations. So, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s much unknown. 

 

And I just gave you one example of something that would make 

this particular piece of legislation much better — and that‟s an 

independent appeal process of what is essential and what isn‟t 

— not one that‟s controlled by the government, where they can 

fire the very individual if they don‟t get the answer they want to 

hear, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, we need to all work very 

diligently to make this legislation the very best possible 

legislation we can make it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will take my seat. There are some 

of my colleagues who would like to comment on this particular 

piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, we hope the Minister of 

Labour is listening. We hope that he will consider some of the 

comments he hears today. 

 

We all have a desire to have good, workable legislation. And 

we should all undertake to make it as workable as possible. My 

one suggestion is just one example, but he‟d hear very, very, 

many, many, possible amendments and ideas if he would just 

let this Bill go out for public consultations so the people of this 

province would have the opportunity to have their say. So thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with great pride 

and humility that I stand in this Legislative Assembly to speak 

on behalf of the working people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The citizens of this province have consistently and respectfully 

worn their pride, their historical admiration for it, of the gifts of 

working people have brought to all our lives. Decade after 

decade, survey after survey, and from generation to generation 

Saskatchewan has ranked higher than any other province in the 

quality of life that we have here. 

 

We have a tradition in this province which exemplifies why that 

is the case and it is embedded in the soul of this province and its 

people. That tradition is, simply put: an injury to one is an 

injury to all. We care about our neighbours, our friends, and 

those who have less than others. If they suffer, it is our 

suffering. If they hurt, we are hurt. 

 

That is the essential nature of what a union is all about. Through 

unions, like co-operatives, we learn the value of working 

together as a collective and for the collective good, rather than 

our personal, individual self-interest. 

 

Through our unions we learn to respect that others may be 

different from us in so many ways. Yet like every child born in 

this great society, we all have the same basic needs, wants, and 

desires, and we all have a beautiful contribution to make that 

improves the lives of everyone. We experience in real terms 

what it feels like to be able to bring a smile to a co-worker and 

their family by listening to them and by working with them to 

improve their daily lives. 

 

We learn the humility of what it feels like to have complete 

strangers come to visit you at home when you have been 

unjustly treated at work and to offer everything in their power 

to make it right again. We learn the responsibility we have to 

ensure that no one goes without the protection of our laws and 

our rights. 

 

It is unions who have brought to our society our human rights 

through collective agreements and through legislation. It is 

through unions that we learn that the entitlement to those rights 

is a fundamental right of everyone, including your children and 

my children. It is through unions that those rights are enforced 

through the grievance and arbitration procedure and under 

collective agreements. The history books and the court records 

and the arbitration decisions are filled with a long and 

extraordinary courageous advocacy of unions and their 

representatives in protecting and promoting those fundamental 

human rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe a huge debt of gratitude for the gift of 

human rights, the gift of human dignity, for the gift of human 

respect, for the gift of human equality that awaits us all when 

we are old enough to work in this province. We owe that 

gratitude to every union worker who has walked a picket line or 

marched in a rally or risked their lives to stand for, to demand 

laws for, and to support a collective agreement at work for the 

rights of everyone to be safe and secure against every and all 

forms of discrimination. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that includes all forms of discrimination. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

That includes, Mr. Speaker, a workplace and a society free from 

the horror and violence of homophobia. What that means, Mr. 

Speaker, is a workplace where your sexual orientation cannot be 

used as a subject of vile jokes which demean and abuse you, 

where your sexual orientation does not become a means to 

prevent you from promotions or hours of work or decent wages 

or benefits or any other working conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could spend hours describing the work of 

unions to eliminate this violence from our workplaces, from the 

hundreds of educational workshops and educational programs, 

to the affirmative action pride committees, to the designation of 

leadership positions inside their own organizations — 

recognizing the need to empower those whom so many 

employers and governments treat as second class citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Assembly knows the views of 

Saskatchewan citizens on this particular matter. The people of 

this province do not tolerate and will not tolerate homophobic 

remarks and attitudes and behaviour. We can provide so many 

examples of the role of unions in taking collective responsibility 

to ensure that behaviour and attitude does not gain any ground, 

that behaviour and attitude does not gain any ground in our 

workplaces and in our society. 

 

Recent events clearly establish where the union movement 

stands on this matter, Mr. Speaker. It was no coincidence that 

union leaders like Donna Smith, Larry Hubich, and Shelley 

Johnson spoke out against homophobic attitudes without a 

second of hesitation when they and the members of the union 

movement they represent witnessed the homophobic hatred 

displayed for all across the country. That is the legacy and the 

tradition of this union movement in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. An injury to one is an injury to all. Mr. Speaker, that is 

their moral code, their ideology, their value system. We should 

honour and respect that, Mr. Speaker, not attack them with 

legislation designed to weaken them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the forms of discrimination which unions have 

fought to eliminate include the intolerance and abuse of racism. 

It includes the elimination of discrimination against working 

people and our citizens because of race, colour, creed, age, and 

gender. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to this very day women face unconscionable 

violence and misogyny at the hands of employers and on 

occasion co-workers. Unions have played a significant role in 

empowering women to end this immorality and abuse. They 

have developed the following through free collective 

bargaining: workplace anti-harassment; educational programs 

given on work time; workplace policies that define what 

harassment is and how it is to be prevented and stopped; 

confidential mechanisms for women to begin to stop the 

violence they face; enforcement procedures to end their abuse; 

and a right to representation at no cost to ensure they are 

protected, safe, treated if necessary, healed if required, and 

suffer no loss of income nor benefits as a consequence. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Outside the workplace, unions have organized public education 

campaigns against violence against women, have gone on strike 

and walked picket lines in solidarity to end violence against 

their sisters, demonstrated and rallied before this legislature to 

demand rights and protections for women in our society, and 

organized to support laws which will protect every woman in 

our society not just those who are unionized. 

 

Most of us will never forget the incredible and beautiful yet 

painful courage of two young women in Saskatoon who, with 

the support of their union brothers and sisters, stood up against 

the Dairy Producers in their successful struggle to end violence 

against women. I remember listening to them speak, Mr. 

Speaker, and when asked why they went through it they 

remarked, quote, “So that my daughters and your daughters 

never have to face violence at work.” 

 

The NDP government changed the workers‟ compensation laws 

and the occupational health and safety laws to make it safer for 

women to protect themselves against sexual harassment at 

work. Union members from all across Saskatchewan and parts 

of Canada joined hands to walk with them in support, in 

solidarity. An injury to one is an injury to all to have lived 

amongst us at the time, as our morality, our value for our 

society. 

 

My union was a brilliant example for me as a woman, mother 

and trade unionist in defending and promoting the rights of 

women, equal pay and pay equity. In addition to being an active 

supporter of the pay equity coalition led by such working class 

union women as Aina Kagis with CUPE [Canadian Union of 

Public Employees], our union fought for several years and at 

every level of our court system to support every woman‟s right 

to equal pay and equality at work in all regards. 

 

Barbara Hall was a Safeway clerk who filed a complaint and a 

grievance with Safeway demanding pay equity with her fellow 

co-workers in every Safeway store represented by her union. 

The employer, as is typical, refused to pay her and all women 

the same rate of pay as men doing similar work. 

 

We had countless meetings to prepare our case. Many of these 

meetings required that we met during work hours and the union 

covered our lost wages. We went to many court hearings and 

were represented by a lawyer paid for by our union. Our 

brothers learned through the collective process and the 

educational process that unions bring to a workplace all about 

the injustice to their sisters at work and supported us through 

the collective. 

 

Even after we finally won the case for equal pay in court and set 

a precedent for all women in Saskatchewan, our boss refused to 

pay up and fix the problem. Our brothers supported us at the 

bargaining table, and we voted collectively to go on strike. One 

of our main demands was for equal pay and to compensate us 

for years of our injustice. We settled at the bargaining table. 

Without our right to strike, Mr. Speaker, that would have never 

happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these rights for women did not come voluntarily. 

These rights were not given graciously and willingly to women 

by bosses and by governments. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, this 

Legislative Assembly knows what it took to get us to a place 

where discrimination against women is unacceptable and illegal 

in this province and generally, Mr. Speaker, and in this country, 

Mr. Speaker. 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Just over a month ago in this Assembly, the government, the 

NDP government, and the opposition recognized the 

importance of International Women‟s Day and what it 

symbolically recognizes. The members of this Legislative 

Assembly know that it began with women going on strike, Mr. 

Speaker, going on strike and marching to demand their right to 

equality. That‟s right, Mr. Speaker. We honour the struggle for 

equality which union women, with the support of union men, 

have led through the use of the right to strike. In some cases, 

women workers faced violence to defend their right to equality. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, is it just a coincidence that this legislation 

seeks to weaken and remove the right to strike from so many 

occupations which are mostly held by women? In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, if this government is focused primarily on health care 

as the target of this legislation, the effect of this legislation is to 

target women workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unions in British Columbia went all the way to the Supreme 

Court of Canada to defend women workers against illegal and 

immoral attacks on the rights of women workers and their right 

to strike in health care, Mr. Speaker. We know that in this 

province, the union movement is about to file legal challenges 

to this legislation, one of the big reasons being because it 

discriminates against health care workers, because it 

discriminates against occupations primarily held by women. 

 

It is the duty of this Legislative Assembly to look at laws which 

promote the equality of women and which do everything 

possible to ensure that all women feel safe and respected in this 

province. 

 

This legislation does nothing of the sort, Mr. Speaker, and it is 

unfortunate that the government didn‟t even have enough 

respect for the women and their unions to consult with them 

about this legislation before what they are doing — which is 

ramming it through. 

 

So I ask the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, why are they 

doing this? Why is the Sask Party showing such disrespect? 

Why does the Sask Party believe that women are not entitled to 

exercise their constitutional right to strike? Is it because they 

respect the work that these workers do so much? Is it because 

they respect these workers‟ ability to exercise their judgment 

about compassion and care? Is it because they believe their 

work is so important that they are paid wages and provide 

working benefits that reward them? Is the Sask Party as the 

employer going to table proposals at the bargaining table this 

year which recognized how highly their labour is valued, how 

important their work is to our society? 

 

Is the Sask Party government going to compensate them for 

taking away their right to strike? Is the Sask Party government 

going to compensate them with improvements to their working 

conditions sufficient to guarantee that without their right to 

strike, they can count on the government providing them with 

what they need to be secure in jobs that properly value what 

they do, Mr. Speaker? 

 

This legislation is overly aggressive and unwarranted, Mr. 

Speaker. It is an insult, and it has elements which appear to treat 

women as second-class citizens. Mr. Speaker, this should 

offend every member of the opposite side, of the government. 

And is it a coincidence, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation is 

designed to weaken the very organizations which have provided 

the leadership every day to protect and promote the equality of 

women? Is it a coincidence that the Sask Party government 

chooses to attack and weaken the unions, the very unions which 

women belong to primarily and which fight for equal pay and 

pay equity and workplace child care and an end to violence 

against women, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Is it this government‟s intention to compensate for this loss of 

respect and this loss of power for women and their unions by 

introducing pay equity legislation voluntarily? By introducing 

workplace child care, Mr. Speaker? By introducing legislation 

that raises the wages and benefits of all health care workers to 

levels which exceed those given to the highest paid workers in 

the oil and gas industry for instance or to those who work in the 

many other occupations which still have the right to strike once 

this legislation is rammed through, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We know the answers to those questions. This legislation is not 

about fairness nor public safety. This legislation is not about 

promoting the dignity and respect of all health care workers. 

This legislation has only one purpose — it is to weaken unions. 

It is to undermine the ability of unions to fight for justice and 

economic security. It is to weaken unions and their ability to 

fight for women‟s rights. And if it wasn‟t, then why ram it 

through now, Mr. Speaker? Why not allow this legislation to go 

to public consultation, Mr. Speaker? Why at this moment in our 

history, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could spend months putting on record the issues 

that unions have led the struggle for on behalf of all working 

people. I could spend months putting on record the 

contributions unions have made to our society. And given the 

union-breaking nature of this Bill and its companion Bill No. 6, 

Mr. Speaker, maybe this legislature needs to take history 

lessons to ensure that everyone here understands the incredible 

disdain this shows for the benefits that unions have brought to 

all citizens of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the truth of this proud history and contribution is 

beautifully and strikingly laid out in the award-winning book 

titled, quote, On the Side of People. It chronicles the history of 

the union movement with particular emphasis on Saskatchewan. 

Its title is apt, Mr. Speaker, for in this book one will learn 

several important facts, several significant truths. Unions have 

always been on the side of people. They have had to use their 

right to strike and to bargain collectively to improve the lives of 

every citizen in this province. And in some cases, union 

members died in the struggle to bring justice to all. 

 

The lists of contributions include medicare. Unions supported 

the creation of the concept of medicare in law. They organized 

support for political parties and elected representatives who had 

the courage to stand for the people and bring us medicare, Mr. 

Speaker. An injury to one is an injury to all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let no one be denied the medical care they need simply because 

of a lack of money. Unions picketed, rallied, marched, and went 

on strike for medicare, Mr. Speaker. Unions supported publicly 

funded health care to ensure that the only requirement for you 

and I to receive medical care was simply if we needed it. Profit 

and money were eliminated as the decision makers for our 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

medical care in this province, Mr. Speaker. Unionized workers 

deliver it proudly, defend it proudly, and to this very day, 

promote this universal medicare system in their collective 

bargaining, including strikes if necessary. 

 

Unions have taken it further and negotiated collective 

agreements which provide every worker as equals — universal 

short-term and long-term disability benefits, dental benefits, 

optical benefits, drug plan benefits, life insurance benefits, and 

so on and so on. Many of these were won through the exercise 

of the right to strike. Unions have promoted changes and laws 

like The Labour Standards Act to bring these universal medical 

benefits to every worker in the province. 

 

Unions have promoted the election of representatives who 

support such laws and who will defend, protect, and extend 

such benefits to everyone in the province. It was essential to 

unions that everyone‟s right to universal medicare was 

protected. Unions take that right very seriously. Unfortunately 

the members of the opposition seem not to, given that they find 

this funny. 

 

But anyways as I said, unions take that right seriously. And 

there is not one single incidence of the union movement doing 

otherwise, Mr. Speaker. During a strike or lockout, unions have 

set up special teams to provide emergency services. That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the truth. 

 

In fact during a strike or lockout, unions have set up teams that 

are more effective in responding to emergencies that in some 

cases would normally be the case. That is because during a 

strike, workers, who are the experts at providing emergency 

care, are the decision makers, Mr. Speaker. They do not have to 

go through the red tape normally required. They can assign 

more people to the emergency than the boss would normally be 

able to provide because they are in control of the work 

assignments. 

 

It is an insult to the compassion and commitment of all health 

care workers for it to be suggested that they don‟t care about 

their patients during a strike or lockout or at any other time, Mr. 

Speaker. They have always cared for and will always care 

because that is who they are. 

 

The amount of money that the vast majority of health care 

workers receive in this province is, in and of itself, rather an 

insult. The workers at places like Pioneer Village and the 

hundreds of other care homes are essentially responsible for 

every second of the lives of the loved ones left in those homes. 

It would perhaps be a valuable lesson for the members opposite 

— and perhaps for all of us, Mr. Speaker — to spend one day 

doing their work. 

 

[12:30] 

 

If it is too unreasonable for an elected representative to spend 

one day only to learn about what these working conditions are 

like and what level of commitment to care is required to even 

be a home care worker, then would it not be respectful, Mr. 

Speaker, would it not be just, would it not be the democratic 

and fair thing to do to invite some of them to speak to the 

committee assigned to hear this as a public consultation to give 

us their stories, Mr. Speaker? Surely we have enough respect 

for the thousands of unionized workers in our health care 

system to give them a chance to tell us the truth about their 

work before we have the audacity to take away their essential 

rights, their right to free collective bargaining, their right to 

strike, their rights as free citizens to withhold their labour until 

the boss makes working conditions and level of care for the sick 

and injured and seniors better and acceptable. 

 

That‟s right, Mr. Speaker. Unions do go on strike to improve 

the quality and level of care for their clients and patients and 

friends, and they do not do so at the risk of the very people they 

care for, Mr. Speaker. For more than you can guess, the workers 

and the persons in their care have a close relationship of mutual 

care and respect that many of us would cherish. 

 

The right to strike is essential to improve the quality and level 

of care, things like more workers to care for persons in care, 

better quality supplies and medications and tools and beds and 

linens and food and supplies and hours of work and less 

overtime, Mr. Speaker. The right to strike for health care 

workers also includes the right to strike to protect universal, 

accessible, quality, publicly owned and operated health care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This legislation shows absolutely no respect for our health care 

system nor the people who deliver it every second of every day 

of every year. They have always had the right to strike in this 

province, except when politicians who support privatizing at 

least some aspects of our universal medicare system get elected 

to power, Mr. Speaker. Is this a coincidence? I think not. Is this 

the government‟s reason for this utter disrespect for the 

essential rights of our health care workers, Mr. Speaker? Is this 

the real reason why the government didn‟t even consult with the 

health care workers before introducing this legislation? Does 

the Sask Party favour moving some aspects of our health care to 

the non-union private sector, Mr. Speaker? Does the 

government want to make sure that our health care workers 

cannot strike to protect our universal health care system, Mr. 

Speaker? The truth is plain and simple. The government has no 

real evidence of a need for this legislation. The unions and the 

health care sector employers have always negotiated emergency 

services because the unions have always provided these 

services through a strike. 

 

At this moment, the government is showing complete contempt 

for the good faith collective bargaining process. No consultation 

with the unions before this legislation was introduced. No 

evidence of reasons for this legislation. No respect for the 

existing history of good faith bargaining, Mr. Speaker. No 

respect for the compassion and judgment of unionized health 

care workers. No respect for the human rights and constitutional 

rights of health care workers, Mr. Speaker. If this is about 

public safety and public health, why does this government fear 

talking to, consulting with, and listening to those very people 

who are responsible for the health and safety of the public every 

day of their working lives, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe a great debt of gratitude to unions for 

employment insurance and laws and collective agreement 

protection for the terrible moment when we might lose our jobs. 

The On-to-Ottawa Trek and marches across Canada, even a 

general strike commenced to ensure that every member of our 

society did not go without the basic essential of life when there 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

were no jobs for them. Basic unemployment insurance 

sufficient to provide the minimum in food, clothing, and shelter. 

Workers negotiated a system which included part of their own 

wages to be used to provide this essential coverage because, for 

unions, what was essential was the right of everyone in society 

to the basic necessities of life. 

 

Being without a job through no fault of your own can be a 

devastating experience for a worker and their family and their 

children. Through free collective bargaining, unions negotiate 

layoff and recall rights, bumping rights, severance pay, 

retraining and job placement, and continuation of important 

benefits like health and welfare. Unions marched for and went 

on strike for these protections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why is it that the Sask Party government seeks to introduce 

laws like this which would show no respect for workers and 

their unions and what they contribute to our society? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is through the unions and their commitment to 

democracy and the quality of life of every member of our 

society that we have so many of the rights that we now have. In 

most cases, they were achieved through free collective 

bargaining and the threat of — if not the use of — their right to 

strike. Unions have used this right not for selfish interest, but to 

secure freedom and security for everyone. 

 

The list is almost endless and touches upon matters such as 

occupational health and safety laws and protections, defending 

peace and democracy and opposing useless and senseless wars, 

protecting our environment, eliminating slavery and child 

labour, bringing us the eight-hour day and statutory days of rest. 

The fight for minimum and living wages required strikes and 

demonstrations, and in some cases, workers lost their lives for 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, must be open to public 

consultation. It makes no sense. It weakens our democratic 

tradition and threatens the most important right that workers 

have been given by our provincial, national, and international 

laws. Mr. Speaker, it is also the worst legislation of its kind in 

Canada. Why? 

 

Let me put on the formal record of this Legislative Assembly 

the words of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. Here is an 

excerpt from their written submission on Bill 5 and its 

implications and dangers. The submission is the most accurate, 

thorough, and comprehensive analysis of the implications of 

this legislation, and thoroughly illustrates why it is not good for 

workers, not good for unions, not good for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and sets a bad precedent for the workers in our 

country. Quote: 

 

The Saskatchewan Federation of Labour represents 

approximately 95,000 members, from 37 national and 

international unions. Our affiliate membership belongs to 

over 700 local unions throughout the province. We also 

advocate for the 25,000 workers who are unionized but 

not directly affiliated to the SFL. And we seek to provide 

a voice for approximately 125,000 workers in this 

province who are not unionized, but who may someday 

choose to become unionized. The SFL advocates for 

aggressive labour legislation and for the expansion and 

preservation of workers‟ rights. 

 

There are approximately half a million workers in this 

province. Not one organization representing workers in 

this province was consulted about either the need for Bill 

5 and Bill 6, nor the details of what they contain, before 

they were brought before the Legislative Assembly. Your 

government has provided no explanation of the 

fundamental purpose of the Bills, leading us to question 

for whom they were written. 

 

Recent correspondence between the Premier and the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business and the 

Saskatchewan Business Council indicates that these small 

business organizations support Bills 5 and 6. These groups 

represent a part of the business sector the vast majority of 

whom are not unionized, nor ever will be. Were they 

consulted in advance of these Bills being drafted? 

 

A close examination of the list of groups that the Ministry 

deemed appropriate to ask for feedback meetings, or for 

written feedback, demonstrates a shocking lack of 

commitment to hearing from working people, that is, 

those who are most directly affected by these Bills. 

Historically the main purpose of labour legislation is to 

protect employees from unfair and exploitive practices. 

Yet a litany of organizations and individuals who are not 

directly affected by this legislation were invited to meet 

and/or provide feedback. Thirteen post-secondary 

institutions, 11 mayors and 17 Deputy Ministers were 

asked for feedback, yet the Ministry invited only eight 

unions and one labour central to meet about these Bills. 

Feedback was invited from just one additional union plus 

the building and construction trades council. 

 

The Ministry‟s short advertisement in the newspaper and 

an e-mail address attached to the Ministry‟s website 

asking for feedback provided little or no information 

about the rationale behind the need for these Bills. 

Twenty-second videos of the Minister describing aspects 

of the Bills on the website are not useful in understanding 

the purpose, or impact of the Bills. 

 

At our recent feedback meeting with the Ministry, the SFL 

asked whether or not feedback received on these Bills 

would be made available on the Ministry‟s website. We 

respectfully request that you make all submissions 

available for the public record so that workers can review 

all of the submissions. 

 

Our analysis of the Bills is that they were clearly designed 

to make it more difficult for workers to form and to 

operate unions and to engage in free collective bargaining. 

They were clearly designed to make it more difficult, if 

not impossible, for union members to exercise their right 

to strike. We submit that if you are going to so drastically 

affect unions‟ abilities to function effectively on behalf of 

their members, that you are obligated to consult at length 

with unions themselves. A two to three-week window of 

private, hour-long meetings with less than a dozen unions 

does not constitute meaningful consultation. 

 

Bill 5: The Public Service Essential Services Act 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

The Saskatchewan Party did not campaign on a platform 

of implementing essential services legislation. Candidate 

Don McMorris, [member for Indian Head-Milestone] who 

shortly thereafter became the Minister of Health, stated 

publicly during the election campaign that he felt there 

was no need for such legislation because the current 

processes in place during strikes was satisfactory. Just 

weeks later, Bill 5 was introduced in the legislature. The 

people of Saskatchewan did not give your government the 

mandate to enact such legislation. 

 

The introduction of these Bills directly contradicts the 

Premier‟s mandate letter given to you, which in part, 

instructs the Ministry to “work with the province‟s public 

sector unions to ensure essential services are in place in 

the event of a strike or labour action.” Introducing a Bill 

that not a single workers‟ organization asked for and that 

not a single workers‟ organization was adequately 

consulted, does not constitute “working with the 

province‟s unions”. 

 

Essential services legislation is unnecessary. Unions in 

this province have always provided emergency services 

during disputes, and they always will. In the event of a 

dispute, the public can count on the unions in this 

province to provide emergency services in a professional 

and ethical manner. We are citizens of this province too, 

and our actions affect our own families no differently than 

they affect each and every citizen. When unions strike, 

they do so with an aim to gaining public support. It is not 

in a union‟s best interest to endanger the citizens it serves. 

To date, the Ministry has provided no factual information, 

nor any rationale as to why such a law is necessary or 

desirable. 

 

Bill 5 is the most sweeping and heavy-handed essential 

services legislation in Canada, other than simply 

proclaiming no-one has the right to strike. While this may 

seem overstated on the surface, it is critical that we look at 

the actual words used in the statute to determine its scope 

and its potential effect on workers‟ rights. We raise the 

following questions and concerns about Bill 5: 

 

a. Pursuant to Section 2(c), the definition of “essential 

services” includes danger to „health‟, a potentially very 

broad concept. Does it include mental, psychological, 

and emotional health similar to such definitions in the 

Occupational Health and Safety Act? 

 

Under the same Section, essential services are defined as 

„prescribed services‟ for Government of Saskatchewan 

employees. “Prescribed services” are then defined in 

Section 2(h) as those prescribed by the regulations. In 

other words, Cabinet will decide what the essential 

services are for [the] Government of Saskatchewan 

unionized employees. There appears to be no requirement 

for this designation to be discussed or vetted by the 

legislative assembly, nor by the public. Because this is 

stated to be an „and‟ as part of the definition, does this 

mean that Cabinet can designate as essential those 

services that are beyond those outlined in the definition? 

The power of Cabinet to make such designations is 

reinforced and repeated in Section 6(3) of the Act, and by 

Section 21(b) and (d) of the Act. 

 

[12:45] 

 

The statutory definition of essential services under section 

2(c) is weakened, perhaps even contradicted, by Sections 

6 and 7. Because the employer gets to decide which jobs 

are deemed essential services, and because the Act does 

not permit anyone to challenge the employers‟ definition 

of essential services (Sections 6 and 7), the way the law is 

presently written the employer can designate anyone as 

essential, even if they do not meet the definition under 

section 2(c). This inconsistency is not acceptable. 

 

b. Bill 5 appears to be the most far-reaching essential 

services legislation in Canada in terms of the scope of 

employers who are covered. No other law covers 

post-secondary institutions and only one other 

jurisdiction covers municipal workers. What is the 

rationale for such workplaces requiring essential 

services? 

 

c. Are unionized private sector employers covered by this 

law? Section 2(i)(xi), states that [the] „public employer‟ 

can mean “any other person, agency or body, or class of 

persons, agencies or bodies, that is prescribed”. Once 

again, Cabinet can make this decision by regulation. 

This is repeated and reinforced in Section 21(c) which 

states that Cabinet can prescribe “any person, agency, or 

body, or class of persons, agencies or bodies, as a public 

employer.” Is it your intention for the statute to apply to 

the private sector? 

 

d. What does an essential services agreement have to 

include? Aside from the list in Section 7 of the Act, 

note that Section 7(1)(e) adds to the list any other 

prescribed provisions. In other words, Cabinet can 

prescribe any other terms that have to be included in an 

essential services agreement. Is there any limit on what 

that might be? Cabinet‟s ability to alter the terms of an 

agreement is reinforced and repeated in Section 21. 

 

e. Section 21(a) states that Cabinet can „define, enlarge or 

restrict the meaning of any word or expression used in 

this Act”. This appears to grant Cabinet extensive 

powers to alter the meanings of words in the Act to suit 

what may be political purposes. Section 21(e) and (f) 

appear to give Cabinet extensive powers to make 

regulations about just about anything. 

 

In several of the points above, we raise concerns about 

decisions being made by Cabinet, out of the eye of the 

public and without input from democratically-elected 

representatives. Regulations are not debated in the 

Legislative Assembly, nor even presented to it. They are 

usually made by a committee of Cabinet and they are not 

made public until they are published in the Gazette. We 

do not believe that Cabinet, or a committee of Cabinet 

should be granted this degree of interference in, or 

influence over, negotiations between employers and 

employees. Indeed, in the case of Government of 

Saskatchewan employees, where the Government acts as 

the employer, to act in such a unilateral fashion, is 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

unconscionable. Dan Cameron, former chief spokesperson 

for the Government of Saskatchewan in public service 

negotiations from 1988 to 1996, argues that “essential 

service legislation, in reducing the power of unions, 

results in government being seen as taking sides in 

collective bargaining thus inhibiting its capacity to 

intercede as a dispute-resolving neutral.” This neutrality is 

further diminished by the way the Regulations are written. 

 

Other concerns about Bill 5 include [under f]: 

 

f. Under Sections 6 and 7, the employer designates the 

classifications that are to be considered essential 

services. Unions do not appear to have the right to 

challenge those designations before the Labour 

Relations Board. Where would a union go to challenge 

those designations if they the employer designated 

workers who do not meet the definition of essential 

services in the Act? Sections 6 and 7 appear to grant 

unwarranted powers to employers. 

 

g. What if there is no essential services agreement? 

Section 9 suggests that if there is no agreement, the 

employer designates who is essential, and that is the end 

of the matter. Again, the power seems to reside 

ultimately with the employer, with little or no ability for 

unions to challenge the employers‟ list. 

 

h. Under Section 10, it appears unions have the right to 

appeal to the LRB on only one point: that is, how many 

people are designated in each classification. There 

appears however, to be no requirement that the LRB 

hold a hearing to allow unions to present arguments, nor 

is it specified how long the LRB can take to make its 

decision. While 14 days is suggested, the LRB can 

decide to take as long as it deems necessary. 

 

i. All employees who are designated as essential, lose 

their right to strike and face fines that are enforceable as 

orders of the Court of Queen‟s Bench under Sections 

2(e),14, 15, 16, 17, 18, [and] 20 of the Act. Individuals 

can face fines up to $2000 and further fines of $400 per 

day. These fines are extremely punitive. 

 

j. Under Section 2(k) we note that “work stoppage” is 

defined “as a lock-out or strike within the meaning of 

The Trade Union Act”, which includes “refusal to 

work” and “activity designed to restrict or limit output”. 

Does Section 14, which states, “No essential services 

employee shall participate in a work stoppage against 

his or her public employer”, mean that workers would 

be unable to refuse to work overtime, or to engage in a 

work-to-rule? Does Section 14 mean that those workers 

deemed essential would lose their right to vote for a 

strike? 

 

The Ministry has said that the intent of this Bill (and Bill 

6) is to balance the rights of workers with public safety. 

Dan Cameron concludes, however, that “The focus of the 

legislation appears to be on limiting union . . . power and 

the impact of strikes and lockout action generally as 

opposed to ensuring [that] the continued provision of 

essential services in those specific instances where they 

are threatened.” Our analysis of Bill 5 also concludes that 

it shifts power to employers, and to the government as an 

employer, at the expense of workers‟ ability and right to 

strike. It is not „fair and balanced‟ to take away workers‟ 

right to strike, to limit work output, to withdraw partial 

services or complete services during the bargaining 

process. In fact, stripping away this right creates the 

opposite effect, because it removes a union‟s power to 

leverage a settlement, tipping the balance unfairly in the 

employer‟s favour. Workers cannot engage in free 

collective bargaining without the ability to withdraw their 

services if they deem it necessary. Removing the right to 

strike takes the “free” out of the concept of free collective 

bargaining . . . because it restricts unions‟ ability to 

respond to unreasonable management demands, and 

because it uses punitive legislation to deny unions that 

option. 

 

When unions have no ability to strike, employers have no 

incentive to bargain in good faith. If employers know that 

workers are powerless to withdraw their services, they can 

act in a unilateral fashion. Why would government want 

to encourage employers to behave in a way that increases 

discord and potentially increases abuses of power in the 

workplace? Furthermore, during the negotiating period, if 

employers know that unions cannot challenge the 

designation of who is essential, they are likely to 

overestimate the number of workers who they require to 

be at work during a dispute. This may have the effect of 

actually prolonging strikes, since there will be less 

incentive for a employer to settle if a high percentage of 

employees are working. 

 

We wish to draw attention to the Canadian Union of 

Public Employees‟ brief, submitted to the Ministry on 

February 4
th
. It draws on statistics provided by 

Saskatchewan Labour, Policy and Planning Branch, 

concluding that 95.5 per cent of public sector collective 

agreements are settled without dispute [that‟s without 

dispute]. Why would we want to implement a Bill that 

would jeopardize such a high rate of freely negotiated 

settlements, agreements made without undue disruption 

and dispute? Why would we want workplaces in which 

free collective bargaining is compromised, when in a vast 

majority of cases, it works very well? 

 

Judy and Larry Haiven, Canadian researchers specializing 

in a comparative analysis of labour legislation and health 

care strikes, reached the following conclusion: 

 

. . . it is a fundamental principle in industrial relations 

lore, borne out by facts, that good labour-management 

relations thrive through voluntarism and wither from 

compulsion. The core of Canadian labour law compels 

union and management merely to recognize each other 

and to bargain in good faith. It does not usually impose 

an outcome upon them. This holds true for negotiations 

over the substance of a collective agreement, and it also 

holds true for negotiations over who should work 

during a strike. 

 

Left to rely on their own expertise without excessive 

legal compulsion, the negotiating parties themselves 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

will fashion the most practical and workable solutions 

to problems where they are. Allowed to freely 

negotiate, unions are surprisingly practical and 

responsible. Negotiating and making agreements is 

what they do best. 

 

We wish also to draw attention to the briefs of the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Health Sciences 

Association of Saskatchewan, submitted on February 8
th
. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is permission granted for leave to 

introduce guests? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Permission granted. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you, I 

would like to introduce guests from my constituency, Saskatoon 

Sutherland in Saskatoon. We have Maxine and Duncan South in 

our gallery, the west gallery, and their son Jeremy. I spoke of 

them earlier in the day. Hi, Jeremy. Thank you, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It tends to be a 

mouthful, doesn‟t it? 

 

We wish also to draw attention to the briefs of the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses and the Health Sciences 

Association of Saskatchewan, submitted on February 8
th
. 

The health care unions in this province have particular 

concerns about Bill 5 in light of the fact that our health 

care system in under stress and strain due to underfunding 

and labour shortages. 

 

Health care workers must have a way of demonstrating 

that the conditions under which they work affect the 

quality of health care they deliver. Exercising their right to 

strike is an important way for health care workers to 

sound the alarm on a system that may be endangering 

public safety. 

 

Under „health care reform,‟ health care personnel are 

working harder, longer and more intensely than ever 

before. It can be said that these workers are a key 

element holding together an overstretched system. 

They need a process to make their concerns known to 

their employers, the government and the public . . . For 

better or for worse, that system is collective 

bargaining, which includes, if necessary the threat of 

withholding their labour. 

 

Careful observation of collective bargaining in health 

care has shown that health care employers and 

managers become less to attentive workers‟ needs and 

less willing to negotiate when a strike threat is missing 

— the so-called „chilling effect‟. This is only natural. 

Employers faced with the possibility of work stoppage 

are more likely to take workers concerns seriously. 

Employers not faced with this possibility can be 

expected to turn their attention to the hundreds of 

other things on their plate. But allowing employers to 

evade the issues actually makes things worse by 

feeding the worker anger that produces strikes. 

 

Unions cannot support a Bill that effectively takes away 

the right to strike for thousands of public sectors workers, 

workers who require that right in order to make their 

negotiations with their employers meaningful and 

productive and to protect the people they serve. Sound 

public policy should support, rather than erode the process 

of free collective bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation has no support from . . . I finished 

the brief, the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] brief. 

Mr. Speaker. This legislation has no support from the workers 

of this province. They never asked for it. If the government had 

bothered to show them some respect and consulted with them 

before this legislation was introduced, they would have known 

that. Here for the record are the words of some of the unions to 

represent the workers that have been targeted. I‟d like to read to 

you from the Canadian Union of Public Employees brief: 

 

[13:00] 

 

In December 2007, less than a month after being sworn 

into office, the new Saskatchewan Party government 

introduced two bills that it claimed would establish a “fair 

and balanced” labour environment. In reality, Bill 5 (The 

Public Service Essential Services Act) and Bill 6 (An Act 

to Amend The Trade Union Act) would tilt the scales 

overwhelmingly in favour of employers. Combined, these 

two pieces of legislation constitute the most aggressive 

assault on the labour rights of Saskatchewan working 

people this province has ever seen. 

 

Bill 5 — Public Service 

Essential Services Act 

 

Saskatchewan‟s proposed essential services legislation is 

the most far-reaching in the country. It will cover 

government employees, Crown corporations, regional 

health care authorities, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 

universities, SIAST, municipalities, police boards, and 

“any other person, agency or body, or class of persons, 

agencies or bodies, that is prescribed” by the provincial 

government. 

 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Essential services legislation could very well prolong 

strikes since it alleviates pressure on both parties to come 

to a speedy resolution. It also does not guarantee the 

resolution of key workplace issues that lead to strikes in 

the first place. In a health care strike, essential service 

legislation could also result in even longer delays for 

elective surgeries. 

 

Essential services designations that are imposed by 

governments and employers are typically excessive. In 

Manitoba, employers have designated groundskeepers and 

library technicians as “essential employees.” In Quebec, 

legislation designates up to 90% of hospital employees as 

essential, a proportion that sometimes require more 

employees to be at work during a strike than would 

ordinarily be present under normal conditions. 

 

If passed, Bill 5 would take away the right to strike from 

thousands of public sector workers, which will seriously 

weaken their collective bargaining power. Without a 

possibility of a strike, employers have little or no 

incentive to seriously negotiate wages, benefits and 

working conditions with public sector unions. 

 

A strike is always a last resort for trade unionists, 

especially public sector workers. Over the last two 

decades, 96% of public sector settlements in 

Saskatchewan were reached without a work stoppage, a 

figure that is significantly higher than the percentage of 

private sector settlements reached without a work 

stoppage [which is] (89%) during the same period. 

 

The most effective essential services agreements are those 

that are voluntary. Public sector unions have always 

provided emergency services when health care strikes 

have occurred and in other disputes where public safety is 

a genuine concern. 

 

I‟d now like to quote from the Health Sciences Association of 

Saskatchewan brief, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Before we move into offering feedback regarding the 

proposed Essential Services Legislation, we wish to offer 

some pertinent background to our remarks. 

 

The members of the Health Sciences Association of 

Saskatchewan commit their lives every working day to 

delivering the highest quality of health care services to the 

residents of Saskatchewan. During the longest health care 

strike in this province‟s history in 2002 . . . [Health 

Sciences Association of Saskatchewan] members 

provided an ethically responsible, extremely high level of 

“Essential Service”. At times during this job action higher 

staffing levels were in place than what was typical during 

times of normal operation. More recently in 2007, 29 

HSAS members (1% of the membership) were pulled off 

their job in order to prepare for the possibility of more 

wide spread job action. As in 2002 Employers blamed 

HSAS for a shutdown of facilities, cancellation of 

procedures and movement of patients to other 

jurisdictions even though in truth HSAS members were on 

the job and the actions taken by Employers during this 

period actually occur throughout the year every year. 

These problems are actually caused by chronic under 

funding, short staffing, and ineffective delivery of 

publicly funded health care services. 

 

We look forward to working with your new government 

on addressing these problems and also in making 

improvements to the Collective Bargaining process in 

health care which in our mind are much more important 

and foundational issues worthy of our mutual attention. 

These issues need to be addressed in order to ensure that 

the introduction of Essential Services Legislation does not 

cause more harm than good for the residents of 

Saskatchewan by leading to deterioration in the delivery 

of publicly funded heath care services. 

 

HSAS strongly believes that, while our health care system 

is good, it can and must be made much better. Legislation 

which empowers Employers to maintain a “business as 

usual” approach during a time of legal job action is 

legislation which will only harm the residents of 

Saskatchewan. “Business as usual” is not an acceptable 

practice when it comes to delivery of our most treasured 

public service — universally accessible publicly funded 

health care. 

 

Pursuant to Section 2(c), the definition of “essential 

service” includes danger to “health”. This is potentially a 

very broad concept. We would ask your government to 

consider what is meant by this. HSAS believes that wait 

lists of a year or more for services, lack of post-operative 

therapy, and chronic disease management services are a 

danger to “health”. We believe . . . that these are 

“essential services” that are not being provided at 

sufficient levels currently in Saskatchewan. We would 

expect our new government to provide the necessary 

staffing and infrastructure investment that will improve 

the provision of these “essential services” on a day to day 

basis. This will go a long way to ensuring that Employers 

are not faced with the prospect of job action 

compromising their efforts to deliver health services. 

 

In many jurisdictions it has been noted that Employers 

request and demand extremely high levels of “essential 

services”. HSAS believe strongly in the provision of 

“emergency services” and we are gravely concerned that 

the Employers in this province will use this legislation to 

demand services that exceed normal levels of staffing in 

order to ensure that they are not “inconvenienced” by job 

action. In the summer of 2007 Employers made numerous 

requests for services which are normally not provided by 

HSAS members. HSAS politely declined these requests. If 

Employers are allowed to make inappropriate and 

unreasonable requests, then certain outcomes are likely. 

Hardening of relationships between Employers and 

workers, ineffective and unproductive Essential Services 

negotiations, lengthier job action and service disruptions 

and increasing erosion of the retention and recruitment of 

health care professionals in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

“Prescribed services” are described and defined in Section 

2(h) as those services “prescribed in the regulations”. 

Given that your government has not released any details 

of the regulations other than Section 21, which suggests 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

the Lieutenant Governor in council has sweeping powers 

to prescribe, define, enlarge, or restrict any word or 

expression in the Act; we are extremely concerned about 

the application of this Legislation. In other jurisdictions, 

illegal walkouts, withdrawal of all services, lengthy job 

actions, and reduction of services have resulted when 

arbitrary decisions have been made which did not fairly 

weigh the needs of all parties and ensure democratic 

processes surround collective bargaining, job action, and 

provision of services. 

 

Also of note is that the Legislation tabled only gives 

provision to Unions to appeal the number of employees in 

a classification who shall be deemed “essential” to the 

Labour Relations Board. This may embolden and 

empower employers to make blanket requests of all 

classifications and place in the hands of the Labour 

Relations Board — who may have . . . [very] limited 

expertise in health care — the responsibility to attempt to 

ascertain acceptable levels of service and necessary levels 

of staffing. It is vital that these rulings be made by an 

independent Arbitrator with expertise in matters related to 

the provision of these vital services. 

 

In closing, HSAS encourages Government to act 

responsibly and in the best interests of all residents of 

Saskatchewan. The health care needs of Saskatchewan, 

the needs of Employers and the rights of workers must be 

balanced in such a way that Collective Bargaining 

aspirations of health care professionals in Saskatchewan 

are validated. This will result in improved retention and 

recruitment of vital workers, improved health care 

services for the residents of our province, and a better 

Saskatchewan for all. 

 

I‟d also like to give a short presentation from the Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses brief: 

 

SUN is profoundly opposed to the enactment of The 

Public Service Essential Services Act (Bill 5), which 

strikes at the heart of the collective bargaining process in 

Saskatchewan. That process has led to the successful 

resolution of literally thousands of collective agreements 

in Saskatchewan over the last 100 years without 

Government intervention. Nothing has changed in the last 

6 months that would suddenly warrant such a wholesale 

disassembling of the public sector collective bargaining 

landscape. 

 

SUN‟s position can be summarized as follows: 

 

1. This proposed legislation would deprive SUN of 

fundamental bargaining interests, namely the right to 

bargain freely negotiated collective agreements, and the 

right to strike as part of the collective bargaining 

process; 

 

2. This proposed legislation is unnecessary both 

because SUN has (and always has had) an extensive 

contingency plan to ensure the safety of patients during 

any job action, and because the professional obligation 

of SUN‟s membership provide adequate safeguards for 

public safety; and 

3. This proposed legislation is unprecedented in 

Saskatchewan‟s history and has far-reaching 

implications for thousands and thousands of employees 

in Saskatchewan. As a matter of fundamental fairness at 

least, the Government must afford deep and meaningful 

consultation to those affected by such legislation (such 

as SUN), and the consultation to date has been minimal 

or non-existent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada has unanimously 

recognized the value of unions and their freedoms under our 

constitution and international law. The Supreme Court, in the 

leading case presented by my union organization several years 

ago, said this, in the case of RWDSU [Retail, Wholesale and 

Department Store Union] Local 558 versus Pepsi-Cola, nine 

judges came to a unanimous decision, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

repeat that. Nine Supreme Court judges came to a unanimous 

decision. I‟d like to read a few quotes from that decision, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Picketing, however defined, always involves expressive 

action. As such, it engages one of the highest 

constitutional values: freedom of expression, enshrined in 

s. 2(b) of the Charter. This Court‟s jurisprudence 

establishes that both primary and secondary picketing are 

forms of expression, even when associated with tortious 

acts: Dolphin Delivery, supra. The Court, moreover, has 

repeatedly reaffirmed the importance of freedom of 

expression. It is the foundation of a democratic society 

(see R. v. Sharpe, (2001) . . . R. v. Keegstra, (1990) . . . R. 

v. Butler, (1992) . . . The core values which free 

expression promotes include self-fulfilment [page 173], 

participation in social and political decision making, and 

the communal . . . [challenge] of ideas. Free speech 

protects human dignity and the right to think and reflect 

freely on one‟s circumstances and condition. It allows a 

person to speak not only for the sake of expression itself, 

but also to advocate change, attempting to persuade others 

in the hope of improving one‟s life and perhaps the wider 

social, political, and economic environment. 

 

Free expression is particularly critical in the labour 

context. As Cory J. observed for the Court in U.F.C.W., 

Local 1518 v. KMart Canada Ltd., (1999) . . . [quote], 

“for employees, freedom of expression becomes not only 

an important but an essential component of labour 

relations” . . . The values associated with free expression 

relate directly to one‟s work. A person‟s employment, and 

the conditions of their workplace, inform one‟s identity, 

emotional health, and sense of self-worth . . . 

 

Personal issues at stake in labour disputes often go beyond 

the obvious issues of work availability and wages. 

Working conditions, like the duration and location of 

work, parental leave, health benefits, severance and 

retirement schemes, may impact on the personal lives of 

workers even outside their working hours. Expression on 

these issues contributes to self-understanding, as well as 

to the ability to influence one‟s working and non-working 

life. Moreover, the imbalance between the employer‟s 

economic power and the relative vulnerability of the 

individual worker informs virtually all aspects of the 

employment relationship: see Wallace v. United Grain 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Growers Ltd., [1997] . . . Free expression in the labour 

context thus plays a significant role in redressing or 

alleviating this imbalance. It is through free expression 

that employees are able to define and articulate their 

common interests and, in the event of a labour dispute, 

elicit the support of the general public in the furtherance 

of their cause: KMart, supra. As Cory J. noted in KMart, 

supra, at para. 46: “it is often the weight of public opinion 

which will determine the outcome of the dispute”. 

 

Free expression in the labour context benefits not only 

individual workers and unions, but also society as a 

whole . . . As part of the free flow of ideas which is an 

integral part of any democracy, the free flow of expression 

by unions and their members in a labour dispute brings the 

debate on labour conditions into the public realm. 

 

[13:15] 

 

Okay. Mr. Speaker, I think that this, that this brief from, these 

quotes from the Supreme Court of Canada decision speak very 

loud and very clear of the union‟s necessity to having a right to 

strike. I respectfully ask the Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker, to, in an act of leadership which demonstrates respect 

for our workers and their unions in this province, that they send 

this legislation to extensive public consultation. 

 

Why choose to pick a fight with the workers of this province, 

Mr. Speaker? Why choose confrontation instead of free 

collective bargaining? Why not promote peace in industrial 

relations? Why, Mr. Speaker, as stated by the SFL in its leaflet 

called Our rights are essential is the first thing the new Sask 

Party government did when it got elected was to introduce 

legislation to take away the right to strike, take away the rights 

from workers that they have enjoyed for almost 60 continuous 

years, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Let the Sask Party government show that it‟s really truthful 

about wanting to find fairness and balance in labour legislation 

by having extensive public consultations on Bill 5, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

obviously my turn to stand and speak to Bill 5 which is titled 

An Act respecting Essential Public Services. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

I think calling this an Act respecting essential services shows 

little respect for people, men and women, who day in and day 

out do the essential work, work that is essential to the operation 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think this legislation is again a new government with a 

one-tool tool kit, and that one tool is the sledgehammer. And I 

find that quite, quite regrettable because there may well be 

some purpose, some validity in having a discussion around 

what might be essential services, but when I speak of this Bill 

using a sledgehammer, Mr. Speaker, you needn‟t go terribly far 

in it. 

 

In their interpretations, for example, it says: 

 

“employee” means an employee of a public employer 

who is represented by a trade union; 

 

Well that‟s everyone who‟s covered. It sounds fairly innocuous 

on the surface of it, but then you head a little further down and 

public employer is defined incredibly broadly. This is on page 2 

of the Act: 

 

“public employer” means: 

 

(i) the Government of Saskatchewan; 

 

That‟s fairly straightforward — if it were only to end there — 

that‟s fairly straightforward, the Government of Saskatchewan, 

roughly 9,000 civil servants. Again, fairly, fairly 

straightforward. 

 

Subsection (ii) of that: “a Crown corporation as defined in The 

Crown Corporations Act, 1993”. So now we‟ve introduced all 

of the Crown corporations‟ employees. Every single one of 

them is now covered under this essential services Act — every 

single one of them. 

 

Well I don‟t have at the tip of my tongue the numbers, but if 

there‟s 9,000 civil servants, I‟ve always operated under the 

belief that there‟s a similar number of people who work in 

Saskatchewan‟s Crown corporations. So all of a sudden now, 

we‟ve got the number of people deemed essential having 

doubled, and that‟s only on two out of 11 sub-indexes on what 

it means to be a public employer. 

 

Subsection (iii) is, “ a regional health authority as defined in 

The Regional Health Services Act;” in other words all the health 

districts throughout the province — every single one of them. 

 

And that seems to be the flashpoint that causes this because 

when we talk about health services in Saskatchewan, of course 

we think of someone having a broken arm or a heart attack or 

something that requires pretty straightforward, pretty immediate 

care if the outcome is going to be good. And nobody, I think, 

argues that those services are necessary. 

 

The member for Regina Walsh Acres has pointed out that 

Saskatchewan has a very long history of people working in the 

health care service provision industry, if I can describe it that 

way, but people of all levels stepping up to the plate during 

what we consider work stoppages. 

 

Now of course as employer, the health regions and the 

provincial government — Ministry of Health — have to make 

arrangements for patient care. And we shouldn‟t lose sight of 

the fact, Mr. Speaker, that when you get to a work stoppage, a 

strike or a lockout, when you get to that stage you‟re at a pretty 

stressful time. Goodwill is at a minimum and of course strikes 

are designed to hurt who? The employer, whoever that 

employer might happen to be. When you get into a strike, to be 

effective the strike has to hurt the employer. 

 

To be effective, conversely, a lockout has to withdraw some 

cash to the employees. In other words, you might do a 

pre-emptive lockout of workers just to . . . Well the employer 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

would obviously feel that they‟re teaching the employees a bit 

of a lesson about who‟s the boss, who‟s really in charge there. 

And that can clearly happen. I‟ll come back to the health care 

system in a minute but that‟s just point (iii) out of 11 points of 

what public employer means. 

 

So you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the definitions and 

the numbers of people included is just growing exponentially 

and there doesn‟t seem to be any containment to it. And that‟s 

really not an insignificant part of our concern on this side of the 

House, is this legislation looks like the government took out its 

one tool that they‟re most familiar with, and that‟s the 

sledgehammer, and here it is. It‟s their way or the highway. 

 

Point (iv) of public employer is subsection (iv) is “an affiliate as 

defined in The Regional Health Services Act”, so we want to 

make sure we catch all of the affiliates too is what the 

government is saying. Leave no stone unturned in who you 

describe as an essential service. Let‟s cover the waterfront, let‟s 

get every person we possibly can named as an essential service, 

and that way we can withhold the right to strike. That way we 

can emasculate the trade union movement; that way we can, 

contrary to all of the nice words about having fair and balanced 

approach. 

 

It‟s like it would be something akin to me getting on a 

teeter-totter with my latest grandson — well either grandson or 

either granddaughter for that matter — it would be like me 

being on one end of a teeter-totter and them on the other end. 

You can tell just by looking at me I have them outweighed. It 

would be a very unfair ride for my grandchildren. 

 

And that‟s what this legislation is doing for working people. It 

is equally unfair. It puts the heavy government on the one end 

and leaves the workers up in the air, leaves workers up in the air 

and in fact knowing that they are virtually powerless because 

Bill 5 has all of the apples, has all of the control, Bill 5 has all 

of the ability to prevent any essential, any work stoppage. It has 

the inability to provide any semblance of balance. 

 

Oh the government says, oh trust us; we would use it only in the 

best interests of working people, of the public. Trust us, they 

say. To that, Mr. Speaker, I say, why would the public, why 

would any self-respecting trade union trust them? But why 

would the public trust them when we have examples of the now 

Minister of Health, then candidate for Indian Head-Milestone 

who‟s been an elected MLA for quite some time, but before and 

during the recent provincial general election, that member was 

saying, oh we don‟t see any need for essential services 

legislation. He was downplaying it before and during the 

election, all the while being supported by the MLA for Swift 

Current — now the Premier who won the general election — 

both of them, both those gentlemen were saying publicly, oh we 

don‟t think there‟s much reason for essential services 

legislation. It would not be one of the first things we would leap 

to. We would try many other venues, many other ways of 

dealing with people, many other ways of dealing with working 

women and men throughout Saskatchewan before we would 

bring in the heavy hand of Bill 5. 

 

Well they didn‟t call it Bill 5 because they would have us 

believe before and during the election that there was no Bill 5 

even contemplated. And yet here we are some four months and 

a bit later, and we‟ve got Bill 5. That‟s what we‟re faced with, 

Mr. Speaker, is the prospect of Bill 5. 

 

Well let me move on from subset (iv) which is “an affiliate as 

defined in The Regional Health Services Act” to a further 

definition of public employer, which is subsection (v), which is 

“the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency continued pursuant to The 

Cancer Agency Act;” In other words, cancer workers I think is 

what that‟s intended to be, anyone providing services to cancer 

patients. 

 

And nobody would argue that cancer patients don‟t deserve an 

incredibly high priority. And I want to point out that in the last 

two health service stoppages in Saskatchewan there were 

provisions made to take many cancer patients out of province. 

Many were treated in neighbouring provinces and even into the 

United States. Sadly I‟m not going to pretend that everyone gets 

transported out of the province or everyone gets the service. 

There are calls made by medical professionals that would 

indicate that a person, it‟s not inappropriate for them to perhaps 

have to wait for an additional week or two and that the outcome 

should be just as good. It‟s not my call. It‟s not our first choice 

for anyone to have to make that call, Mr. Speaker, but that call 

does have to be made in the event of a work stoppage. 

 

Now what‟s the alternative? I would argue it‟s not Bill 5. It‟s 

not what is called an essential services Act. An alternative 

would be to have a respectful relationship between the 

employer and the employees. We‟ll always do far better when 

there is a respectful, mutually respectful relationship where the 

employer can sit down and negotiate or discuss what its needs 

are. The union can sit down with that same employer and 

discuss what its needs are, what its desires are for its members, 

but where everyone is equal. There‟s no big stick. There‟s no 

sledgehammer hanging over anybody‟s head. There‟s always an 

opportunity to find something that will work out mutually 

advantageously and will work out in the public interest. That‟s 

very important. We‟ve got long history of that. 

 

[13:30] 

 

But here we are. Public employee, public employer means, and 

I‟ve got to five out of 11 of this ever-growing list of people that 

are covered under what it means to be employed by a public 

employer. The list just keeps broadening and broadening and 

broadening and that, by definition, should cause us to pause. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, how can you have everyone as an 

essential service, everyone listed as employed by the public and 

potentially comes under the essential services Act, Bill 5, when 

you can have — I‟ll get to it — but you can have cabinet say, 

oh well, you‟re essential; you cannot withhold your services. 

You simply have to show up no matter what the rate of pay, no 

matter what the working conditions, no matter what the issue, 

you simply have to show up day in, day out, and there‟s no 

recourse, no legitimate recourse for you, that is a legal recourse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move from sub (v) to sub (vi), which is 

the University of Regina. Okay. This is, public employer means 

the University of Regina. So now we have this broadened so 

that employees of the University of Regina are covered under 

Bill 5, the so-called essential services Act. Every employee, 

unionized employee, at the University of Regina covered under 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

this Act. My goodness, this is just ballooning out of control. 

This definition of public employer catches just about everyone. 

 

Now we go past subsection (vi) which is the University of 

Regina, and we hit subsection (vii), and I think people can 

pretty much guess where I‟m going there. That would be the 

University of Saskatchewan, based in Saskatoon. So every 

employee at the University of Saskatchewan is now a public 

employee under the definition of this Act. Every single 

unionized worker at the University of Saskatchewan falls under 

the essential services Act, this ever-broadening Act, this Act 

that defines who is covered in its . . . And this is just page 2 of 

the Act, Mr. Speaker — just page 2 of the Act. 

 

Here we are. The numbers are just growing by thousands every 

time I hit a new subsection — growing by thousands — and 

that just defies logic. There is no possible way that all these 

employees can be deemed essential. And if we all are, if we all 

are, Mr. Speaker, then with a mountain of money — cash — 

$1.3 billion, they‟ve got a lot of ability to take care of that and 

to appropriately remunerate people who are working in 

essential services. 

 

You cannot have it both ways. Oh we need you desperately, but 

oh we can‟t pay you. You cannot have it both ways. Oh we 

need you desperately, but we won‟t respect you as an employee. 

Oh we need you desperately, but it‟s our way or the highway. 

You cannot operate that way in the long term. 

 

In a crisis situation, Mr. Speaker, absolutely. In a genuine and 

real crisis, people respond. We‟re Saskatchewan people. We 

roll up our sleeves and we‟ll just jump in and do whatever it 

takes to get the job done. But what‟s the crisis? What is the 

crisis? Where‟s the public consultation? None of it. There‟s no 

evidence of any of that having taken place. 

 

There is evidence. There‟s written copies of speeches made 

before and during the recent provincial election saying things 

that were very calming; saying, we don‟t see essential services 

legislation being necessary. Well actions seem to speak a lot 

more clearly than words do, Mr. Speaker. The actions of the 

government are very, very clear because here we are debating 

Bill 5, which is the essential services Act, would be the short 

title. 

 

I want to move on from sub (vi) which is the, public employer 

means. I want to move on from the University of Saskatchewan 

to sub . . . I said sub (vi), that‟s sub (vii) is the University of 

Saskatchewan. I sure wouldn‟t want to confuse any of us about 

which sub is what. 

 

I want to move to subsection (viii), which . . . And this will be 

very little surprise to many of our friends that are in the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology in 

its various campuses around Saskatchewan, in its various 

campuses around Saskatchewan. 

 

But here we are adding literally thousands more people — 

thousands more instructors, thousands of more support workers, 

thousands of more people in administration, in our applied 

science and technology institutes all around the province. 

People that are delivering training for working women and men, 

for primarily young people but as you know the trades 

encompasses people of most ages and in fact we encourage 

people to train and to retrain and to retrain again. 

 

But that doesn‟t necessarily mean that everyone that works 

there is providing what is deemed as an essential service. Not 

everyone there is, but under this Act everyone who works at the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology is 

by definition employed by a public employer and that means 

they‟re covered under this Bill 5, Mr. Speaker — every single 

one of them. Every single one of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to move, just dash right past (viii), 

subsection (viii) to (ix). 

 

There‟s only eleven subsections so I ask members to have a 

little bit of patience here in this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But because the point I‟m making, and it seems to have been, 

the point seems to be missed by members opposite. Every time 

I add, read one more list here — one more list — the number 

grows by thousands, literally thousands of people who are 

covered under the definition of public employer and it increases 

by thousands the number of people that the new government‟s 

cabinet can simply say, they‟re essential. You have no ability to 

withhold your services; you are not an equal; it‟s our way or the 

highway. And that‟s a very, very dangerous precedent. And it‟s 

a precedent that they‟re trying to set having given all assurances 

to the contrary short months ago. And that‟s perhaps even more 

scary than everything else. 

 

Just short months ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were saying, 

no we don‟t contemplate going into essential services 

legislation. Short months ago they were saying one thing 

publicly, and now here we are some four months later, and 

we‟re discussing Bill 5. And we‟re discussing it in the absence 

of any reasoned discussion. We‟re having, we‟re having . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Certainly from that side. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well we have the Minister of Labour who is 

listening, clearly, and that‟s at least a hopeful sign. Maybe 

we‟re making some progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government that is saying they‟re going 

to introduce some amendments. Well tell us what the 

amendments are. For heaven‟s sakes, you just introduced the 

legislation and already they‟re acknowledging it‟s flawed and it 

needs some amendments. Well it seems to me they‟re moving 

with an awful lot of haste. 

 

Why don‟t we, why don‟t we try something fairly novel? Why 

don‟t we refer this out to the public, because any piece of 

legislation that affects so many people, that affects so many 

people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it should withstand public 

scrutiny. There‟s very few people that I would trust more than 

the general public to weigh in on this and to say whether this is 

necessary legislation or whether it‟s not. 

 

We have a saying on the farm, you know, where the rubber 

meets the road. Well the public knows where the rubber meets 

the road. The public understand at a level that we seem to all 

too often lack in this legislature, all too often. We‟re sitting on 

this side trying to urge that we have some semblance of sense. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

Let me dash on from point (viii) to point (ix) of what it means 

to be a public employer. Remember each point adds thousands 

of people to the list of employees, of unionized employees that 

are covered under this Bill 5. 

 

Point (ix) says simply, “a municipality,” a municipality. Well 

we‟ve got municipal employees all over Saskatchewan, all over. 

In our cities we have hundreds, probably thousands, in the 

cities. And then not to count, not to count RMs [rural 

municipalities] and hamlets and villages all across 

Saskatchewan, we have added many, many people into what the 

definition of public employer is, just by this one point (ix) 

which seems designed to catch everything. 

 

Dashing right along, we hit point (x), which is “a board as 

defined in The Police Act, 1990” — “a board as defined in The 

Police Act, 1990”. Now we‟ve added a whole new level of 

people covered under Bill 5 as public employees. 

 

The point of this seems to be, Mr. Speaker, to draw that 

everyone that is employed even loosely by public taxpayer 

dollars, even loosely, is a public employee. Certainly I say even 

loosely because point (ii) of this was our Crown corporations as 

defined by The Crown Corporations Act. 

 

Well that means even in the Crowns like SaskPower, 

SaskEnergy, SaskTel, SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance], which are Crowns that make money in their own 

right, that make their money primarily from the provision of 

services, that people who subscribe to those services — those of 

us who get power and telephone services from SaskTel, 

insurance through SGI, certainly Auto Fund, and those of us 

who heat our homes with natural gas or heat our hot water with 

natural gas or any of the other uses — those people . . . I mean 

that‟s not a case of taxpayer dollars. That‟s a case of users 

funding those Crown corporations, those commercial entities. 

And yet, and yet here we are with all of these employees being 

covered under the essential services Bill 5, all of them falling 

under public employees. 

 

So now we get to who‟s missing. Who‟s missing under this 

definition of public employer? Who‟s missing? Well now 

subsection (xi) kind of, kind of catches anybody that might have 

been inadvertently missed. This is the catch-all. It is subsection 

(xi): “any other person, agency or body, or class of persons, 

agencies or bodies, that is prescribed.” 

 

And who does the prescribing? Cabinet, the government, 

cabinet — that‟s who does the prescribing. Any bodies, any 

entity, any agency, any class of persons that is prescribed. So 

there we have it. There we have it in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, 

the definition of public employer which literally — really 

literally — catches everybody in Saskatchewan. It catches 

everybody here, and it says to people of Saskatchewan that the 

government has the right to use the big hammer. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The government has the right to unilaterally say your work is 

essential. You have no obligation but to show up tomorrow 

morning or whenever you‟re scheduled, your shift is. You have 

no right to do anything other than to show up, and it matters not 

what our working conditions are, it matters not what the pay is, 

it matters not what your supervisor or your boss might say or 

think or do to you and about you. None of that matters because 

we have unilaterally, the government has unilaterally said 

you‟re an essential service. All the people of Saskatchewan run 

the risk of being declared an essential service. 

 

This is why, Mr. Speaker, we‟re trying to get the government, if 

it‟s such a good Bill, just take it out to the public. Let the public 

pass its comments about it: what‟s good, what‟s bad, what‟s 

needed, what‟s not. Let them have a say. Let‟s do the 

consultation because the consultation should have been — and 

this is probably the most offensive part of it — the consultation 

should have been in the run-up to the last general election. 

 

But, but there was deceit, there was a lack of clarity as we see it 

now because we had the now Premier, the now Minister of 

Health saying publicly, oh we don‟t anticipate essential services 

legislation. We don‟t think that there‟s a problem. We think that 

there‟s an ability to work with unions in the public sector. We 

think they‟re happy to work with us, said Sask Party members. 

We think they‟re good people, happy to work with us, so why 

would we contemplate, they said, the hammer, the 

sledgehammer. And that‟s what we‟re trying to ask is why 

would you contemplate the sledgehammer. 

 

Why on earth, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would any new government 

with all of the goodwill that the Sask Party came in with, all of 

the goodwill and the good wishes . . . I refer you to my first 

speech after the general election where I wished the incoming 

government well. And I was far from alone but with all of the 

good will that this, that this administration brought with it to the 

table, why on earth wouldn‟t they have at least tried that. 

 

The question that might come to mind, Mr. Speaker, is what‟s 

the crisis that‟s happened in the little more than four months 

that the Sask Party has been in government? Well let‟s see now. 

Is there a health strike? No, no health strike. I thought that was 

the big flash point — the health. But no, no strike. Were 

highway workers, have they struck? No, no strike in highway 

workers. 

 

My goodness and here we are. It‟s in April, we‟re . . . Actually I 

read the other day, 5 per cent of our snow comes after the first 

day of spring. So that‟s, that‟s the average — 5 per cent comes 

after the first day of spring. So we might have a day or two of 

snow yet. We might have that. Got to be, got to be careful, I 

hear government members chirping, got to be careful. 

 

So on the offside chance that there is a storm and on the even 

more remote chance that SGEU [Saskatchewan Government 

and General Employees‟ Union] highway workers will be at a 

point of withholding services . . . not withstanding there‟s no 

threat for them to withhold services today or in the near future, 

the immediate, foreseeable future. There‟s no threat of that. But 

not withstanding that, what‟s the government‟s response? Bring 

in the sledgehammer. Let‟s declare highway workers an 

essential service. Let‟s declare health care workers an essential 

service. Let‟s bring out the sledgehammer. Let‟s just go at it . . . 

is what their attitude seems to be. 

 

If it‟s essential, Mr. Speaker, that highway workers be declared 

essential workers, we‟ll tell them. You know why I say that? 

Highway workers, highways workers are relatives of mine and 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

of many of us here. Highway workers are friends of mine and 

many of us here. Highway workers have voted for members, 

both sides of the House. Highway workers have voted for 

members on both sides of the House. And you know what I 

predict? No matter what happens with this Bill 5, Mr. Speaker, I 

predict that highway workers are going to continue that pattern 

in the future of not voting unilaterally for one party or the other 

or a third or other alternative. I think people of Saskatchewan 

are going to think now who is it that best, best represents me? 

Who is it that I think I can trust? 

 

But I can tell you on this issue of trust, this essential services 

legislation does very much undermines the new government‟s 

position, Sask Party‟s position with workers. It makes workers 

not want to trust the new government because it‟s a matter of 

unilaterally withholding abilities. 

 

Now I‟m going to move on to page 3 of The Public Service 

Essential Services Act, Bill 5, and this one I find most 

interesting. It‟s section 5 which is, Crown bound. And it‟s very 

short and very straightforward. It says, “The Crown in right of 

Saskatchewan is bound by this Act.” 

 

Well workers, I‟m sure, are quaking in their boots at that 

because this Act says that cabinet gets to name who‟s essential, 

which workers have to go to work. Cabinet is bound by their 

own choice. My goodness, Mr. Speaker, hurt me bad. Cabinet 

— imagine that — bound by their own decisions. Holy smokes, 

what a hardship, just about impossible to get past that one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve tried to make the point throughout my speech 

so far, that working women and working men deserve respect. 

Working women and working men get up, and they work as 

diligently as they possibly can to try and deliver health care, 

highway services, birth certificate services — in terms of our 

public service, does so, so many things. I mean you could just 

almost start anywhere and just rattle off what happens, and 

those are delivered by, somewhere, a public service employee 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And those 9,000 people do it, 

just by and large, do a terrific job. 

 

I‟d love to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that every single instance 

where a member of the public emails or writes a letter or picks 

up a telephone and actually has a . . . or has a face-to-face 

interaction with the civil service, that it turns out perfect right 

away. That, I mean, that, that just isn‟t the real world. 

 

We all have interactions, be it in stores . . . or maybe we‟re 

trying to trade a vehicle and we can‟t deal with a particularly 

hard-to-deal-with salesperson. You know the fact is, life goes 

on. And the fact is that when we have a dealing with a civil 

servant and it doesn‟t turn out as good as we would like it to, 

there‟s the next person that you can talk to. And we always get 

things sorted out. 

 

But I‟m saying that not to detract from the point that 9,000 

women and men day in, day out do terrific service on behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan. They did terrific, terrific 

service on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan when it 

was a New Democratic Party government, and we valued, 

respected, appreciated the work that they did. I want to right 

now say thank you to those public servants who did that work 

while we were in government. And I want to thank them for 

continuing to try and do the job while the Sask Party is in 

government. 

 

I had spoken about the cabinet and the government being bound 

by this Act, Mr. Speaker. I want to refer to Part III section 4 

which, I‟m going to read it first and then discuss it. It says, 

 

(4) If at any time the public employer determines that 

more employees are required to maintain essential 

services and there is no essential services agreement 

concluded between the public employer and the trade 

union, the public employer may serve a further notice on 

the trade union setting out: 

 

(a) the additional number of employees who must work 

during all or any part of the work stoppage to maintain 

essential services; and 

 

(b) the names of employees who must work. 

 

And that what I‟ve been really saying earlier, Mr. Speaker, is 

under Part III, section 4, subsections (a) and (b), really this Bill 

5 says that cabinet can name any and everybody. Cabinet can 

say oh the list of people that we had previously said was 

necessary to maintain essential service isn‟t good enough. That 

previous list isn‟t enough, so we now are going to name more 

people. We‟re now going to name ever more. 

 

This is a Bill that puts all of the control in the hands of cabinet, 

all of the control in the hands of the government, Mr. Speaker. 

And that‟s what we‟re, in part, objecting to. Our objections 

come in several ways. One, as I‟ve pointed out, the now 

Premier, the now Minister of Health, both repeatedly before and 

during the election saying, oh we don‟t anticipate the need for 

essential services legislation. That was before and during the 

general election. 

 

And what a shame that is, Mr. Speaker, because the public have 

a right, the public have a right to trust us. They have the right to 

trust the MLA for Kindersley. They have the right to trust the 

MLAs from everywhere else. What we say before and during an 

election should be consistent with what we say after the 

election. Always, always should be, always we should try our 

absolute best to be as consistent before and during an election 

as we are after. 

 

Now you can‟t, the government members can‟t use the 

argument that they were ill-prepared or that somehow they fell 

off the turnip truck the night before the election. The Sask Party 

nearly won the previous election. The Sask Party have claimed 

to be a government-in-waiting for two terms now, two terms — 

one that the conventional wisdom had them winning. Well 

conventional wisdom was wrong, and New Democrats formed a 

government in 2003. 

 

But in 2007, that was the second go-round, and quite frankly it 

didn‟t come as much a surprise to many of us, who won that 

election, didn‟t come as a surprise at all. We could see the 

writing on the wall. We could see that the Sask Party were 

saying all of the things that were resonating with the general 

public throughout Saskatchewan far and wide, saying many 

things that resonated. And my fear or my anger is that they were 

saying some things that they clearly didn‟t believe. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

That‟s the mistake. That‟s where our democracy suffers. That‟s 

where the people of Saskatchewan have every right to stand up 

and say, what changed in the last four months? Is it some threat 

of a health strike? No. Is it some threat of a health care worker 

strike? No. Is it some threat of SGEU walking off the job? No. 

In fact the only thing that‟s happened in the four months, there 

was SGEU‟s own unionized staff, and SGEU had their own 

problems, have their own problems that they‟ve worked to 

separating, to resolving. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to slide on to Part IV, which is “under 

obligations of employees.” Subsection (14) says, “No essential 

services employees shall participate in a work stoppage against 

his or her public employer.” So there we have the obligation of 

employees not to participate in a public work stoppage against 

their public employer. 

 

So cabinet gets to say who‟s essential. Cabinet sets the 

definition that is all-encompassing. And if that 

all-encompassing definition of who is a public servant isn‟t big 

enough, they get to name more. They get to add more. They get 

to add more, Mr. Speaker. And then, then there‟s a prohibition 

against these very employees from conducting any withholding 

of work against their employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where we‟ve got An Act 

respecting Essential Public Service, Bill 5, that desperately is 

crying out for an opportunity for the public to comment on, for 

the public to see. Again I say, if it‟s good legislation, it‟ll stand 

the test of time. Everything that we do that‟s worthwhile in our 

lives, if it is in fact good, there will be people that are going to 

stand up and say it is good, it is necessary, it is something that 

we should proceed with. 

 

Conversely if it is not something that‟s in the public interest, 

you will have people stand up. And I predict you‟ll have no 

shortage of people standing up and saying this legislation is 

wrong-headed. This legislation takes out the sledgehammer. 

This legislation is unduly harsh on working women and men, on 

9,000 direct employees. That‟s under subsection (1) of what it 

means to be a public employer; that‟s the Government of 

Saskatchewan. That‟s not speaking to the other 10 subsets. Just 

one subset is 9,000. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, needs to go to the public. This 

legislation needs to have some balance introduced into it. 

 

Earlier I spoke of the lack of balance. I spoke of a teeter-totter 

quorum, and we‟ve got the heavy government sitting on one 

end and employees helplessly up at the other end of that 

teeter-totter up in the air with no ability to get down other than 

to jump off the teeter-totter, but no ability to get down. And we 

have a government that is saying, it‟s our way or it‟s the 

highway — simple as that. Our way or the highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in the best of times, and we live in the 

worst of times. It‟s the best of times because the new 

government of just over four months inherited $1.3 billion 

unanticipated wealth — 1.3, a mountain of money, $1.3 billion. 

Mr. Speaker, if ever there was an ability for an incoming 

government to address ongoing concerns or concerns in the 

public service, no government has ever had more ability to do 

so than this incoming Sask Party government. No government 

in Saskatchewan‟s history has ever been blessed with $1.3 

billion extra cash available for them to spend however they 

want. 

 

And I point out this isn‟t just about money. It‟s about working 

conditions. It‟s about respect. It‟s about mutually trying to agree 

to get a job done. It‟s about working together. It should be 

about fostering . . . our working careers should be about 

fostering new working relationships. It shouldn‟t be about how 

do we build up walls or how do we build up sides where it‟s 

us-them — you know, good people versus bad people — 

because life should be much, much more than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I pointed out that this so-called essential services 

Bill is not essential to anybody except for the incoming 

government. For some reason the new incoming government 

thinks that this essential services Bill 5, this essential services 

legislation is essential. But to whom? To whom? Only to them 

and their narrow agenda. 

 

That‟s who this Bill is essential to because there‟s no . . . I‟m 

not inviting people to necessarily call, but I do report I have not 

had a single call at my constituency office where somebody has 

called and said, oh we need Bill 5 passed. We need essential 

services legislation for the civil service and anyone and 

everyone who could possibly be defined as a public employee. I 

just haven‟t had that phone call. Not once have I had that phone 

call. So we have in Saskatchewan a long history of labour 

legislation that has become ever more sophisticated, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have found ways of acknowledging that, whether we‟re part 

of management or whether we‟re part of an organized union or 

whether we maybe aren‟t represented by a union but we have an 

employer-employee relationship. We have consistently 

throughout Saskatchewan, recent decades, we have tried to 

introduce progressive legislation. We have tried, Mr. Speaker, 

to be ever more sophisticated. We‟ve tried to find ways of 

respecting one another and working together. That‟s really what 

has been the centrepiece of good governance for decades now. 

 

And I think the proof of the pudding is that the new government 

has inherited the hottest economy in all of Canada, just a very 

hot economy. We‟ve got absolute record levels of 

unemployment. We have got people coming into Saskatchewan 

in record numbers. We‟ve got a population that‟s growing. 

We‟ve got an economy that‟s growing. We‟ve got so many 

things coming our way, so many things. It‟s Saskatchewan‟s 

turn to shine, Mr. Speaker, and yet the new government seems 

to want to put a black eye on it all. 

 

It seems to want to say, oh but we don‟t trust our civil service. 

Oh but we don‟t trust our health care professionals. Oh but we 

don‟t trust women and men to deliver necessary services. We 

don‟t have any, any trust. That‟s what they‟re saying through 

this Bill. That‟s what they‟re saying through their actions. 

That‟s what they‟re saying every day and in every way. And 

that is a shame because this legislation can be summarized by 

the Sask Party as it‟s our way or the highway. It‟s 

heavy-handed. It‟s draconian. 

 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

Many have argued, Mr. Speaker, that this essential services 

legislation is amongst the most far-reaching legislation in all of 

Canada, all of Canada. We have a situation where teachers 

come under it, education authorities come under this essential 

services legislation. One would expect that you‟d have some 

broad belief that health care workers, not all, but there should 

be some provision for certain health care services to be 

provided even through a work stoppage. We don‟t want lives 

threatened, but that‟s not the situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about this. I just realized 

that one of the things I‟ve neglected to speak on is essential 

services which . . . and I refer you to page 2 of the Act: “(c) 

„essential services‟ means services that are necessary to enable 

a public employer to prevent, ” and then there‟s a list of things 

that this essential services means, services that are necessary to 

prevent a public employer to prevent “(i) a danger to life, health 

or safety.” 

 

Life, health or safety — well does that mean that when a speed 

limit sign falls down or someone calls for a new speed limit 

sign to be put up, there‟s a safety matter? Right? There‟s a 

safety issue, clearly, by this. But surely that‟s not what the new 

government is contemplating. Surely they‟re not saying that 

somehow there‟s some immediate threat or danger to life if one 

of the 110 kilometre-per-hour signs on Highway 11 between 

Regina and Saskatoon comes down. Or surely we‟re not saying 

if a 90-kilometre-speed sign on a tertiary highway in 

Saskatchewan comes down that people won‟t realize that the 

speed limit‟s 90. I mean, that‟s just absurd, and yet clearly 

there‟s a safety issue involved. 

 

These are things that we have objection to, that we know that 

the public should have the right to pass comment on. We know 

that there are concerns around this Bill 5, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to go to subsection 2(c)(ii) on the essential services, 

which sub (ii) says, “the destruction or serious deterioration of 

machinery, equipment or premises.” Well that‟s a pretty broad 

statement, very, very broad statement. Does that mean that 

normal maintenance like a lube job or an oil change on a 

vehicle is somehow now an essential service? Now it‟s an 

essential service. And the Minister of Labour says I‟m straining, 

Mr. Speaker, but it‟s not my legislation. We‟ve got questions, 

and the public have questions that should be, that should be 

answered. The questions should be, the questions should be 

answered. And if this legislation is as good as the government 

thinks it is, all we‟re asking is take it out and let the public 

make comment on it. 

 

I‟m sure there‟s going to be probably hundreds of people, 

maybe thousands, that will say this is good legislation. Minister, 

this is good legislation. You should pass it. Well you know 

what? Give those people the opportunity. Give them the 

opportunity to say yes. Give them the opportunity to say yes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, destruction or serious deterioration of machinery, 

equipment, or premises, so without normal maintenance like a 

paint job, does the building fall apart? How quickly does that 

happen? What‟s covered under essential services, Mr. Speaker? 

There‟s all kinds of questions under here. 

 

Subsection (c) (iii) under “„essential services‟” means, “serious 

environmental damage.” It says, reads, “serious environmental 

damage.” Well are we talking about what comes out of the 

tailpipe of vehicles every day, or are we talking about what 

comes out of Boundary, Coronach, Shand power stations every 

day? Are we talking about emissions? Water emissions? 

Sewage treatment that cities, towns, hamlets, villages introduce 

into the environment every single day, Mr. Speaker? What do 

we mean here? What‟s the government mean when it says, 

“„essential services‟”? Means services that are necessary to 

enable a public employer to prevent “. . . serious environmental 

damage . . .”? 

 

What do they mean? Well I‟ve said before that they‟ve got an 

all-encompassing list of people who are essential to deliver, to 

protect against this — whatever this threat might be. They‟ve 

got a long list of people that they‟ve named that are essential. 

And if that list isn‟t long enough, if somehow they‟ve missed 

somebody, they simply name the additional people they‟ve 

missed. Add another one or add another 100 or another 1,000. It 

doesn‟t seem to matter. That‟s what Bill 5 seems to be all about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under subsection (c) “„essential services‟” I‟m 

now hitting subsection (iv). I‟ll read it in totality so it makes 

some sense here: 

 

[14:15] 

 

c) “essential services” means services that are necessary 

to enable a public employer to prevent . . . 

 

(iv) disruption of any of the courts of Saskatchewan; 

 

Well we certainly, certainly wouldn‟t want for parking tickets, 

we certainly don‟t want parking tickets to have to wait an extra 

day for their day in court. Mr. Speaker, it‟s absurd. It‟s absurd 

to think that every court is necessary at every particular minute, 

is an essential service. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I know that at times the debate can 

become tedious, but it‟s only right to respect the members‟ 

ability to stand and express their opinions. The member from 

Regina Coronation. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you very much. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. I want to just summarize, before I take my place, 

some of our concerns around this public services . . . An Act 

respecting Essential Public Services, Bill 5. That‟s how it‟s 

titled. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve drawn the fact that it‟s a case of a new 

government that campaigned before and during the election — 

recent election about four months ago, a little better than four 

months ago — saying they didn‟t need essential services 

legislation. That‟s what they said then. Now they‟re saying 

something completely different and the proof is in the pudding; 

we have Bill 5 before us. 

 

So wasn‟t needed before but now it‟s all of a sudden is 

essential. It‟s just critical to the Sask Party that this Bill be 

passed. We‟re saying that in light of them having been 

duplicitous, at least at minimum, in saying one thing before and 

during the election and doing something completely different 

some less than four months later, in light of that, Mr. Speaker, 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

we‟re saying the public should have every right to pass 

judgment on this, to make comment on it. We need an 

opportunity to take this Bill 5 out to the public. 

 

We need . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the member says 

there‟s 55 per cent in favour — 65. Is that the percentage that 

the Sask Party won in the last election? Let‟s assume that‟s 

right for a second, Mr. Speaker. But all the more reason that my 

argument holds water because before and during the election 

they were saying, we don‟t need essential services legislation. 

 

So what are the public, what‟s the voting public supposed to 

think? They‟re supposed to think, don‟t need essential services 

legislation. If they don‟t think we need essential services 

legislation, surely they don‟t have it up their sleeve. Surely they 

don‟t have a Bill 5 prepared. Surely they don‟t have essential 

services legislation at the ready to table as soon as the House 

starts meeting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t care what the percentage that Sask Party 

members garnered in the previous election. They were saying 

one thing before and saying something completely different by 

their actions today. So the public has every right to pass 

comment on this legislation, to say whether it‟s good, bad, or 

indifferent. They have every right to say this is too 

all-encompassing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have done my very best to outline some of my 

concerns, concerns that people who are near and dear to me 

have with this draconian Bill. We could end this, you know, if 

the government would simply agree to go out to public 

consultation on Bill 5. Let the public have its open, fair, honest 

consultation — end of story. Whatever comes then, that‟s what 

comes. But in the meanwhile we‟re trying to put up a stopgap 

stop to this legislation, because it‟s not legislation that they said 

they wanted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been my honour to be able to stand up on 

behalf of my constituents and my family, my friends, people 

that I hold very near and dear to me. It‟s been an honour to 

speak against this Bill 5. I take my place with that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

truly an honour for me to rise and have the privilege of 

addressing this particular Bill on behalf of fine folks of Regina 

Northeast. It‟s truly a privilege. It‟s once again, Mr. Speaker, 

one of those situations where I actually wish I didn‟t have to 

address this Bill. I actually wish we didn‟t have to talk about 

legislation that‟s being proposed that will rip away the rights of 

working men and women. I wish we didn‟t have to talk about 

that, but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we do. 

 

It‟s interesting. The point that my colleague was making earlier 

is so very, very correct and so very, very right is that we have a 

government very early in its mandate — four or five months 

into its mandate — that has already set a track record, I guess 

you would say, of being willing to say one thing when it‟s 

convenient to them and then do something else when they 

finally get into power. 

 

It was reported widely, reported widely in the media prior to the 

last election, the comments of the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley, now the Minister of Health, on this very topic, 

on this very topic of essential legislation. When asked by the 

media that if the Sask Party were to form the government, 

would they, would they consider introducing essential services 

legislation, he categorically stated that no, they would not. It 

was his opinion and that of his party, so he says, that it wasn‟t 

necessary to introduce legislation because the same could be 

achieved through negotiations as has been in the past. As it has 

been done in the past. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we soon seen, very soon we seen that that 

wasn‟t the case, that that wasn‟t the case at all. They quickly, 

quickly when they became government, quickly moved to 

introduce essential service legislation in Saskatchewan. A clear, 

clear indication, Mr. Speaker, that that party over there and that 

government now are willing to say one thing and do another. 

 

During the election campaign my Sask Party candidate in my 

constituency was going around and because my constituency is 

made up very heavily of working men and women, he would of 

course be met at the door by many of these folks with their 

concerns. And one of the concerns that the working men and 

women of my constituency had during the election campaign 

was, if there was a Sask Party government in Saskatchewan, 

what would this mean to labour? What would they do to labour? 

Well my Sask Party candidate, door after door after door, when 

hit with this very same question, his response was, oh we 

wouldn‟t touch labour; we‟re not going to do anything to 

labour. We‟re just going to continue on with the very positive 

atmosphere around labour that exists today. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s absolutely not the case. We see here 

already Bill 5, and soon later today we‟ll be talking about Bill 

6, which are two Bills that were brought in very early in the 

mandate of this government with one intentions, and one 

intentions only, and that‟s to strip away the rights of working 

men and women. And I find this so very, very hard to 

understand why, Mr. Speaker, really understand why. Is 

because never, never has there a withdrawal of services where 

those working people haven‟t put up committees to address the 

emergencies, to address essential services when it has been 

required in the past. But this Act, this essential services Act will 

require that the unions and the employers negotiate which 

services are essential before job action takes place. And then if 

they can‟t agree, they can‟t agree upon what is essential 

services, then the employer will have the right to deem 

whatever is essential services. 

 

If the union and the employer can‟t agree, then the employer 

will decide which services are essential, how many people are 

required to maintain each service, the names of the people who 

must work. In other words, Mr. Speaker, what this is doing . . . 

And the members opposite will say there is no way that they are 

eliminating the right to strike. And technically I suppose that is 

correct, because they are not eliminating the right to strike, 

they‟re just eliminating the right of the workers to participate in 

the strike. 

 

So they‟re saying to the workers, you can strike as long as you 

stay on the job. You can strike as long as you‟re at work, but 

you can‟t demonstrate, you can‟t demonstrate your desire to 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

look at such things as safety in the workplace, such benefits to 

ensure that the families of working men and women are able to 

participate in a meaningful way in our economy, that they‟re 

able to enjoy a disposable income that will bring them an 

adequate and reasonable living standard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question that often arises in this debate is, who 

is essential? Now I have had the opportunity to discuss this with 

many people in the general public, and when you mention 

essential services, at first blush people say, well yes, I‟m in 

favour of essential services. And I say, well that‟s fine but who 

do you think, who would you consider as essential? Well the 

response is virtually always the same. It‟s well policemen 

because of safety factor; I want to be sure that if I find myself in 

circumstances that I need to call the police that I know that a 

policeman will be available to come to my services and to meet 

my needs because we want to ensure that they‟re not on strike 

and not withholding their services, that they are available to the 

public on a 24-hour basis. And, Mr. Speaker, they are and they 

always have been. 

 

Then you ask, who else do you see as essential? Then they say 

well, firemen. We need to be sure that firemen are essential 

because we never know when we might need their services. We 

hope we never do. We really hope our friends and our 

neighbours never ever need to have a fire truck visit their 

establishment, their home, or their residence because of a fire. 

But you never know. You just never know when that might 

happen. 

 

So you‟d say, those people are essential. But outside of that, the 

degree of being essential sort of weans pretty quickly, except, 

Mr. Speaker, except in the eyes of that government over there. 

 

Who do they say is essential? Well it begins with all 

government employees. They‟re saying that all government 

employees are essential. Then they‟re saying that all health care 

workers are essential. Then they‟re saying employees at the 

University of Regina and Saskatchewan, SIAST, are all 

essential, all essential. Then they‟re saying all municipal 

employees are essential. And then, then the real kicker is, the 

government may add anyone else, at any time, to that list. 

 

That means, Mr. Speaker, that say a construction site . . . say 

well let‟s perhaps use the co-op upgrader here in town. Let‟s 

suppose the co-op upgrader is closed down for a refurbishing, 

and there comes an issue on the job of occupational health and 

safety. The job site may not be safe. The workers do not want to 

work in that atmosphere. They want to have the ability to render 

the job site safe, and so they have a disagreement between the 

contractor and the employees, between the co-op upgrader and 

the employees that are providing the services. 

 

That disagreement could potentially result in a walk off or a job 

stoppage, labour walk off, labour dispute on that site. If the 

government deems it, they can just say, that job site is essential 

services and you do not, you do not have the right to strike. Mr. 

Speaker, this is a wide-ranging, wide-ranging legislation that I 

wonder for what reason. What reason? 

 

When you look at the past of history, and history is a great 

teacher . . . Somebody once said that our history is a road map 

to the future, and if we would look at our history, we could 

learn from our mistakes and move forward in a very positive 

way. So when we look at the history of job action within the 

public service here in Saskatchewan, we find that 96 per cent of 

all public contracts, 96 per cent of all public contracts are 

settled without job action. Ninety-six per cent of all public 

contracts are settled without job action, and yet we have 

legislation here that‟s coming down on the rights of working 

men and women like a sledgehammer. I wonder why. I wonder 

why. 

 

[14:30] 

 

It makes you wonder, Mr. Speaker, what is the hidden motive 

here? What is the real agenda? Why is it that this government 

has so seen fit to go after this particular part of our working 

society and actually set it up so that everyone in our economy, 

everyone in our working society is subject to their 

heavy-handedness and subject to their ability to deem them as 

essential and force them into a situation where they no longer 

have the rights to negotiate with their employer? 

 

Saskatchewan‟s essential services legislation is the most 

far-reaching in the country. And it‟s obvious, Mr. Speaker, if 

you take a close look at this legislation, a real close look at it, 

you‟ll quickly see that it is, it really is a legislation that has no 

bounds to it. I mean it‟s all open-ended. And it leaves all the 

power, all the power in the decision-making process in the 

hands of the government, in the hands of cabinet — which is 

even narrower than the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is to me, it is scary. It is scary when you have, in a 

democratic system you have an elected government that was 

elected democratically and by the majority of people — I give 

them credit for that — but when you have that government 

elected in a lot of ways under false pretences because what they 

said during the election campaign, what they said leading up to 

the election campaign, is certainly not reflected in their actions 

after they come out. That, that, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker, 

becomes scary. 

 

It becomes scary that you have men and women who can do a 

180 so quickly, so quickly that in fact I think maybe some of 

them even got whiplash when they turned around from what 

they were saying prior to the election to what they were saying 

during the election to what they‟re actually doing today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is to me amazing that they have decided to pick 

on the people who are the engines of our economy. It‟s the 

working people of our province, it‟s the working people of this 

province that drive the economy. When they earn a reasonable 

living and they‟re able to support their families well and have a 

little disposable income, they spend it. 

 

And these aren‟t the people like the members opposite who may 

spend the bulk of their money elsewhere other than in 

Saskatchewan — they may be spending it in New York or 

Hawaii or Hong Kong or wherever they may happen to be 

going, but — the bulk of the people here in this, particularly in 

my constituency, the working people spend all their money 

here. They‟re raising their families here. They‟re paying their 

mortgages here. And they‟re taking advantage of the services 

that are here. 

 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

So their money is spent here. Their disposable income is spent 

here. And it‟s that, expenditures by those good folks that drives 

our economy, that causes our economy to move forward in a 

positive way. They spend their money here. They perhaps have 

their children in sports — in hockey, in soccer, and so on and so 

forth. So they spend money on that. They purchase their goods 

and their services right here in this province, right here in the 

city of Regina. They spend their money on that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s those people who are driving our economy. 

It‟s those people who are so important to our economy. And yet 

these folks are picking on them. They‟re wanting to strip away 

their rights — their rights to earn a reasonable and decent living 

— by denying them the ability to negotiate with their employer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s proposed essential legislation is 

far-ranging, the most broadest of anywhere in the country. It 

covers government employees, Crown corporations, regional 

health authorities, Saskatchewan cancer agencies, universities, 

SIAST, municipalities, police boards, and any other person, 

agency, or body or class of persons, agencies, or bodies that is 

prescribed by the provincial government. In other words, 

anyone. 

 

Anyone in our society, any organization in our society, any 

project in our society can be deemed — by that narrow band of 

men and women over there called the cabinet — as essential 

services, stripping away their rights to ensure that they have 

adequate and safe working conditions, to ensure that they have 

adequate and safe benefits, and to ensure that they have the 

ability to negotiate with their employer. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They don‟t have to worry. Government 

MLAs aren‟t an essential service. 

 

Mr. Harper: — My colleague just made a very interesting 

comment and it‟s very much to the fact that MLAs, particularly 

government MLAs, are not essential services. 

 

Essential service legislation could very well prolong, Mr. 

Speaker, essential services legislation could very well prolong 

strikes. It could prolong labour unrest. It could prolong strikes 

simply because it takes the pressure off both parties to come to 

a speedy resolution. It takes the pressure off, it takes the 

pressure off both parties — both the employer and the 

employee — to come to a speedy resolution of a labour dispute. 

It also does not guarantee that the resolution of the key issue 

that perhaps caused the labour dispute in the workplace that led 

to the strike, or led to a potential of a strike in the first place, 

there‟s no guarantee it will be resolved. It can sit there and 

simmer and simmer, and gnaw away and gnaw away, and 

digress the working conditions and the atmosphere in that job 

place. It‟s not a plus, but it‟s a negative. 

 

In a health care strike, essential service legislation could also 

result in even longer delays, even longer delays, of the elective 

surgery list — a list, Mr. Speaker, that we‟re starting to see 

signs of growing under this government. 

 

Essential services designations are imposed by government and 

employers are typically excused from it. 

 

In Manitoba, employers have the designated groundskeepers 

and library technicians as essential services. In Quebec, 

legislation designates up to 90 per cent of hospital employees 

are essential, and that sometimes requires other employees to 

maybe working during a strike situation would ordinarily be 

present under the normal conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have in the past, we check our history and we 

will see that in Saskatchewan we have had health care workers 

who have withheld their services in order to drive their point 

home to their employer in regard to whether it be compensation 

for the services that they provide or the benefits that they think 

they are due, or just bring themselves into line with the services 

that their members provide in other provinces. And they have 

had that ability to do that. 

 

But every time it has happened, every time it has happened 

there has been a committee set up by the employees that have 

provided essential and emergency services when required. 

There has never ever been a situation where a loss of life or a 

very negative effect on a human being‟s health in this province, 

a person‟s health in this province has been caused by the 

withholding of essential services. That is not the case, Mr. 

Speaker, not the case at all in the past. 

 

Bill 5 has taken away the right to strike from thousands of 

public sector workers, which will seriously weaken their 

collective bargaining powers. Mr. Speaker, simply put, simply 

put, Bill 5 now weakens, weakens the collective bargaining 

powers of the working men and women, working men and 

women. They no longer will have the right to be able to sit 

down and negotiate in a fair and equitable way, on a level 

playing field with their employers. Without the possibility of a 

strike, employers will do little or have little or no incentive to 

seriously negotiate wages, benefits, and working conditions 

with the public sector unions. They simply will not have any 

initiative to sit down . . . any incentive, rather, to sit down with 

their employees and negotiate — negotiate a fair level of wages, 

of compensation for the services provided; for a fair benefit 

package, to be competitive with those other jurisdictions; and to 

negotiate safe, quality working conditions in their job place. 

There will be no incentive to do that. 

 

So then what you have is a poisoning of the atmosphere. The 

productivity will likely not be there simply because you create 

an atmosphere where quite frankly it‟s not friendly. It‟s not a 

warm atmosphere. It‟s not an atmosphere where people want to 

go to work. 

 

And I‟ve experienced that in my life, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve worked 

in various jobs and various workplaces, and I have worked in 

some that have been a real delight to work in — friendly, warm, 

where you had employer that was understanding and fair, and 

you enjoyed going to work. You looked forward to going to 

work, and in fact the productivity in that atmosphere was very 

high — very high. 

 

I‟ve also experienced having just the opposite, working in an 

atmosphere where it was soured. It was soured over time by the 

decisions being made by the employer and the methods in 

which he or she was treating their employees. And that 

atmosphere was soured. It was a place where you didn‟t want to 

go to work. You actually dreaded going to work, okay. When 

you got there it was bitter, bickering, discontent, and it was not 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

a productive atmosphere. We did what we had to do, but 

certainly the productivity wasn‟t what it could have been, what 

it could have been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, strikes is not something that the working men and 

women, our labour force across this province jump at with great 

haste. In fact strike is a last resort. It‟s the last meaningful tool 

that labour has to drive its point home to its employer, but it‟s 

not a tool that they use with great haste, and it‟s not a tool that 

they enjoy using at any time. Strikes is, quite simply put, 

always, always is the last resort for a trade union. But it‟s even 

less used and less urgency to use it by public sector workers. 

 

Over the last two decades 96 per cent of public sector 

settlements in Saskatchewan were reached without, without 

work stoppage — a figure that is significantly higher than the 

percentage in the private sector settlements reached without 

work stoppage at 89 per cent during that same period. 

 

So that‟s very evident, Mr. Speaker, very evident that there is 

full co-operation by the public sector workers in this province 

when it comes to negotiations and when it comes to providing 

the services during those negotiations. And often those 

negotiations go well past the time of a contract being in place, 

but they‟re reluctant, they‟re very reluctant upon withholding 

their services and that‟s evident that over the last two decades, 

over the last 20 years in this province, 96 per cent — that‟s 96 

per cent — of the public sector settlements in Saskatchewan 

were reached without job stoppage. 

 

That I think is something that is a testimonial to the 

professionalism of the workers that we have in this great 

province and how they feel a part of, a part of this province, and 

how they take ownership for the programs and the services that 

they provide to the folks of Saskatchewan on a daily basis. And 

I want to take my hat off to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The most effective essential services agreements are those that 

are done on a voluntary basis. Public sector unions have always 

provided emergency services when health care strikes have 

occurred and other disputes in regards to the public safety were 

of genuine concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think if you just look at the history of the last 20 

years, the last two decades where we have enjoyed 96 per cent 

of public sector settlements without work stoppages, 

withholding the services, we see that very small sliver, that 4 

per cent when it did happen, as rare as it was, when it did 

happen, essential services were still provided. Still provided to 

the people of this province by the employees because they felt, 

they felt the need to provide that services, but also because they 

feel so much a part of this system and so much a part of this 

province and that they‟re simply professionals that provide 

those services when required. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 5 is a Bill that is simply designed for one 

purpose and for one purpose only, and that is to weaken the 

trade union movement in this province, to take away their 

rights. This is a battleground. This is just fulfilling a promise of 

the Premier. The promise that the Premier had made several 

years ago — when on a talk show, when asked about where the 

Sask Party‟s position was on organized labour — the Premier 

had no problem, had no problem in saying that if and when the 

Sask Party ever became Government of Saskatchewan, one of 

the first things they would do, one of the first things they would 

do is to go to war with labour. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they are doing . . . they have that . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member over there says it‟s not 

true. Well it‟s part of public record. It‟s part of public record, 

Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Member. And, Mr. Speaker, they are 

going to war with labour, and one of the first volleys in that war 

is Bill 5. One of the first frontal attacks is Bill 5. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know, I find it interesting and quite 

nervy of the government to be willing to expose themselves 

right off the bat as an anti-union, anti-worker government by 

doing a frontal attack on labour. 

 

And if you look at history, Mr. Speaker, whether it be the 

history in North America or whether it be the history of Europe 

and North America, most recent history, you will see that often, 

often the history of different countries — not so much Canada 

I‟m proud to say but certainly in North America and certainly in 

Europe — a history of violence and the history of battles and 

the history of military actions, military battles, military wars. 

And it has been a practice in the past, probably in the 16‟s and 

1700s, and that the battle then was a frontal attack where the 

enemy was on one side of the ridge and the good guys was on 

the other side of the ridge, and they would crawl up and they 

would meet them. They would . . . a frontal attack. They would 

face each other. They would either use their muskets or their 

bayonets or their swords or whatever it is to combat with one 

another and then whoever was left standing won. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was soon discovered by those who were a 

little sharper, a little smarter military tacticians that a frontal 

assault never worked. A frontal assault never worked. So I‟m 

kind of pleased to see, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 

decided to take a frontal attack on labour, to rally up the hill and 

take labour on nose to nose because I can guarantee you one 

thing, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not going to work in the long run. Yes 

the government because of its might, because of its majority, 

because of its might, might win a battle. They might even win 

two battles, but I can guarantee in the long run they won‟t win 

the war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s public service legislation Act 

applies to every public employee and employer, every trade 

union, every employee. The public employer is defined to 

include the Government of Saskatchewan, Crown corporations, 

regional health authorities, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 

University of Saskatchewan, University of Regina, SIAST, 

municipalities, police boards, and any other person, agency, or 

body, or class of persons, agencies, or body that is prescribed 

by the provincial government. 

 

So what does this mean? It means that within the cabinet lies 

the authority and the power to deem anybody — any group, any 

site where there are people working — as essential services. It 

gives them the power to determine in this province who is 

essential services. 

 

Now it may not even be, it may not even be the public sector. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

They can say that this particular operation, job site, workplace 

in the private sector has a direct relationship to the economy 

and therefore has a direct relationship to the government, and 

therefore they have the ability to deem it as essential services. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very broad distribution of power, very 

broad. 

 

We‟re seeing that that group, the men and women over there are 

going to — if this is passed — are going to enjoy wide-ranging 

powers over the workplace in our great province. If they really 

believe, Mr. Speaker, if they really believe that this is good 

legislation, this is good for the economy of Saskatchewan, this 

is good for the people of Saskatchewan, then I ask, why do they 

fear to take it out to public consultation? Why do they fear the 

public having the opportunity to voice their concerns? 

 

Why are they scared to turn this over to an all-party committee 

of the legislature? — which we have, which we have. The field 

policy committees are all standing committees of the 

legislature, all parties of the legislature. Why wouldn‟t they 

allow those committees to take this legislation to the broad 

public and ask for their input, to ask for their input? Ask the 

good folks out in Saskatchewan, who by the way are going to 

be affected by this legislation front and centre. Why don‟t they 

ask them what they think of it? 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, if the majority come back and say 

they‟re in favour of this legislation as it is, as it is today, then 

fine. The people have had their opportunity to speak. The 

people have had their opportunity to put their opinions forward 

and if they‟re in favour of it, then fine. 

 

But if they‟re not, then let‟s amend it. Let‟s amend it to make it 

workable, workable for the people of Saskatchewan. But until 

we know, until we know what it is those people want . . . 

Because this government has failed to do any consultation. 

They have not taken this out to the folks. They have not taken 

this out to the stakeholders. They have not taken this out to the 

people who are going to be affected on the front lines of this 

day in and day out. They haven‟t done that, Mr. Speaker. So 

we‟re asking them to do that. That‟s all we‟re asking. That‟s all 

we asking. Just take it out to public consultation. Let the good 

folks of Saskatchewan, and in all fairness, let the good folks of 

Saskatchewan have the opportunity to voice their concerns. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that if I had a product that I 

was very, very excited about and I thought it was a very, very 

good product, then I would be willing to share that product with 

the people of Saskatchewan and hope they would buy into it. 

Well if this government has a product and they‟re calling it this 

particular Bill, Bill 5, if they believe Bill 5 is a product that 

people of Saskatchewan want, it‟s a product the people of 

Saskatchewan would support, then I ask you, take it out to the 

people of this province and get their blessings, get their 

blessings. But if you don‟t, then I ask you to ascertain from the 

people of Saskatchewan what it is they want . . . changes, what 

changes they want made, so that this Bill can be of a benefit to 

them and have a positive reflection on them and their needs. 

 

Five provinces and the federal government have essential 

services legislation, while Ontario, Alberta, Prince Edward 

Island banned strikes and lockouts altogether in the health care 

workers in favour of binding arbitration. In Ontario ambulance 

workers have the rights to strike, but are covered by essential 

services legislation. Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia are 

currently the only provinces without essential services 

legislation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s worked pretty good up till now. When 

we look at the history in this province, when we look at history, 

only 4 per cent, only 4 per cent of the public sector services 

collective bargaining agreements have ever, ever, ever resulted 

in a strike. And when that has happened — as rare as it is, when 

it has happened — the employees themselves, in concert with 

the employers, have put together the teams that are required to 

provide those emergency essential services when called upon. 

 

This particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, if passed, 

Saskatchewan‟s essential services legislation will be the most 

far-reaching in the country. Unlike other jurisdictions, those 

legislative primary targets of health care, police, firefighters, 

with the strike ban and essential services legislation in 

Saskatchewan — proposed legislation would cover universities 

and other post-secondary institutions as well. Very broad. 

Probably . . . no, absolutely the most broad-ranging legislation 

of anywhere in Canada. 

 

Other provinces have forms of essential services legislation but 

nothing as broad as what‟s been proposed here, and nothing 

with the open-endedness that gives cabinet the power, the 

absolute power to deem anybody, anywhere, any organization, 

any job site, any workplace in our province as essential service. 

That is far-ranging, far-ranging powers and it opens the door, it 

opens the door to abuse. It opens the door to abuse of working 

men and women. It opens the door to abuse of our working 

people in this, in our great province of ours by a small band of 

people who are in cabinet. It opens that to that abuse, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

While the above public services are very critically important, it 

does not follow that they are all essential in the same sense as 

they are necessary to prevent danger of life, health, and safety. 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s the difference. Essential services, if you 

have a framework to build essential services on and you can 

indicate in some manner, shape, or form that some service is . . . 

and the withdrawal of that service could be a danger to life, a 

danger to health, or a danger to safety, then perhaps an 

argument can be made. But when you have legislation that has 

as the back door the escape clause of allowing the government 

to add anybody, anyone, any industry, any job site, any 

workplace, any group of men and women in this province as 

essential — add them to that list and say, you are essential 

services — then that simply, simply is a government that‟s 

trying to cling to a power base here that will allow them to 

manipulate and intimidate the people in this province. 

 

The right to strike is a fundamental right of all workers, and it‟s 

a very important part of the free, collective bargaining process. 

Without the possibility of a strike, employers have little or no 

incentive to seriously negotiate wages, benefits, or working 

conditions with the employees‟ union. They have no incentive 

to negotiate. 

 

As I said earlier, striking is not something that a working people 

use with great haste. They don‟t. It‟s something they only use as 

the absolute last resort when they‟ve been unable to negotiate 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

with their employer a fair and reasonable settlement, whether it 

be compensation for the services they provide, whether it be of 

benefits that bring them into line with other jurisdictions, what 

workers are receiving in other jurisdictions. When this has all 

failed, when there has been no other resort available, then 

they‟ll go on strike. They will withhold their services. They will 

send a strong message to the employer that they‟re prepared to 

sacrifice because that‟s what they do. 

 

In a strike, the working men and women sacrifice. They 

sacrifice themselves and their situations and in many cases they 

sacrifice the welfare of their families simply to send a message 

to the employer that they, as working people, have the right to 

enjoy a fair and reasonable compensation for the services that 

they provide. And they do that for future generations because 

those people who are participating in that strike, even if they get 

the settlement that they‟re hoping for, at the end of the strike, at 

the end of the day, even if they get the settlement they‟re 

hoping for, in most cases — in most cases — never, never make 

up for what they‟ve lost. 

 

But they do it because they know the importance to working 

people today and to the working people of the future, the 

importance of maintaining the ability to send that strong, strong 

message to the employers of today and of the future. 

 

[15:00] 

 

In a recent landmark ruling, in fact it was so recent it was June 

8, 2007, the Supreme Court of Canada confirmed that the 

bargaining process is protected, is protected under the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms. The collective bargaining process is 

protected under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Well I wonder, I wonder if the Minister of Labour, and I 

wonder if the cabinet of the Sask Party government opposite 

and I wonder if the members of that government were aware of 

that, were aware that the collective bargaining process is 

protected under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. If they 

were, maybe they would have done a double clutch and 

re-thought their assault, their assault on the rights of working 

men and women in this province through Bill 5. 

 

As the Chief Justice stated in their rulings: 

 

The right to bargain collectively with an employer 

enhances human dignity, [labour and] liberty . . . of . . . 

[the working people] by giving them the opportunity to 

influence the establishment of workplace rules and 

thereby gain some control [some control] over a major 

aspect of their lives, namely, their work. 

 

According to some legal analysis, the Supreme Court‟s decision 

sends a very important signal to governments, that they must 

consider the collective bargaining rights of workers before they 

enact legislation that may negatively impact upon those rights. 

 

Well that‟s exactly what we‟re seeing here, Mr. Speaker. We‟re 

seeing legislation that — the proposed legislation — if passed, 

will certainly, certainly smack right in the face of the rights of 

the working people. A subtle assault, a subtle assault, Mr. 

Speaker, on the rights of working people who had . . . That it 

was not given to them. It‟s something they have earned over the 

years. It‟s something that they have earned over, over the 

sacrifices of working men and women throughout the decades 

past. They‟ve earned those rights. They weren‟t given to them. 

They‟ve negotiated those rights. They‟ve worked for those 

rights. They have given up things to achieve those rights. And 

what do we have, Mr. Speaker? We have a government here 

that is not in power for six months, and it wants to strip away 

those rights of working men and women who have earned that 

over decades, Mr. Speaker, over decades. 

 

And yet we have seen in this province, we have seen in this 

province the loyalty of Saskatchewan working people. We‟ve 

seen the loyalty of people who work for this great province of 

Saskatchewan. We‟ve seen that loyalty in their willingness to 

negotiate and settle without work stoppage in 96 per cent of the 

cases. In 96 per cent of the times, they settle without job 

stoppage. It‟s only that narrow 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker, narrow 

4 per cent, and even that, this government wants to strip away 

those rights. 

 

In addition to strengthening collective bargaining rights, the 

right to strike in a public sector serves as a very important 

function: “As management professors Judy Haiven and Larry 

Haiven have pointed out, „the right to threaten or implement a 

work stoppage is the only effective mechanism workers . . . 

have to warn employers and the public of . . . [impeding] 

problems.‟” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is why I said earlier working men and 

women, working men and women don‟t rush to a strike. The 

public sector men and women do not rush to a strike. A strike is 

something they only use as a last alternative, the last alternative. 

It‟s not something they‟d use right away. Why? In the public 

sector, I like to think, it‟s because the people that work for this 

great province and work for the Government of Saskatchewan 

and work here in Saskatchewan love this province. They do 

everything they can to make it operate as well and effectively 

and efficiently and as smoothly as possible. 

 

But yes, on rare occasions, on rare occasions when they‟re 

unable to make headway in their negotiations with their 

employers, they have to, they have to draw attention to the 

issue. They have to draw attention to the issue, and they do that 

through a strike. They‟re sending a warning not only then to the 

employer. Not only is the employee sending a warning to the 

employer, but they‟re also sending a warning to the general 

public of this province that there‟s a problem and that problem 

needs to be addressed. 

 

The overwhelming majority of public sector contract 

settlements are reached without a strike, without a lockout. 

During the period 1987-2007, 96 per cent of public sector 

settlements in Saskatchewan were reached without work 

stoppage. This figure is significantly higher than the percentage 

of private sector settlements reached without work stoppage 

during the same period of time at 89 per cent, at 89 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, health care unions have always 

agreed to voluntarily providing emergency services prior to or 

during job action. For instance, prior to the six-day strike by 

12,000 health care providers in 2001, CUPE signed a volunteer 

agreement with Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations regarding essential services situation. Mr. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

Speaker, before they went on strike, before those health care 

providers went out on strike, they made sure, they made sure 

that they had staff — their members — staff available to meet 

the needs in emergency situation so that no one, no one would 

suffer undue hardship in this province. 

 

Over the last two decades, union members have also 

volunteered to provide emergency services in the following 

strikes. 

 

During a one-day strike by CUPE health care workers in 

January 1999, CUPE health care workers — such as lab and 

x-ray technicians, engineers, and IT [information technology] 

technologists — were required to be on call and were on call. 

During their 1999 province-wide strike, members of the 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses provided emergency services as 

they did, as they did during their 1988 strikes and 1991 strikes. 

So those services were provided. Health care workers, though 

on strike, had a team together identified prior to the strike to 

provide those essential services, those emergency services so no 

one, no one in Saskatchewan was at risk. 

 

During the 1999 strike by SGEU, members at the Saskatchewan 

Cancer Agency, every staff was left to work to provide essential 

services. Every staff was left to provide essential services. Mr. 

Speaker, this speaks well of the fine, loyal people we have 

working for us in Saskatchewan. I believe, Mr. Speaker, they 

should be given a bouquet and acknowledged for their efforts, 

not trod upon as this government is about to do through Bill 5. 

 

During the 2006-2007 strike by members of the SGEU public 

service and government employees unit, highway workers 

returned to their snowplows and sand trucks to help deal with 

the upcoming winter storm. Mr. Speaker, they were out on 

strike, and they could have stayed on strike, but no, the forecast 

was for a severe winter storm coming through their province 

and what did those fine folk do? They rallied to the call. They 

rallied to the call. They — absolutely every one of them — 

went back to work to man the snowplows and man the sand 

trucks in the event that storm did strike, that nobody, nobody in 

the motoring public in Saskatchewan was at risk because all of 

the snowplows and the sand trucks were out there doing their 

job, as loyal employees as they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the 2007 strike, CUPE Local 1975 reached 

a voluntary agreement with the University of Saskatchewan that 

allowed 20 members to provide essential services at the 

Western College of Veterinary Medicine, serving the needs of 

our rural Saskatchewan producers who maybe during that 

period of time might have had a severe incident with their 

livestock population, their livestock herd, whether it be cattle or 

horses or sheep. But these producers could have lost thousands 

and thousands of dollars if some health problem was to arise in 

their herd and there was no way to address it, no way to identify 

it through the veterinarian system. These workers, these 

workers did not go on strike. They stayed on the job and 

provided the emergency services and the essential services in 

the event that such a situation was to hit our livestock industry. 

 

Public sector unions take public safety seriously. That‟s why 

public sector unions have volunteered to provide emergency 

services when they have had no other option but to resort to job 

action. 

The proposed Public Service Essential Services Act, which 

could very well strip most public essential services‟ rights to 

strike, represents a clear case of overkill. This Act treats every 

negotiations as if a strike or a lockout was absolutely next on 

the list, which is not true, Mr. Speaker, which is simply not true. 

And that is verified if you look at our history. For the last two 

decades in Saskatchewan, 96 per cent of all public sector 

negotiations has resulted in a contract being put into place 

without work stoppage. 

 

The public services essential Act threatens to roll back the free 

collective bargaining process for thousands, thousands of public 

sector workers. In this sense the legislation will serve as a 

useful mechanism for the provincial government to club, to club 

future real-wage gains and benefits to improve the public sector 

workers, mostly whom are women. When you look at the 

population of our public sector workers, you find that the 

highest percentage of women, and this legislation is indirectly 

or perhaps directly taking aim at the women within our 

workforce or our public sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it just unbelievable that this government 

would move in such a direction so fast, so fast after becoming 

elected here in the province of Saskatchewan. Within . . . I was 

going to say within months. Actually it was probably within 

weeks of becoming government. They introduced legislation 

that certainly has set out the parameters of the war that they 

have declared on the working men and women of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you one thing. 

When the opportunity comes, I will not be supporting this 

legislation. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to just talk for a few brief remarks in this 

debate, and I know that‟ll be applauded by all members when I 

use the words brief. The public, those that are tuning in, Mr. 

Speaker, the issue we‟re discussing is Bill No. 5, and Bill No. 5 

is an Act respecting essential public purposes. 

 

The Act is intended to assure the continuation of public services 

whose absence during a strike or lockout would constitute 

threats to health, safety, result in the destruction of property, 

environmental damage, or disrupt court operations. That‟s what 

the Bill is intended to do. Public services in the Bill are quite 

broadly expressed to include of course the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the Crown corporations, a regional health 

authority, an affiliate as defined in The Regional Health 

Services Act because in addition to regional health authorities, 

there are affiliate organizations that also provide health 

services. The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is a central agency 

that is specifically defined, the University of Regina, the 

University of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology, a municipality, a board as 

defined in The Police Act, and here‟s a catch-all — “any other 

person, agency, or body, or class of persons, agencies or bodies, 

that is prescribed.” 

 

[15:15] 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

That is a very broad definition of public employers that could 

potentially provide essential services. My colleagues have made 

reference to this that this is likely among the broadest if not the 

broadest interpretation of public employees in all of, or public 

employer, in all of Canada. It‟s a bit of a stretch to consider 

what essential services when we talk about the absence of 

which or would constitute threats to health, safety, result in 

destruction of property, environmental damage, or disrupt court 

operations might actually be provided by for example, the 

University of Regina. 

 

I understand that there might be a special case at the University 

of Saskatchewan where the University of Saskatchewan is the 

employer with respect to certain health care services but the Act 

does not specifically define that portion of the University of 

Saskatchewan that provides such services. It goes much broader 

than that, and it‟s a bit of a stretch actually, these public 

employers that might actually be providing essential services. 

To also say that any other person, agency, or body or class of 

persons, agencies, or bodies that is prescribed as a catch-all, you 

wonder whether this is something that the government should 

simply be able to do by saying this is a group we‟re going to 

add or whether that it is something that should be debated in the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Now I know that the minister opposite has said oh there‟s a 

specific agency that provides services to people with disabilities 

that wants to be added as an employer under this Act, that 

providing essential services and perhaps that should be 

considered. But the question is, should that simply be the right 

of the government to define who those public employers are, or 

those agencies or bodies that provide in their view essential 

services, or whether that‟s something that should be debated in 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

And so if the government wants to dissuade the public, the 

people of Saskatchewan, that this is not in fact one of the . . . an 

Act that has the broadest interpretation of a public employer 

that provides essential services, then here‟s an opportunity for 

them to take out the words “as prescribed” and to say that this is 

something that can be included in future legislation, so that we 

can all have a debate about what it takes to be included as an 

employer that provides essential services, Mr. Speaker. So we‟ll 

wait and see what the government wants to do on that. But 

certainly, here‟s an opportunity for them to clarify, set the 

record straight. 

 

The public might be wondering, well I agree with the notion of 

essential services, that there should be some protection for the 

public when it comes to essential services. What is it in this Bill 

that is different than the situation that exists now? How does 

this work? 

 

Well as the Bill points out that 90 days before the expiration of 

a public service collective agreement, the Bill states that the 

employer and the union must meet, must meet and attempt to 

reach an agreement on what constitutes essential services. So 

the idea is that the union and the employer will sit down before 

a contract expires. And these contracts are usually for a year, 

two years or even three years now. And the idea is that before 

that expires, you sit down; you try to define what are the 

essential services going forward that need to be covered by an 

agreement, and who are the employees that should be covered 

by such an agreement. 

 

And that sounds on the face of it very fair and very reasonable, 

except for one little thing. If agreement can‟t be found, well the 

employer can simply state these are the services that in their 

view need to be covered; these are the employees that should be 

providing that service. And if the unions don‟t like it, they can 

go to the Labour Relations Board, Saskatchewan Labour 

Relations Board, to get a ruling as to what employee should or 

should not in fact be covered by an essential services 

agreement. 

 

But you know, inexplicably, inexplicably there‟s no role for this 

outside body for this Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board, 

this third party, to look at the question of what essential services 

should be covered. We heard many times people make mention 

of how in Manitoba, somehow in their essential services 

legislation, groundskeepers have been included. Now I know 

that groundskeepers provide valuable services, Mr. Speaker, but 

I would not necessarily go so far as to classify those as essential 

services. 

 

So for example what could happen here is that the health district 

might say, well you know it‟s very important that we keep the 

parking lot going during the dispute. And we can‟t have the 

parking lot shut down, because if people can‟t park at the 

hospital and they can‟t go visit the people in the hospital, you 

know it might affect their health if they don‟t get those visits in 

a timely fashion. So therefore we want to include that as well as 

a public service. 

 

Well you know, that‟s the kind of interpretation that an 

employer can put on this that‟s not subject to any discussion at 

the end of the day, not subject to any further review by an 

outside body. You know the outside body can say, well you 

should have one or two parking attendants, but not this third 

one because that one can come from management. But there‟s 

no opportunity here for a third party to question what it is that 

the employer in their view is saying is needed in terms of 

essential services. 

 

So when people are critical of this Bill, they are very critical of 

this one-sided opportunity by an employer to define what is in 

essential services. There is no opportunity as such for 

employees to say, well we don‟t agree that this service is 

essential, and here‟s our reasons why we don‟t believe that it‟s 

an essential services, and to have this third party to adjudicate 

and say, well we agree with you. 

 

But no, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the reasons that there has 

been a great deal of debate and argument about this . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And my colleague from Regina 

Rosemont certainly feels strongly about this, and is interjecting 

in this debate for good reason because many people are very 

concerned about this legislation, very concerned about this 

one-sidedness, one-sidedness of this legislation, one-sidedness 

where there‟s no opportunity for a third party to adjudicate as to 

what services an employer wants to have included as essential 

services at the end of the day. 

 

And here‟s an opportunity, I think, for the government, as we 

go forward into committee, through amendments to clarify that 

they don‟t mean this, what is actually contained in the Bill. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

Here‟s an opportunity, I think, for the government to clarify 

their intent. Here‟s an opportunity for the government to ensure 

that this is not a one-sided piece of legislation, that this is a 

piece of legislation that serves all of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, I think, Mr. Speaker, that if you were to ask people 

generally the question, do you support the concept of essential 

services, that if there‟s a strike in an important public sector, 

say in the hospital sector, do you believe that there should be 

essential services defined so that if there is something of an 

emergent nature that that will be looked after, I think most 

people say well we agree. I mean who‟s not to agree with that? 

We all agree with that. 

 

But, you know, are there problems with this Bill as it‟s 

constructed, the way that it‟s constructed now that in fact may 

work against the interests of the public? But that‟s not 

something that the government is exactly letting people know 

about. They‟re not, for example, pointing out that there may 

well be less pressure on parties to settle an agreement because 

essential services are covered. 

 

So here you have a situation. You‟ve got a public employer. 

You‟ve got employees. The employer says these are the 

essential services. They‟re quite broad. You know, here‟s the 

employees that are covered by that, but there‟s, you know, the 

employees that are not covered by that. You know, they might 

say, well we might . . . the only real opportunity we have as 

opposed to the breadth of our action is to have a longer action. 

And for the non-essential services, that might in fact create 

some issues at the end of the day. 

 

What do we mean by non-essential services? For example, hip 

and knee surgeries. Those are not essential surgeries or essential 

services as such. Those are surgeries that can be postponed and 

quite often are postponed. If surgeries of a more emergent 

nature are presented at a hospital, hip and knee surgeries may 

get delayed. For example if there‟s a major accident or if there‟s 

a major flu or if there‟s a major epidemic in Saskatchewan or in 

one of our cities, a hospital may say we simply need to have 

those beds to deal with the emergency that‟s before us, and 

therefore we need to delay hip and knee surgeries because those 

in the main — not exclusively, but in the main — can be 

delayed. Well so it is with essential services legislation. 

 

If you take the view, as my colleague, the member from Regina 

Rosemont does, that this — you know, and I heard him talk 

about this — that, you know, that when you ease the pressure, 

when you ease the pressure, and because all the essential 

services are covered, you may well have a situation where there 

can be longer delays. There can be longer protracted withdrawal 

of services for the non-essential services, and therefore create 

situations where hip and knee surgeries, as an example, can be 

subjected to even longer delays. 

 

And finally there‟s no guarantee of course that there won‟t be a 

withdrawal of services simply because you have essential 

services legislation. We see from other jurisdictions in BC 

[British Columbia] where teachers, I think, are an essential 

services, but nevertheless because of extenuating circumstances, 

they‟ve withdrawn their services. 1988, Alberta nurses, I think, 

as a group are classified as providing an essential services, and 

they nevertheless in 1988 withdrew their services, and so it was 

with some CUPE hospital workers in Ontario in 1981. 

 

So you know, there‟s no guarantee that services won‟t be 

withdrawn by public service workers simply because you have 

the legislation. To be sure, there are very significant penalties in 

the legislation for any union that supports that or any individual 

that supports that, but as we see from history, there are cases in 

Canada where services have nevertheless been withdrawn. 

 

So are there problems with this Bill? Yes, there may well be 

problems with this Bill if there‟s less pressure on parties to 

settle, and we see non-essential services like hip and knee 

surgeries being subjected to even longer delays. Will it create 

. . . certainly in terms of that, there will never be an issue? No, 

the Bill can‟t provide that guarantee. 

 

So why enact essential services, Mr. Speaker? Very good 

question. You know, Saskatchewan as a province has now 

existed for 103 years, and as an organized entity was operating 

before that as part of the North-West Territories going back to 

the 1800s. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Our experience in Saskatchewan has been that where there are 

disputes — and not necessarily essential services, not 

necessarily essential services — but where there are disputes 

that show no sign of resolution and, for example, there could be 

a potential danger to the public as was the case in 1999 when 

nurses were ordered back to work in Saskatchewan. Could be 

an economic impact that concerns the government — for 

example, the government of the day ordered dairy workers back 

to work in 1984. Could be a matter of extreme hardship. There 

was the issue of University of Saskatchewan students that were 

affected in the late 1980s where the government ordered 

everyone back to work so as to ensure that students weren‟t 

going to lose a whole year which would be an extreme hardship 

as a result of that strike. So the legislative option is always 

there. 

 

The legislative option is always there and it can be done very 

quickly if need be. I know that people look at the Legislative 

Assembly and . . . I know my colleague from Regina Rosemont 

does, that maybe this is a bit of a cumbersome institution. But, 

Mr. Speaker, history would show that if there‟s a need to recall 

the legislature immediately, that can be done in a matter of 

hours to deal with any issue of essential services or any issue of 

disputes. 

 

So what are the actual issues vis-à-vis essential services that 

demand this change? That is a very good question, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know, when I ask this . . . You know, usually you get, 

when you make remarks in the Chamber, you get lots of 

kibitzing going back and forth. You have members on the 

opposite side who want to heckle the remarks that are being 

made. 

 

But when I put this question, what are the actual issues, what 

are the actual demonstrated issues vis-à-vis essential services in 

our history that demand this change — you know that 

commercial, Mr. Speaker? Have you seen that on TV? It‟s by a 

courier company — I think it‟s FedEx — where, you know, you 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

have a group of employees and one poses a question, well how 

do we get this parcel, how do we get that to Germany. And then 

all the employees stand around and say, you know, they stare 

off into space, and they look puzzled, and no one really has an 

answer. And someone says, geez maybe we‟d better have a 

complicated process to review this. We call that a FedEx 

moment. Well when I asked the question what are the actual 

issues vis-à-vis essential services that demand the change posed 

by this legislation, I see the members opposite having a bit of a 

FedEx moment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Was it a campaign commitment that is causing the government 

to act in this way? Well, you know, was it the government, for 

example, saying this is something that we promised the people 

of Saskatchewan, and therefore we need to make good on our 

promise, wrong-headed as it might be? We understand that. It‟s 

something they campaigned on. It‟s something they said to the 

public, and the public said, yes we agree, and therefore you 

should do it. Is that the case here? 

 

No. To the contrary we had in fact a member of theirs shortly 

before the election saying to the public, when asked about a 

work withdrawal or withdrawal of services, potential 

withdrawal of services in the health sector, indicated that no, we 

don‟t need essential services legislation. This is something that 

can be argued out by the parties, and they can resolve this 

without any essential services legislation. So you‟d hardly call 

that a campaign commitment to now come in to do exactly the 

opposite of what you said prior and during the campaign. 

 

So it‟s not that, Mr. Speaker, that is at stake here. And, you 

know, I take the point of view that, given that urgency has not 

been quantified, has not been demonstrated nowhere, given that 

this could poison labour relations, and people might say, well 

what difference does that make to me, well when you think 

about it that if you have a grumpy group of service providers 

who have been ordered back to work and have not been given 

the opportunity to argue in a democratic way if you like, in a 

free way for what they should be paid for those services . . . 

 

And I use the word democratic because, you know, that was . . . 

I think all of us remember 25, 26 years ago when we had Polish 

shipyard workers in the city of Gdańsk in Poland, the Solidarity 

union arguing for their right to bargain collectively as a union. 

And we all applauded that and said, that‟s a good demonstration 

of what democracies are all about, that when we give workers 

the right to argue their own case in settings so, you know, this 

could poison labour relations. 

 

And you really have to ask, how does that benefit us in terms of 

. . . You know, we should always be looking to see what we can 

do to improve democratic functioning in our society as opposed 

to lessening democratic functioning in our society. 

 

So we have to ask how that benefits anyone. And on a very 

more direct level, how it benefits the public to go to someplace 

where, you know, public services are provided and workers are 

not happy, morale is poor, the services aren‟t being provided 

the way that they should be because the government has acted 

in some unilateral way to deny them their rights. So you know, 

it could poison labour relations. And how does that really 

benefit anyone? 

 

And given that it may actually mean there‟s less pressure to 

settle disputes and create even longer delays in non-essential 

services, given that, I think that this Bill should be taken out for 

public discussion and consultation. I take the point of view that 

this Bill, you know, again . . . Because it‟s not something that 

was promised during the election campaign. It‟s come on sort of 

after the campaign as an initiative by the government. 

 

And given all of the ramifications that might be there for the 

public, I think the public has a right to know what this Bill is all 

about. And more than, you know, this one-sided debate here in 

the Legislative Assembly where the government won‟t stand up 

and argue their point of view. Or if they do do it, it‟s only in 

question period and then it‟s sort of with rhetorical retorts, if 

you like, that really don‟t add to the debate and really don‟t 

answer the questions that the public has. 

 

I really think there needs to be a more extensive, substantial 

public discussion so the public fully understands where it is that 

we have been over the last 103 years with respect to this matter, 

why it is that a change is required now, and if there is to be a 

change, can this be done in some collaborative fashion between 

the government and public employers on the one hand and 

public employees on the other hand. Is that possible? Wouldn‟t 

that be the very best way to resolve this matter of essential 

services, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know this Bill to me is not about good 

public policy. One, the government hasn‟t adequately defined 

why it is that something that has essentially existed for 103 

years should be changed in this way, changed in a way that also 

brings into place motions about extended debate and closure to 

limit the debate, if you like, on these Bills. You know, why, 

why the rush to do that? 

 

So it‟s got to be more than about protecting the public. I think 

this is about gotcha politics. I think this is about the 

Saskatchewan Party which now forms the government saying to 

the unions of this province, got you. This is what this is all 

about, about a political agenda to get the unions, to weaken the 

unions. In fact the members on the other side, while my 

colleague from Regina Northeast was in a debate, were arguing 

or yelling across about all the money that they‟ve gotten from 

corporations and businesses for their election campaigns. And 

we wonder, is this really a way for them to begin to pay off 

their debt to corporations that, corporations that have not very 

favourable a union attitude and who support actions to weaken 

the unions? And is that what that heckling was all about, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said I would be brief. I‟m going to stick to that. 

If I can just sum up, again the government has not demonstrated 

why something that has been in effect for 103 years, and I think 

has served us relatively well, should now be changed in the way 

that they are proposing to change it. 

 

I think the government needs to do a better job of demonstrating 

why the change is necessary and also showing us that they 

really are listening and are prepared to be a little bit more 

inclusive in this legislation so as to ensure that, going forward, 

that it‟s not unilateral actions by employers that settle the 

question of essential services legislation in Saskatchewan. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I commend the member from Regina Douglas 

Park on the comments. And before adjourning debate, I would 

just like to make a few short comments on this Bill. I would 

commend the member from Regina Douglas Park on talking 

about the problems with having no longer strikes in this Bill. I 

would like to commend him for talking about the withdrawal of 

services, even with legislation with, where there is legislation 

preventing, banning strikes, that we have to be worried about 

that. 

 

And what were, as he mentioned, what were the demands in this 

FedEx moment — which was a very good point he made — and 

what caused this legislation to be brought forward, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? What were the conversions, what were the 

conversions that happened to the Saskatchewan Party 

government that before the election they said that there was no 

need for this legislation, and immediately after they brought it 

in? What about the public consultations and public hearings that 

everybody is calling for — the whole issue of the minister 

attending public meetings on Bills 5 and 6 but yet the 

government hiding from having and holding their own public 

consultations and hearings on this issue? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the way that this legislation was brought 

forward — and I think one indication of that is we now have 

Bill No. 24, trade union Act amendment, requiring changes 

after an original Bill is brought in. I think this probably shows a 

little lack of research, maybe some haste in drafting. And on the 

drafting piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the questions raised there 

are, who drafted this? There‟s been questions in this Assembly 

on the cost of this to the taxpayers — questions of, did in fact 

the ministry as shown by their lack of ability to answer 

questions on the various issues that they . . . their degree of 

involvement in the legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, over and above all this we have moving to 

legislation which was not called for. As the member who spoke 

said, there was no reason to do that. In fact most of the Sask 

Party was saying that this was not necessary. 

 

What do we do then when we talk about the quasi-judicial body 

like the Labour Relations Board and the way that they have 

handled the changes in the Labour Relations Board? How is this 

going to promote trust? How is this going to promote trust in 

the future for all the practitioners? And we have the labour 

lawyers of Canada coming in and writing a letter questioning 

the Sask Party government and the way that they have dealt 

with this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I will also be talking about the legislation and the rights — 

and were they aware, as the member said earlier, about the 

freedom of association for unions and the Charter protection for 

collective bargaining in these and how they come together 

before we would come in and bring in legislation of this. So I 

think also one of the sections that I would be touching on is 

section 21. 

 

But I think overall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I sit down here, 

what I would like to say is I think what we‟ve witnessed is the 

inability of the ministry, the inability of the minister to answer 

the simplest of questions, to come clean and say the same thing 

on two different days, makes us wonder not only why the need 

for the legislation, why the conversions by this government, but 

many other questions from that. So at this time, I would like to 

adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member‟s called 

to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adjourn 

debate? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 6 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2007 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to continue on in the debate of Bill 6 in the 

Assembly here today. 

 

The Premier in the mandate letter given to the new Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour on November 

21, 2007, instructed the minister to undertake the following, and 

I quote: 

 

In your capacity as Minister of Labour, establish a fair and 

balanced labour environment in Saskatchewan that respects 

the rights of workers and employers by: 

 

Removing legislated limits on the length of collective 

bargaining agreements. 

 

Working with the province‟s public sector unions to ensure 

essential services are in place in the event of a strike or a 

labour action. 

 

Ensuring democratic workplaces by: 

 

Requiring secret ballots on any vote to certify a union in 

a workplace, and a 50% plus one result for successful 

certification; and 

 

Ensuring freedom of information in the workplace during 

. . . [a] unionization drive, by allowing unions and 

management the opportunity to fairly communicate with 

employees. 

 

The marching orders to the new minister were reiterated in the 

Throne Speech of December 10, 2007, which saw the opening 

of the first legislative session of the new Sask Party 

government. The speech is entitled “Securing the Future,” and I 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

would like to take a moment to highlight some of the contents 

in relation to the intent of this government when it comes to the 

rights of workers and trade unions that represent them. 

 

The following is found on page 2 of that document, quote, 

“That‟s why growth and security will be the watchwords for my 

government in the months and years ahead.” I would suggest 

that the growth and security that are referenced in the first 

Throne Speech of this new Sask Party government are not 

intended to include unions or their members as these 

amendments to The Saskatchewan Trade Union Act clearly 

indicate. The likelihood of growth for trade unions and security 

for their members will be completely undermined through these 

amendments if allowed to pass. In fact Bill 6 just might be the 

death threat that was envisioned 16 years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us look further on in the speech to page 5 under 

the heading, “Democratic Labour Laws”, and I quote: 

 

The goal of promoting growth requires my government to 

focus some attention on the current labour legislative 

environment. The rights of workers to bargain collectively 

and the rights of employers must be respected. However, 

the labour legislative environment must also be 

competitive with other Canadian jurisdictions, if the 

Saskatchewan economy is to realize its potential. 

 

My government will introduce legislation that achieves 

this competitive balance in labour laws. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there is no intent in Bill 6 to 

recognize or enhance the right of working people to join or 

organize unions for the purpose of bargaining collectively. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are designed to massively 

tip the balance inherent in The Trade Union Act and the more 

than 60 years of labour relations history to a position that 

heavily favours employers. 

 

There is not a single amendment to The Trade Union Act in Bill 

6 that improves the situation for working people in their unions. 

Bill 6 will force, if not entirely exhaust, the ability of employees 

to join a union, and by doing so it will severely erode workers‟ 

ability to enjoy the fruits of free collective bargaining which is 

the touchstone of a free and democratic society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As for being competitive with other Canadian jurisdictions, this 

government has chosen to go below the bottom of the barrel. 

Bill No. 6 as proposed does absolutely nothing to provide a 

so-called competitive platform from which workers can 

participate fully in the growing prosperity of our province. 

 

Further on, in the December 10, 2007, Throne Speech, the 

government assures the people of Saskatchewan of the 

following. And I quote from page 13: 

 

All of these changes will not happen overnight. But they 

will happen over the course of the next four years. Then, 

Saskatchewan people will have the opportunity to judge 

whether my government has kept its word. 

 

It would appear that this government‟s commitment to 

thoughtful, accountable, and transparent processes is something 

envisioned for everyone except for those who belong to a trade 

union or who hope to. For supporters of unions, this 

government‟s approach to change is draconian, instantaneous, 

and completely devoid of meaningful or thoughtful 

consultation. 

 

I do, however, believe that the Throne Speech hit one right note 

when it said that the Saskatchewan people will judge this 

government in four years. Mark my words. There will be a day 

of reckoning for this government because the people of 

Saskatchewan do not look favourably on any government 

running roughshod over their rights or the rights of their 

neighbours. The people of Saskatchewan believe in 

accountability, transparency, fair play, and good governance. 

The people of Saskatchewan do not appreciate and do not 

welcome ideologically driven, mean-spirited, high-handed 

actions by those entrusted with the public good. 

 

As I said at the outset of my remarks, the Premier‟s letter to the 

new minister is dated November 21, 2007. The Throne Speech 

was presented less than three weeks later and nine days 

following that — on December 19, 2007, to be exact — the 

minister introduced sweeping and draconian amendments to 

The Trade Union Act. 

 

The amendments contained in Bill 6 appear to have been 

conceived in a vacuum as there was no public consultation. 

There were no meetings with the stakeholders, and there was no 

indication that these drastic and regressive amendments would 

be dumped on the legislature moments before the close of the 

first session and scant days before the citizens of the province 

enjoyed their traditional year-end holiday season. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who drafted the amendments contained in Bill 6? 

The people have the right to know who drafted this legislation. 

The minister himself admitted that he knew nothing about the 

contents of Bill 6 at his swearing in, but he did indicate that his 

party had been working on the legislation for over a year. The 

people have a right to know whose interests are being served by 

these amendments. The people have a right to know if any 

conflict arises in regard to the architects of this letter bomb to 

the trade unionism and the practising of labour relations in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This government deliberately put a lump of coal in each and 

every trade unionist‟s stocking and then sat back like the grinch. 

No, it wasn‟t the Christmas presents and trinkets that were 

stolen from working people by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

In fact what this government proposes to do is to steal 

employees‟ rights. No amount of empty rhetoric by this 

government or its apologists can explain away the sting of this 

assault on democratic freedoms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where is the consultation? When the NDP government was 

poised to proclaim a particular piece of legislation in 2005, the 

party who now sits as government cried foul and so did the 

business community, Mr. Speaker. We reconsidered our 

intentions and took account of the opposition being expressed at 

that time. The public demands real consultation when 

governments propose to make dramatic changes to the laws 

governing their workplaces and lives, and justifiably so, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada has spoken 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

clearly on this area, just ask BC Premier, Gordon Campbell. His 

legislated attack on working people in his province has been 

impugned and sections and of that legislation have no force and 

effect. 

 

But now the same party that cried foul in 2005 is governing this 

fair province. And they seem to be singing a different tune from 

a different songbook, Mr. Speaker. Whose songbook is it, Mr. 

Speaker? It sounds a lot like the tune that many employer 

lobbyists whistle. And this government seems to have joined 

the chorus because they are paying the piper. Mr. Speaker, the 

changes that have been introduced to The Trade Union Act are 

nothing short of payback for the support of the business 

organizations in the last election since there is no evidence 

whatsoever that Bill No. 6 is a response to the expressed wishes 

of working people. 

 

And if one looks back on the sentiments expressed about unions 

and union leaders by Ms. Kathy Young, the current executive 

director of communications, 16 years ago, it is clear that this is 

nothing short of a concerted attack, to use Ms. Young‟s words, 

on the red union leader. With all due respects, Mr. Speaker, you 

would think that we were back in the era of McCarthyism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some key questions that need to be 

addressed if this government is going to convince the public 

and those affected by these egregious amendments that there is 

any legitimacy to those amendments. 

 

As I asked earlier, who drafted these amendments? And who 

was consulted in the process, Mr. Speaker? What comparators 

were examined in the development of these amendments, Mr. 

Speaker? What harm, public mischief, injustice, or imbalance is 

being remedied or repaired in The Trade Union Act that creates 

the need for these amendments, Mr. Speaker? 

 

When I look back to the minister‟s mandate letter, I note that 

the letter also provides the following, and I quote: 

 

Through our government‟s hard work and your 

accomplishment of the above-noted objectives, we will 

deliver on our plan for Securing the Future and making 

Saskatchewan a leader in the New West, Canada and the 

world. 

 

It is the respectful opinion of my colleagues and myself that the 

actions of this government are more reminiscent of the Wild 

West and not the new West. But I was curious, Mr. Speaker, as 

to what the phrase new West meant. And that became more 

clear to me when leaving the Calgary airport, where I was 

greeted by a sign proclaiming: welcome to Calgary; heart of the 

new West. Imagine my surprise in discovering the origin, if not 

the meaning, of the new West moniker. I know the Premier 

likes to spend a lot of time fundraising in Calgary. And if that 

great city is the heart of the new West, I‟m not sure what part of 

the anatomy that makes Regina and indeed Saskatchewan in the 

Premier‟s mind. 

 

If the new West means a region of Canada determined to lead 

the country and the world in building a better society, an 

ecologically sensible economic order for all its citizens, not just 

those with deep pockets, Mr. Speaker, then count me in. But if 

embracing the slogan foretells a reckless approach to social 

issues reminiscent of a time gone by, then definitely count me 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan is positioned to be the leading province in 

Canada‟s economy. This is not the product of electing a new 

government. It is the result of the hard work and persistence of 

our people plus the good fortune to be in a place on earth that 

has an abundance of what so many others want. These 

opportunities were enhanced by a stable, skilful, and balanced 

approach to public administration delivered by successive NDP 

governments following the wreckage left by this government‟s 

mentors, tutors, godparents, and soulmates. 

 

The surplus — the robust treasury that this Sask Party inherited 

— is a result of prudent management, timely and responsible 

development of public policy, and attention to economic 

indicators that build a sustainable, equitable society. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan we enjoy enviable economic growth. 

And the largest challenge facing employers is the shortage of 

workers. The Calvert government was taking steps to address 

those very real issues facing employers all across this province 

and in all industries and sectors. We established the 

Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission to examine and 

make recommendations to address the province confronting 

employers and provide some guidance and assistance for 

potential employees to enter and remain in the workforce. This 

was done after consultation with the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce and the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour — let 

me repeat — after consultation with both employer and 

employee representatives. 

 

It is important to note that, in the run-up to our current 

economic success, employers weren‟t citing The Trade Union 

Act as a barrier to growth. On the contrary, employers cite the 

shortage of workers as the real barrier. And on that real issue, 

did we see any significant investment to address that issue in 

the recent budget? No, Mr. Speaker. There was lip service and 

ill-thought-out expressions of intent. 

 

[16:00] 

 

This government may be able to realize that the former NDP 

government was well on the way to addressing these real 

impediments to growth, but the Sask Party government can‟t 

get off their misguided ideological bent to address it, Mr. 

Speaker. Instead they want to create a war with labour — the 

very people we need to be working with to fashion solutions to 

the labour shortage problems facing employers all across this 

great province. 

 

The Premier may say that they value the participation of labour 

and that his sentiments expressed 16 years ago do not define the 

relationship today because he has not introduced right to work 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, I will stand on record as stating that 

these amendments, coupled with Bill 5, the essential services 

legislation, do just that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members across the floor did one thing 

correctly when they continued with the Saskatchewan Labour 

Market Commission as a forum for business, labour, and other 

equally important stakeholders to address the real labour market 

issues. They have gone so far as to retain the commission‟s 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

board of directors who were appointed by the previous 

government. The verdict is still out whether they will accept the 

recommendations from this diverse, experienced group of 

individuals and whether there will be the required support to do 

the important tasks that they have agreed to undertake. 

 

What my colleagues and I in the Calvert government put into 

place was a forum where business and labour could meet and 

work together. We took those steps to overcome historical 

obstacles and to mediate the often adversarial nature of 

industrial relations, Mr. Speaker. We acknowledge the wisdom 

the Premier and his colleagues appear to be embracing by 

continuing that methodology. However at the same time, we 

condemn the Premier and his government‟s incredible lack of 

judgment in summarily firing the chairperson and 

vice-chairpersons of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board. 

These firings were, by the government‟s own admission, 

without cause, Mr. Speaker. I will have further comment on that 

subject later. 

 

But I must say that evident political interference in the 

functioning of the Labour Relations Board is hugely 

problematic. And it is but another piece of this government‟s 

assault on sound labour laws and stable industrial relations in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I‟ve said, I acknowledge the wisdom of the government in 

keeping with the path laid by the previous administration to 

work collaboratively — one might even say collectively — with 

the stakeholders, the public, and those we hope to invite to be 

engaged. That is the road to the development of sound public 

policy, and that is what the public expects when electing a 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The road that the Sask Party is taking in introducing these faulty 

and prejudicial amendments to The Trade Union Act is one that 

leads us back to the dark days of Saskatchewan and North 

America in general, in the 1930s, when the right to join, 

organize, and support a trade union was regarded by the 

powerful as something akin to a criminal conspiracy. Social 

strife, unstable labour relations, rampant industrial disputes, 

recognition strikes, and the like were the characteristics of that 

sad time in our collective history, Mr. Speaker. And 

out-migration from the province was one of those by-products 

too. 

 

Why does this government want to take us back to the time of 

brutish economic and social inequality, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Trade Union Act 

are a recipe for a return to widespread labour unrest and social 

division in the province. These amendments signal an attack on 

the rights of employees to freely choose to belong to a trade 

union of their choice. This government has drawn a line in the 

sand when none was needed. This government is choosing to 

pick a fight where none was needed. 

 

Will this government‟s labour legislation program, as we‟ve 

seen it expressed and acted on so far, cause one more family to 

move back to Saskatchewan or convince one more young 

person to stay here to contribute, build a life, and raise a family, 

Mr. Speaker? I think the answers to those questions are clear. 

 

However if the Premier was conducting exit polls of 

Saskatchewanians at the Calgary Airport in relation to The 

Trade Union Act when he was down there shopping for 

marketing slogans and campaign contributions, perhaps he 

would like to share his polling results with the rest of the 

Assembly. 

 

Before I get to the substance of these proposed amendments — 

and I use the word substance very loosely, Mr. Speaker, as 

these amendments are nothing short of a sycophantic attack on 

the rights of labour designed to appease an antiquated ideology 

— it is important to provide somewhat of a history lesson for 

the members across the floor. 

 

First off, the design of sound public policy is not something that 

occurs in a vacuum, a backroom or a darkroom. Rather, good 

and sound public policy like medicare has its root in historical 

reality, Mr. Speaker. Like medicare, The Trade Union Act of 

Saskatchewan as it now stands is a public policy law that has 

been brought into place in order to establish a level playing 

field which balances the right of employers to run their business 

and, at the same time, guarantees working people the right to 

depart from the master and servant relationship, Mr. Speaker. If 

I thought it would be received with an attentive ear, I would 

simply advise the Premier and his government to leave it alone 

because it works. 

 

I will save the House from a history lesson that begins in 

England in the 1500s — although I know my colleagues would 

like to hear it — with the law supporting and recognizing the 

rights of trade guilds, this being of course the roots of what 

became the craft unions and the trades; such as carpenters, 

millwrights, and the like. 

 

I will take us to the more recent iteration of developing labour 

or industrial relations law. My choice is the 1935 Wagner Act 

in the United States. The Wagner Act was established to end the 

recognition disputes that were crippling the manufacturing, 

mining, and other sectors in the United States. Those battles 

were waged by workers attempting to convince their employers 

to recognize that they had freely chosen to belong to a trade 

union and bargain collectively. Indeed part of the historical 

watershed leading up to the passage of the Wagner Act also 

occurred in Canada with the Winnipeg general strike of 1919, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

These disputes were often violent and resulted in the death of 

workers who were simply fighting for the right to be unionized. 

Other Saskatchewan examples, such as the Estevan coal miners‟ 

strike and the Regina Riot, also come to mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These disputes of the last century grew in intensity across North 

America. Employers routinely called upon the state to pass laws 

making unions illegal and, in extreme cases, demanded that 

local governments provide police and/or troops to put down the 

strikers and protesters. Quite often governments were drawn 

into that abuse of authority. 

 

After years of strife, the Government of the United States of 

America was moved to put an end to the most obvious 

discriminatory and disruptive features of the imbalance of 

power between employers and workers by proclaiming the 

Wagner Act — which acknowledged the right of workers to 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

join a trade union of their choice by a card majority system, as 

Saskatchewan‟s trade union Act currently provides — and to 

require that that decision to be recognized by the employer. 

 

The Wagner Act included the right to bargain collectively as a 

companion of the right to join and be represented by a union. 

And it created a set of rules — for example, unfair labour 

practices, etc. — that protected workers in their unions from 

coercive, unlawful actions by employers. 

 

For reasons similar to our cousins south of the 49th parallel, in 

1943 the Government of Canada through Privy Council order 

PC1003 adopted the principles of the US [United States] 

Wagner Act in relation to worker‟s rights to unionize and 

bargain collectively. Somewhat later in the 1960s these 

principles became the foundation of the Canada Labour Code, 

which continues in place today, not withstanding alternating 

Conservative and Liberal governments over the years since. 

 

In June 1945 the Government of Saskatchewan became the first 

provincial jurisdiction in Canada to adopt labour legislation 

modelled on the Wagner Act in the US and PC1003 at our 

federal level of government. The principles surrounding the 

right to join a union for the purposes of bargaining collectively 

with an employer by signing a union card and having those 

expressions of majority support certified by a neutral Labour 

Relations Board, free from employer interference or coercion, 

became the law in Saskatchewan and have remained the law for 

more than 62 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Trade Union Act of Saskatchewan as it stands is a good 

and durable piece of legislation that has facilitated the 

unionization of approximately 35 per cent of the labour force in 

the province. Union density numbers as measured by Statistics 

Canada places Saskatchewan as about the national average. Is 

this a problem for the Premier‟s government? And if so, Mr. 

Speaker, why? 

 

I would like to examine the sections of The Trade Union Act, 

that the Sask Party government is proposing to amend. Bill 6, 

An Act to amend The Trade Union Act: 

 

Section 6 amended 

3(1) Subsection 6(1) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(1) Subject to subsections (1.1) and (2), in determining 

what trade union, if any, represents a majority of 

employees and an appropriate unit of employees, in 

addition to the exercise of any powers conferred upon it by 

section 18, the board must direct a vote to be taken by 

secret ballet of all employees eligible to vote to determine 

the question.” 

 

Since the passage of the first trade union Act of Saskatchewan 

in 1945, working people in this province have had the ability to 

show majority support for a union becoming their collective 

bargaining agent by signing application for union membership 

cards or forms, Mr. Speaker. This is the worker‟s own business 

and it is usually conducted away from the workplace on the 

worker‟s own time, free from the potential of reproach of their 

employer. 

 

The evidence of employee support in the form of union cards is 

submitted to the Labour Relations Board by the union in 

question. The board in turn carefully scrutinizes and weighs its 

submitted evidence to ensure that it is genuine and legitimate. 

Only after it is satisfied that the evidence of support submitted 

by the applicant union truly reflects the wishes of the majority 

of employees in an appropriate bargaining unit, and only after 

giving the subject employer an opportunity to respond with the 

Labour Relations Board issue, a certification order granting the 

union the status of being the employees‟ sole collective 

bargaining agent. 

 

Furthermore in the lead up to a union‟s application for 

certification, employees who have a change of heart have the 

ability to revoke their membership, and these revocations are 

deducted from the union‟s evidence of support, Mr. Speaker. 

The process now in place is a system with very careful checks 

and balances that is well understood by all stakeholders. Not a 

scintilla of evidence or fact has been advanced to support doing 

away with a solid and reliable practice built up more than over 

60 years. Bill No. 6, however, through it‟s proposed changes to 

section 6 of The Trade Union Act, seeks to undo more than 60 

years of solid, democratic practice and policy in Saskatchewan. 

 

I ask why, since what has evolved in Saskatchewan is also the 

long-standing practice in the majority of jurisdictions in this 

great nation. For example in the federal jurisdiction, the Canada 

Labour Code operates in much the same manner as the 

Saskatchewan Trade Union Act in relation to applications for 

union certification. The federal system, in this connection, has 

been in place for 65 years, and neither Liberal nor Conservative 

federal governments have messed with the essential ingredient 

of balanced labour laws. 

 

The dishonest claim by the members opposite that they are 

trying to make things more democratic simply does not hold up 

to scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. In addition by trying to lead the public 

to believe that this change is simply in keeping with the 

majority of the jurisdictions in Canada is patently false, Mr. 

Speaker. The facts are that today in Canada, the provinces of 

Saskatchewan, Quebec, and Prince Edward Island have a 

certification system that recognizes majority card support with a 

threshold set at 50 per cent plus one — a simple majority 

support system for certification. 

 

As I said earlier, the Government of Canada has the same 

system as provided in the Canada Labour Code. Yukon, 

Nunavut, and the Northwest Territories all rely on the Canada 

Labour Code for the administration of their industrial relations 

and therefore also have a majority card support system in place 

for certification. Manitoba grants certifications on the basis of 

65 per cent card support, and New Brunswick at 60 per cent. 

While Newfoundland and Labrador have a system requiring a 

vote, it is not absolutely mandatory as the employer and the 

union can agree that no vote is required, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I want to touch on this particular topic a little further. But first 

let‟s count the number of jurisdictions in this country that rely 

on union support evidence to grant certification orders when 

that support has shown to be sufficient in each jurisdiction. It 

seems that fully nine out of the possible 14 jurisdictions in this 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

nation rely on support evidence and support evidence only as a 

basis for ordering certification of an applicant union. 

 

Only Ontario, British Columbia, Nova Scotia, and Alberta — a 

minority in terms of Canadian jurisdictions — require 

mandatory votes, but it is important to note that Ontario allows 

for card check certification in the construction industry with 

support evidence of 55 per cent. So really only three 

jurisdictions out of the possible 14 in Canada have a mandatory 

vote system. 

 

It is equally important to note that the majority of those 

provinces — specifically Ontario, British Columbia, and Nova 

Scotia — allow for the granting of remedial certifications when 

the employer has been found guilty of an unfair labour practice, 

Mr. Speaker. The amendments introduced by the Sask Party 

government do not even allow for any kind of legitimate 

balance such as a remedial certification order. 

 

The three jurisdictions that require mandatory votes but also 

provide for remedial certifications are not the only jurisdictions 

that provide for remedial certifications in the face of illegal 

interference with employee rights by an employer. Manitoba, 

New Brunswick, Quebec, and Canada, which would also 

include the Northwest Territories, Yukon, and Nunavut also 

provide for remedial certifications, Mr. Speaker. If this 

government is actually doing what it claims and is attempting to 

bring Saskatchewan‟s labour legislation up to the standards of 

the majority of the jurisdictions, then why was this 

commonplace provision not included in Bill No. 6? Ten 

jurisdictions do. 

 

I will tell you why, Mr. Speaker — because the Sask Party 

government is not looking to balance labour legislation and 

ensure fairness, nor is the government looking to further 

democratize Saskatchewan‟s labour legislation. Instead of 

making it even easier for working people to realize their right to 

be represented by a union of their choice, this government is 

moving to tilt the balance that already exists way over to the 

right. If this government gets its way — and we now know what 

the Premier thinks of consultation as a result of his comments 

reported in the March 8, 2008 edition of the Regina 

Leader-Post — working people and the unions they choose will 

find it virtually impossible to obtain a new certification order 

again in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The amendments to The Trade Union Act tabled in this House 

are nothing short of an attack on trade unions and the right of 

employees to join or organize unions of their choosing for the 

purpose of bargaining collectively with their employer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The right to unionize is sanctified in section 3 of The Trade 

Union Act and the proposed amendments to section 6 severely 

restrict and probably remove that right altogether. It is no 

wonder therefore that this government summarily fired the 

Chair and Vice-Chairs of the Labour Relations Board without 

cause, an action that has attracted the attention of national 

media, and by the way, not in a positive way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government knew that, as responsible adjudicators, the 

now former Chair and Vice-Chairs of the Labour Relations 

Board would have had to try and make sense of the 

government‟s misdirected dictates flowing out of Bill 6. In 

reality, Mr. Speaker, this government is proposing to introduce 

chaos and conflict into a labour relations system that has 

functioned well in the service of all stakeholders. The 

government‟s actions around Bill 6 and the firing of the Chair 

and Vice-Chairs of the Labour Relations Board give me cause 

to ask, Mr. Speaker, whether the Premier‟s transitional kingpin, 

Mr. Doug Emsley, had an axe to grind with the Labour 

Relations Board. Has he, Mr. Speaker, ever been a party to an 

application for certification, Mr. Speaker? The public deserves 

to know the details to the answer to this question. 

 

To go back to the legislation of Newfoundland and Labrador for 

a moment, I notice that the members opposite find it absolutely 

incomprehensible that employers would agree to not hold a 

vote. Clearly they didn‟t do their homework or bother to 

investigate the real labour relations climate in this country. 

 

Certainly it is clear that they paid it no heed when it came to 

gutting the law in Saskatchewan. If they had done any 

investigation they would have found that the current system in 

Saskatchewan grants uncontested certifications on a regular 

basis. What that means is that employers are not objecting to a 

certification application, questioning the level of support that 

the union enjoys, or challenging the bargaining unit description. 

They are satisfied that the board will determine if the union has 

a majority support and do not object to their employees 

becoming members of a union. To be sure, Mr. Speaker, there 

are occasionally hotly contested applications for certification. 

Wal-Mart, for example, comes to mind. But this government 

wants to take away the right of employers who respect their 

employees‟ right to unionize by imposing an absolute, 

state-dictated regime of compulsory voting even when an 

independent tribunal has bona fide evidence that a majority of 

employees want a union to represent them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government wants to impose its will on 

workers and employers by introducing a disruptive system of 

voting that requires the employer to provide a place to vote on 

the work premises and have that vote conducted during work 

hours. I had thought that this government‟s agenda was about 

growth and increased productivity, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I ask 

the minister responsible to explain how productivity improves 

when the employer is required to interrupt production to 

conduct a vote when that same employer doesn‟t even object on 

any level to the union‟s application for certification. Why, Mr. 

Speaker, is this government unnecessarily burdening employers 

and stripping them of the right to consent to the union‟s 

application? 

 

Further to that there are sectors of this province‟s economy that 

simply cannot accommodate the government‟s interference as 

contemplated in Bill 6 with their operations. I speak specifically 

of the industries that rely on the hiring halls such as the film and 

construction industries. Let me start with the film industry, an 

industry I have a fair bit of familiarity with as the former 

minister of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 

 

When a movie or a TV series shoot is under way, each day 

carries a very hefty price tag, Mr. Speaker. The producers — 

the employers — require the skill, knowledge, and experience 

of the members of the International Association of Theatre and 

Stage Employees, IATSE, to get the job done. Today in 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

Saskatchewan the union signs up a majority and as I understand 

it, that majority really comprises pretty much all of the crew 

and makes an application to the board for certification. These 

applications are not usually contested by the employers, the 

producers in this case. 

 

Now this government has, under the much ballyhooed moniker 

of democracy, decided that production must come to a halt so 

that a vote can be conducted. The vote will yield the same 

results. The union will be certified but at a great cost and 

inconvenience to the employer. The same scenario plays out in 

the construction industry, Mr. Speaker. I ask again for the 

minister to explain why his government believes that it is in the 

public interest to create such an onerous regime that is 

unwanted, unnecessary, and unproductive. 

 

As I indicated earlier, Ontario has seen the error of the 

mandatory vote system in this industry and replaced it with a 

card check system that requires 55 per cent majority support to 

obtain certification. Alberta‟s construction industry is in major 

crisis with Charter challenges and labour disputes looming. 

British Columbia is also fraught with problems. These, Mr. 

Speaker, are the footprints to prosperity, but instead recipes for 

disaster. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, how is it justifiable to conduct a 

vote? Again, keep in mind the burden put on employers when a 

union has applied for certification with a majority support, all 

the way up to 100 per cent support, Mr. Speaker. It just doesn‟t 

make sense. 

 

How is it justifiable to undertake the expense of sending 

someone — perhaps an employee of the Labour Relations 

Board or maybe a crony of the Premier‟s — to a workplace 

somewhere in Saskatchewan to conduct a vote when a majority 

of employees — all the way up to 100 per cent of the 

employees — have signed support evidence to express their 

wishes to join a union, Mr. Speaker? It just doesn‟t make sense. 

 

This whole regime will be as costly for taxpayers and about as 

sensible as the ill-conceived plan to change the province‟s logo. 

They haven‟t thought it through, Mr. Speaker. And to tell you 

the truth, it seems they haven‟t put much thought into it at all. 

But then of course, all of these issues could be canvassed 

through a consultative process involving stakeholders if this 

government wasn‟t so hell-bent on putting their footprint on 

labour relations in the province. 

 

Maybe this Bill should be renamed the Brad Wal-Mart Bill, 

since that employer, just like this government, seems intent on 

stopping employees from unionizing in order to preserve its low 

wage and corporate grip on its workplaces. 

 

Cheap labour, cheap practices, and no rights for workers. Is that 

what the new West means to the Premier and his colleagues, 

Mr. Speaker? Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, this legislation should 

be renamed the Brad Wal-Mart Bill, an Act to ensure that 

workers in the new West are prevented from joining a union of 

their choice. 

 

The members opposite may feel chaffed, but I suggest this is 

because it hits too close to home, Mr. Speaker. I read recently a 

critique of Bill 6 written by Dr. S. Muthu, professor emeritus in 

the Faculty of Business Administration at the University of 

Regina. Dr. Muthu‟s field of specialization is industrial 

relations, business ethics, and administrative law. Dr. Muthu 

takes a look at the impact of Wal-Mart‟s corporate agenda and 

on the rights of employees, and references a well-known study 

done by Roy J. Adam which concluded that: 

 

The entry into Canada of aggressively anti-union 

employers such as Wal-Mart may have emboldened 

employers to take stronger positions on union avoidance. 

 

Dr. Muthu goes further, and I quote: 

 

Wal-Mart has been pushing for . . . [the] end to the 

card-check certification . . . and the adoption in all 

Canadian jurisdictions of a vote in every certification 

[case] to rebalance the power between organized labour 

and employers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a good cause to refer to Bill 6 as the Brad 

Wal-Mart Bill since the Premier is in lockstep with Wal-Mart‟s 

stated corporate vision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before turning to the other aspects of the Bill, I 

would suggest that this government is showing a distinct lack of 

confidence in the newly appointed chairperson of the Labour 

Relations Board since they propose to take away the 

discretionary authority of the board to determine if the support 

evidence filed with an application for certification is sufficient 

to certify a union. 

 

I do not want to be unfair to Mr. Love, as he deserves a chance 

to show his mettle, even though my colleagues and I profoundly 

disagree with this government‟s hypocritical and unprecedented 

intervention in the composition and workings of the 

Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board. But the notion of 

fairness, Mr. Speaker, also leads me to ask whether the seven 

times or so that Mr. Love has appeared before the Labour 

Relations Board leaves this government with a level of 

uncertainly as to his experience, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I read Mr. Love‟s biography with some interest, Mr. Speaker, 

particularly his representation of employees before the Labour 

Relations Board. Here is something I found very interesting, 

and I quote from the document. Quote: 

 

One of his cases before the board led to the inclusion in 

The Trade Union Act of the duty of fair representation, 

which the board recognized as a duty to be imposed upon 

trade unions under common law in Saskatchewan. Since 

that decision, this duty was also recognized by the 

legislature and included in The Trade Union Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was curious more and so I undertook some 

research on this groundbreaking, law-making case. But I could 

not find any reference whatsoever to a case involving the duty 

of fair representation presented by Mr. Love. 

 

In fact, the first case which, before the board was Doris 

Simpson versus United Garment Workers of America and dated 

May 27, 1980. In that decision, the following is stated, quote: 

 

The applicant alleges an unfair labour practice against the 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

union by reason of the union‟s failure to fairly represent 

her by filing a grievance with respect to dismissal from 

employment by her employer, G.W.G Ltd. 

 

The applicant raises an issue not yet decided in 

Saskatchewan: whether, in the absence of any specific 

provision in The Trade Union Act, unions are subject to a 

duty of fair representation to their members. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The chairman of the board at that time was N.W. — and I‟m 

going to have a problem with this name — Sherstobitoff. 

Sherstobitoff is the expertise on this side — Q.C. [Queen‟s 

Counsel], a well-respected adjudicator and now a justice of the 

Court of Appeal. While the application was dismissed, there 

was a finding that the common law principles of duty of fair 

representation have a place in the Act. The applicant was 

represented by E. Holgate. 

 

Subsequent to that decision, another application was filed on 

the subject of duty of fair representation wherein the Simpson 

case was used as a template for determining the board authority. 

The case was decided again by Justice Sherstobitoff, wherein 

there was no finding in support of the applicant but the concept 

of duty of fair representation was upheld. The decision is dated 

June 17, 1982 and the applicant was represented by Gwen Gray, 

a former chairperson of the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act was amended in 1983 to include the duty 

of fair representation in The Trade Union Act, and a number of 

applications have followed. What I did not find on this 

historical tour of the duty of fair representation was a case in 

front of the board that was argued by Mr. Love. I would like the 

Minister Responsible for Labour to provide that decision to the 

House or to myself so that this House and the public can be 

assured that the qualifications and competencies of Mr. Love 

have not been misrepresented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Love may be as capable a legal practitioner as 

I‟m sure he was a very capable constituency vice-president for 

the Minister for Government Relations‟ constituency 

association. Given that, if this government has confidence in 

Mr. Love‟s abilities, why would it write a labour relations script 

so tight as to render the job of the Chair of the Labour Relations 

Board to be something tantamount to being the chief clerk 

responsible for stopping employees from unionizing? All I ask 

and raise issue with before going on to the practical problems 

with this amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Turning to the question of representation votes, Mr. Speaker, 

when one looks at the four examples of the mandatory vote 

legislative regimes, one finds practical guidelines that assist the 

parties in understanding the transparency of the process. The 

conducting of votes is a serious undertaking and is done in an 

expeditious manner. 

 

Rather than going into the full details of the four jurisdictions 

already mentioned, I‟m going to focus on the legislation and 

practice of British Columbia, since that appears to be the source 

of parts of the amendments that the Sask Party government has 

introduced. 

 

Section 24 of the BC Labour Relations Code not only requires 

the union to have at least 45 per cent support evidence to apply 

for and satisfy the board to order a vote; it also provides that the 

vote will be conducted within 10 days from the date the board 

receives the application for certification. In fact section 24 of 

the BC code provides for a second vote if less than 55 per cent 

of eligible employees cast ballots. 

 

The practice guidelines of the British Columbia Labour 

Relations Board trade union certification process, which is on 

the BC board‟s website, outline the following procedures when 

applications for certification are received. Number one, notice 

of the application is received by the employer, and the employer 

is required to post it for five consecutive working days. Number 

two, an investigation takes place wherein the employer‟s 

payroll records and the union‟s evidence of support are 

examined. Membership support is kept confidential to the 

board. Number three, a report with confidential information 

dealing with membership information is provided to the board 

and a vote is tentatively scheduled. Number four, a hearing is 

scheduled seven or eight days after the receipt of the application 

by the board and limits the issues, the objections that an 

employer may want to raise. 

 

By the way, that means unless it is a question of jurisdiction, 

federal or provincial, the objections are limited to (a) is the 

applicant a trade union as defined in the code; (b) is the group 

applied for appropriate; (c) is there the necessary support to 

have a vote ordered and counted. 

 

Going on to the point number five, a without-prejudice and 

formal meeting with an officer of the board and any agreements 

reached in that meeting are binding. 

 

Bearing in mind, my remarks about the balanced and fair 

approach that the Saskatchewan Trade Union Act has provided 

for approximately 62 years, at least, Mr. Speaker, the approach 

to union certification set out in the BC Labour Relations Code 

has a rational, understandable, and straightforward approach to 

its process. 

 

I see nothing of the sort in Bill No. 6, and it is maybe because 

the Sask Party government‟s approach is not rational or 

straightforward, but it will be understood to be the anti-union 

mishmash that it is. It may be that employers will object to the 

examination of their payroll records. It appears to be the 

simplest method of ascertaining the relevant information and 

the facts. 

 

In the BC code‟s regime, which we do not endorse, Mr. 

Speaker, at least scheduling an early hearing of a union 

certification application and limiting the scope of the employer 

objections that can be raised at the hearing ensures to some 

degree that the employees‟ wishes are respected and dealt with 

in an expeditious manner. 

 

The BC legislature took the steps it followed after reviewing the 

recommendations for labour law put together by a 

subcommittee of special advisors before the legislation was 

drafted. This is a point I want to highlight, Mr. Speaker, and I 

want to highlight that important factor because the importance 

of meaningful consultation has been entirely rejected by this 

government. In fact the Premier thumbed his nose at 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

consultation with experts from the stakeholder groups by 

declaring that it is more important to do what his government 

thinks is right even though they have no actual experience in 

this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the government, Premier‟s government 

did consult people they believed to be experts in labour 

relations. And if so, who are they, Mr. Speaker? Will he tell the 

Assembly? Will they come out from the shadows and out of the 

backrooms, Mr. Speaker? 

 

With all due respect, Mr. Speaker, I think the current 

government‟s attitude and approach shows contempt for the 

people of this province, not the least of whom are the well over 

100,000 people who already belong to unions. Shame on a 

government that would exclude the very stakeholders it said 

should be consulted when the Sask Party sat on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. Shame on the Sask Party government in a 

modern society that governs in a high-handed, paternalistic, 

dictatorial way, closing their ears and their doors and their 

minds to meaningful exchanges with the people affected. 

Shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite raised the roof on the issues of 

transparency, accountability, and public consultation when they 

were in opposition. But now when they have formed 

government, they have forgotten their own words, Mr. Speaker. 

It is another example of the worrisome characteristic of saying 

one thing but actually doing another. And that started on the 

first day of this government‟s administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as I was saying, although British Columbia went in a 

direction that I would not advocate in Saskatchewan, they did 

understand the importance of dealing with the question of union 

representation vote in a timely manner. We see nothing of that 

kind in terms of a consideration of Bill 6, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is well established in labour relations boards‟ 

decisions from across the country and the continent, and it is 

well established by the courts, including the Supreme Court, 

that creating a climate in which employees can exercise their 

right to freely join a union without interference by the employer 

is an essential ingredient to enabling working people to realize 

those aspirations and gain their rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, labour case law is chockablock with cases of 

employer interference, and the prohibition of employer 

interference is evident by the unfair labour practice sections in 

the current trade union Acts or codes of every jurisdiction in 

this nation. It is present in the national labour relations board 

Act in the United States as well. If you recall, it was one of the 

founding principles articulated in the Wagner Act that I spoke 

of earlier. And those principles have been copied by legislators 

throughout North America. I will get into this a little deeper 

when I get to section 11 amendments. 

 

I want this government‟s assurance, the stakeholders that I have 

spoken with want this government‟s assurance, and the 

members of the loyal opposition, Mr. Speaker, certainly want 

assurance that the minister is going to provide and describe for 

the benefit of this Assembly the substance of how this piece of 

legislation is going to be administered in relation to the 

mandatory certification votes it proposes to dictate. 

I recommend that Bill No. 6 in its entirety and any 

accompanying regulations be referred to a committee of 

experts, with employer and unionized labour representation to 

hold public meetings, meet with the stakeholders, and form 

recommendations. Mr. Speaker, such a step would enable 

members of the Assembly to hear from and probe the thinking 

and experience of stakeholders as well as other interested 

parties. Let‟s get all of the government‟s intentions out into 

light of day for the community to comment on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To leave all of the questions and concerns unanswered in 

relation to the amendments being proposed to section 6 of the 

current trade union Act is unconscionable, Mr. Speaker. 

Furthermore to leave everything this government proposes to do 

in Bill 6 to be subject to unseen, yet-to-be-drafted or hidden 

regulations, made behind closed doors in secret — much like 

occurred with the drafting of these amendments — without the 

assurance of scrutiny of genuine stakeholder consultation, 

reminds me of the Court of the Star Chamber at a time that 

predates the Magna Carta. These are not the actions of a 

democratic government or of a government that claims to 

adhere to the principles of transparency and accountability, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery 

joining us to listen to some of the debates, people who have an 

interest in the amendments and the legislation that is being put 

forward and the debates that are here, we have with us Rosalee 

Longmoore, president of Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, and 

Donna Trainor, executive director of Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses. I ask all members in the Assembly to welcome these 

two residents of Saskatchewan, trade unionists, and leaders of 

unions to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Ross: — I would also like to welcome the two . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You have to ask leave. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Sorry. May I ask leave please? 

 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley 

has asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

too would also like to join in welcoming two very esteemed 

members of our nursing profession, and it is a pleasure to have 

them in the House, and thank you very much for their 

attendance. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. So 

furthermore to leave, to leave everything this government 

proposes to do, to do in Bill No. 6, to be subject to unseen yet to 

be drafted or hidden regulations made behind closed doors in 

secret, much like occurred with the drafting of these 

amendments, without the assurance of scrutiny of genuine 

stakeholder consultations, reminds me of the Court of Star 

Chamber and a time that predates the Magna Carta. These are 

not the actions of a democratic government or of a government 

that claims to adhere to the principles of transparency and 

accountability. 

 

We heard enough from them on these subjects when they were 

in opposition, Mr. Speaker, and as a result maybe Saskatchewan 

voters were fooled into believing that the Premier and his 

colleagues actually meant what they said. It now appears that 

they didn‟t adhere to the convictions they claimed for even 100 

days. 

 

A cautionary note, Mr. Speaker, in relation to another reality, 

the fact is that in certain sectors many workplaces today have 

significant part-time employee contingents. And when a 

workplace is made up of a significant portion of part-time 

employees — say for example 45 per cent — some of them 

may not see a notice to vote, which is essential information. The 

right to be informed of a vote in which you are entitled to 

participate is a natural justice issue, Mr. Speaker. It is of 

paramount concern when establishing the framework for 

democratic elections. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Going back to the BC example — which this government seems 

to be drawing on at least for its ideological inspiration if not for 

any part of the procedural or consultative considerations that 

went into that province‟s revisions to labour legislation — if 

there are allegations of an unfair labour practice or practices, 

then the BC Labour Relations Board will hear those at the same 

time as the hearing for certification if they are related, as they 

most often are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in its context, the BC approach seems to make 

sense, but as I understand it, that can sometimes delay decision 

from the board. So the BC practice is clear in that the 

representation vote is conducted within 10 days of the 

application of certification, notwithstanding delays over unfair 

labour practice complaint decisions. When this kind of situation 

occurs in BC, Mr. Speaker — and many times it does — the 

vote is conducted on a tentative voters list as is in the case in a 

situation when the employer challenges the appropriateness of 

the bargaining unit description. As a result, ballot boxes are 

sealed and securely stored by the board. In some instances 

ballot boxes that have been securely stored are now gathering 

dust. Employees‟ wishes are not counted. 

 

These cases, while not the majority, do occur and continue to 

occur in a framework that has a methodology provided in the 

statutory provisions of the legislation in addition to correctly 

developed regulations and policies based on recommendations 

of a subcommittee of advisers struck and mandated to examine 

the issues. The analysis provided by well-researched and 

consultative committees guides adjudicators in interpreting new 

or amended pieces of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the Bill before this Assembly, all we have is the 

dictate of a compulsory representation vote. This Bill is devoid 

of any of the procedural mechanics or considerations that would 

emerge from a process whereby experts and practitioners, 

unions, and employers could consult and advise as to proper 

methods that take into account the rights of the parties to an 

application for union certification. This is a serious and 

egregious flaw that will not be explained away by any of the 

bluster we‟ve witnessed thus far from the Minister Responsible 

for Labour or from the Premier. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier and his posse of 

unnamed advisers set out to hang the right to unionize from the 

nearest tree, they might have been better served and thereby 

have better served the people of Saskatchewan by first taking 

time to consider the rule of law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while there are some aspects of Bill 6 that seem to 

be borrowed from the legislation in BC, the pieces the 

government has cut and pasted are either ill-fitting or 

ill-considered. This is a problem, Mr. Speaker, and I predict 

will come home to roost on that hanging tree the Premier and 

his posse are eyeing up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, grabbing a piece of legislation from here or there, 

at least drawing on what appears to be jurisdictions in the new 

West and slamming them into the current legislation, may 

explain why Bill 6 is contradictory to the purpose and intent of 

many of the sections of the current trade union Act. 

 

It leaves me thinking, Mr. Speaker, that if Calgary is the heart 

of the Premier‟s new West rapture, then surely BC was looked 

upon as the brains. But what does that leave as Saskatchewan‟s 

role, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I find it more than passing strange that it was the scant days 

before this legislative session began that this government fired 



April 14, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

all of the adjudicative employees of the Labour Relations 

Board. Perhaps as government they are not concerned, Mr. 

Speaker, about the nuts and bolts of these amendments, because 

they have fired all of the seasoned adjudicators and put in one 

of their own. And although the intention was to — without due 

process — appoint a Vice-Chair, the people of this province 

have demanded that a fair hiring process be used. The public 

demanded an open hiring process, an accountable hiring 

process, and a transparent hiring process. 

 

While I believe that we may end up having an illusion of that, 

members of the opposition are prepared to reserve on that for a 

moment. 

 

Now maybe they can dictate what the law will be for a time, 

and put their man in place as the new sheriff to make sure it is 

applied consistent with their right-wing ideology, but then it 

begs the question of whether this government‟s idea of the new 

West is really synonymous with the Wild West. 

 

The labour relations community, and indeed any Labour 

Relations Board charged with administering new legislation or 

regulations, would be well and better served by having a 

thorough understanding of the intent of the legislation. All 

concerned would benefit from additional information, from 

actual consultation, and ultimately from recommendations that 

emerge from a credible and balanced stakeholder committee. 

 

Careful deliberation and thoughtful consultations that are open 

and accessible is how credible and enduring public policy is 

built, Mr. Speaker. What possible harm can come to the 

government from doing things in a reasonable, credible 

manner? What is the rush, Mr. Speaker? Where is the fire? 

What spectre is haunting the Premier and his colleagues? Is it 

the spectre of trade unionism that turns their new West dream 

into a nightmare, Mr. Speaker? Wild swings of the pendulum 

do not create sound public policy. The kind of lurch to the far 

right that Bill 6 exemplifies smacks of political payoff and 

short-sighted dogma. 

 

Now I want to be fair, Mr. Speaker, and say that everyone can 

understand that a new government with no prior experience will 

make mistakes. And if they are honest mistakes, we can forgive 

and correct them, Mr. Speaker. But no one will be inclined to 

forgive or forget ideological pigheadedness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I implore the government not to take 

Saskatchewan down a labour relations road rife with 

divisiveness and discontent. Our province and our people are on 

a path to prosperity. I implore this government not to mess up 

our province‟s growth and security by creating an unstable, 

confrontational labour relations regime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we now have a stable industrial relations climate 

that is dependable and predictable. There is no cause for the 

amendments or the mischief they will create for working 

people. While there may be a few in the business community 

who advocate that it is now time to get theirs, I think they 

detract from the many who have invested, built businesses, and 

established good relations with the unions their employees have 

chosen. 

 

There wasn‟t and there isn‟t now any public outcry calling for 

the repeal and dismantling of the card check system 

underpinning the certification process of the current trade union 

Act. The system we have is well respected and recognized in 

laws that have been scrutinized by the courts. No court has 

found this system to be wanting or unfair or unclear or 

unreasonable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, history is replete with sorrowful examples of the 

social discord and material loss wrought by political leaders 

who claim to know better than the people. And I can assure my 

friends opposite, when the people of this great province have 

had their fill of the ideological binge represented by this 

government — one that is as short-sighted as it will be 

short-lived — a new government will be elected and we will 

restore labour relations law back to its present trusted and just 

balance. The legislation as it stands today is consistent with the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms on the question of card 

majority system, and it does not stand alone in the adjudication 

and administration of the certification process for trade unions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no court has held that the current legislation 

hinders or harms the true free expression of choice for 

employees to belong or not to belong to a trade union. The 

amendments proposed in Bill 6 are frivolous and vexatious and 

do nothing to enhance productivity or continue to enhance a 

stable labour environment or sound industrial relations. 

 

Without a sound reason for the amendments, without any good 

cause or reasonable justification and absent of any competent 

explanation as to why these amendments are needed, there is 

but one conclusion to draw, and that is a negative inference. 

And the inference is that Bill 6 is an attack on working people 

and the organizations that represent them, Mr. Speaker. It is 

simply an attack on the rights of workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as for the second amendment to The Trade Union 

Act: 

 

“(1.1) No vote shall be directed pursuant to subsection (1) 

unless the board is satisfied, on the basis of the evidence 

submitted in support of the application and the board‟s 

investigation in respect of that evidence, that at the time of 

the application at least 45% of the employees in the 

appropriate unit support the application. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a moment on the 45 per cent 

threshold which the government proposes to define, the 

threshold required for a certification vote. Once again, I want to 

place it in the context of the other jurisdictions in Canada. 

 

Alberta, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and 

Labrador, Nova Scotia, and Ontario all have a threshold of 40 

per cent. Quebec and Canada, which includes the Yukon, 

Northwest Territories, and Nunavut, all have a threshold of 35 

per cent. Prince Edward Island doesn‟t have a threshold but 

leaves it to the board‟s discretion. Only one province in Canada, 

only one province in Canada has a threshold of 45 per cent, and 

that is British Columbia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is this government intending to burden 

the province with unjustified interference against the rights of 

employees on the question of unionization, not only is this an 

undemocratic proposition but it‟s a falsely democratic system 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2008 

which will be played out at the expense of employers and 

taxpayers. What the Premier‟s government proposes is a system 

modelled after one lone province that has a threshold for 

support evidence set at 45 per cent. In a jurisdictional 

comparison, British Columbia stands alone with the highest 

threshold of any of the other 13 jurisdictions in Canada. Perhaps 

it‟s because of the mountains that they thought that they would 

be the highest; one doesn‟t know. 

 

By far the most common threshold is 40 per cent for requiring a 

representation vote, leaving aside for the moment the debate 

about card majority evidence and certification. So I question 

this government‟s desire to simply, quote: “bring Saskatchewan 

into line with other jurisdictions.” That is not the evidence in 

the public domain nor before the House, Mr. Speaker. If the 

government was true to its words the threshold would have 

been set at 40 per cent. And I say this notwithstanding my 

party‟s firm belief that these amendments are unnecessary since 

there is nothing in the present Act‟s determination of the 

majority threshold that needs fixing anyways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact remains that the Sask Party government is not 

concerned with aligning other province‟s labour laws with the 

rest of Canada but instead it appears that these amendments 

come from a much darker and dogmatic desire to stem 

successful union organizing and eventually severely limit or 

eradicate trade unions altogether from this province. 

 

This government wants to make the smiley face of Wal-Mart 

even happier, Mr. Speaker. It is not just the illusion of prices 

falling that is the stated corporate goal of Wal-Mart, but the 

falling rates of unionization that they really desire. The Premier 

is happily facilitating that for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We now know that the Premier and his government do not 

always believe in cheap labour, especially when it comes to 

their friends, Mr. Speaker. We now know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

new Chair of the Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board will be 

paid a salary of $180,000 per year, which I am told is a $60,000 

per year increase. Mr. Speaker, is this the value-add that the 

Premier talks about when he‟s questioned on various issues of 

the province? 

 

Now I have no problem with this, Mr. Speaker, with paying 

good salaries to civil servants. But the key here is, nothing new 

is being produced. No additional duties have been assigned, no 

increased workload or responsibilities — in fact nothing that 

justifies the astronomical increase, except for perhaps payback 

to a loyal supporter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is attempting to justify their 

actions in tabling these amendments in a manner that appears to 

be as innocuous as modernization or housekeeping. But it 

seems plain to me that the real motivation is to install their 

friends and enshrine a piece of legislation designed to limit the 

freedom of association that is entrenched with the Canadian 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. They also herald this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Being the agreed time of recess, this 

Assembly stands recessed until 6 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 18:00.] 



 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 817 

  Schriemer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 845 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 874 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 817 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 817 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 817 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Skills Canada Competition Winners  

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 817 

 Adopt a Member of the Legislative Assembly  

  Schriemer .................................................................................................................................................................................. 818 

 North Saskatoon Business Association Discusses Bills 5 and 6 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 818 

 MacKenzie Art Gallery Art in Bloom Event  

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 818 

 Methadone Assisted Recovery Program Graduation  

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 819 

 Constituents Receive Samuel McLeod Legacy Award 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 819 

 Scott Collegiate Dinner Theatre  

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 819 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Revenue Sharing With Municipalities  

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 819 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 820 

 Funding for School Divisions  

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 821 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 821 

 Confidential Documents 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 822 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 822 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 823 

 Essential Services Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 823 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 823 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Volunteers Recognized During Victims of Crime Awareness Week  

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 825 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 825 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 27 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard  

  D‟Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 825 

 Bill No. 28 — The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 826 

 Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l‟éducation  

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 826 

 Bill No. 30 — The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act  

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 826 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 826 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 827 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 5 — The Public Service Essential Services Act 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 827 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 833 



 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 838 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 848 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 855 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 861 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 865 

 Bill No. 6 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 865 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 




