




















































Hansard: March 10, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 9A  MONDAY, MARCH 10, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 221 

 March 10, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

stand today to introduce three students who are articling with 

the Ministry of Justice. They are Adam Breker who is from 

Saskatoon, Leslie Dawson and Lee Hnatiuk from Swift Current. 

 

Mr. Hnatiuk indicates that he hasn’t met the MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] from there, but he has heard good 

things about him. Mr. Breker has worked on one of the Bills 

that will be introduced later today. They are here today 

observing proceedings from the Speaker’s gallery. They are 

joined by Lee Anne Schienbein, executive assistant to the 

deputy minister of Justice. 

 

Adam, Leslie, and Lee are all graduates of the University of 

Saskatchewan College of Law. These students began their 

articles in June 2007 and are being exposed to a diverse and 

challenging articling experience with the Ministry of Justice 

and Attorney General. I am pleased that these individuals are 

interested in public service and have chosen to article with the 

ministry. I’m sure they will find their time with us will equip 

them with general practical knowledge of the justice system and 

how it works to serve Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

Adam, Leslie, and Lee to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce a number of individuals that are involved 

with the midwifery profession. I will have more to say about 

that profession later on today, but I would like to introduce 

Debbie Mpofu, member of the Midwives Association of 

Saskatchewan. If you can just give a wave as I introduce you. 

Thank you. 

 

Sonya Duffee is a member of the Midwives Association of 

Saskatchewan and also a member of the midwives transitional 

council. Ray Joubert is the Chair of the midwives transition 

council. Linda Muzio is a member of the midwifery transition 

council. Karen Pollock is interim executive director and 

registrar of the Saskatchewan College of Midwives. Andy 

Churko is midwife program consultant. Margaret Baker is the 

director, primary health services branch, Ministry of Health. 

Darby Semeniuk is Saskatoon Health Region, communications; 

Debbie Vey, member of the Midwives Association of 

Saskatchewan; and Gail Rosseker, also from the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. 

 

I’d like all members to join me in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly I’d like to introduce some guests in your 

east gallery. Sitting at the back are Gord Campbell, president of 

the Health Care Council of Saskatchewan; Judy Henley, the 

treasurer of health care council; Sinda Cathcart, president of 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] Local 3967. 

Below them, Debbie Hubick, recording secretary of CUPE Sask 

division; Chris Larson, executive member. Lower down, Mike 

Keith, representative with the Canadian Union of Public 

Employees; Erin Morrison, executive assistant to the 

Saskatchewan division of CUPE; and Tom Graham, the 

president of the Saskatchewan division of CUPE. I’d ask all 

members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure, especially in times 

of such financial bounty in the province of Saskatchewan, to 

present a petition on behalf of citizens that by expanding and 

renovating the Moose Jaw Union Hospital, the facility will be 

better positioned for success in retention and recruitment of 

health care professionals and that residents in Moose Jaw and 

the surrounding area will benefit from improved health care and 

improved wait times for surgery. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are signed by residents of the city of 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I humbly submit a petition 

on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these 

petitioners note that with regard to school closures, the Sask 

Party’s actions have not met their promises. They ask the Sask 

Party to live up to their promises . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ll remind the members that a decision 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

was made a number of years ago that we read the prayer and not 

get into a long dialogue on the petition. If the member would 

read the prayer, it would be appreciated. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: —  

 

Therefore the petitioners ask that the Sask Party 

government develop, announce, and implement a plan to 

address school closures. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present several pages 

of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on behalf of the 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning the 

withdrawal of the proposed essential services legislation and the 

withdrawal of the proposed amendments to The Trade Union 

Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Pilot Butte, Strasbourg, 

Indian Head, Watrous, and Regina. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on Saturday, March 8, International Women’s Day 

was celebrated around the world. Canadians have marked 

International Women’s Day by celebrating progress towards 

women’s full participation, reflecting on challenges and barriers 

that remain, and considering future steps to achieving equality 

for all women in all aspects of their lives. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan women fill significant roles, not only in 

our families and our communities, but on the family farm, in 

industry, and in business. Our contributions are considerable. 

Saskatchewan has one of the highest percentages of women 

with children attached to the workforce. We are business 

owners, professionals in all sectors — industrial and retail — 

and volunteers. 

 

The number of women graduating from post-secondary 

institutions is continuing to climb, but we continue to struggle 

with such basic issues as pay equity, child care, and work and 

family balance. We comprise 52 per cent of our population but 

are still under-represented at an elected, executive, or 

decision-making level. 

Progress has been made. It is a day to celebrate, but it’s also a 

day to recommit to the continued progress on issues important 

to women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in acknowledging 

International Women’s Day and the numerous groups around 

the province that plan and host events in their communities to 

celebrate the collective power of women — past, present, and 

future. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

International Women’s Day Marked in Prince Albert 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, each 

year on March 8, Saskatchewan marks International Women’s 

Day and recognizes the importance of equality for women in all 

aspects of society. The day was proclaimed internationally by 

the United Nations in 1975, but it originates in women’s 

activism from the early 1900s. Today it has evolved to provide 

support and recognition for women in all their diversity. 

 

Events will take place throughout the month as communities 

and organizations honour women and work to improve the 

status of women everywhere. Celebration International 

Women’s Day in our province, Mr. Speaker, is a way of 

recognizing how Saskatchewan women contribute to our 

families, communities, and economy in so many ways. 

 

This past Saturday I had the honour of attending the Prince 

Albert Council of Women Hall of Fame ceremony, along with 

Minister Hickie, who brought greetings. Melba Jenkins was 

introduced into the Hall of Fame that day for her volunteerism 

and contributions to the community. 

 

We are proud to be a part of a global community that celebrates 

women and envisions a future in which all women are safe from 

violence and recognized as equal members of society. Mr. 

Speaker, I encourage everyone to take the time to honour the 

women in their lives and ensure that future generations of 

Saskatchewan women have equal opportunity to find security 

and prosperity in our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Regina & District Labour Council Awards 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on the 

evening of March 7, several of my colleagues and I had the 

privilege of attending the Regina & District Labour Council’s 

annual awards dinner for 2007. Mr. Speaker, this awards 

banquet provides an opportunity for working people to come 

together and distinguish council members who have assumed a 

crucial role in building community by strengthening their 

unions and concurrently providing support for the less fortunate 

and underemployed. 

 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

Kelly Diebel, president of the Communications, Energy and 

Paperworkers Union Local 481 received the Labour Activist of 

the Year Award. Ms. Diebel is a busy mother of two children 

and a strong leader in the union movement. 

 

The second award of the evening, the Labour Community 

Services Award, was awarded to Barb Cape, president of the 

Service Employees International Union Local 299. She was 

presented with a print of a mural created by artist Crystal Howie 

which was the winning entry in a competition sponsored by the 

Saskatchewan centennial workers celebration. Ms. Cape is a 

committed community activist and worker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Regina & District Labour Council has a long, 

established history of community support for the working 

people in Regina and area. I would like to invite all members of 

the House to join me in offering congratulations and support for 

the efforts of the Regina District Labour Council towards 

ameliorating the welfare of working people. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Social Work Week 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the House 

today to bring to the attention of the hon. members that this is 

Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. Social workers are a 

unique group of individuals who spend each day working to 

help others. They may be working with children in foster care, 

young people in conflict with the law, parents who need some 

help, individuals who have experienced emotional trauma, 

patients in the hospital, people with disabilities, students, or the 

elderly. 

 

In a world and a society that is growing ever more complex, the 

principles and values that guide the profession of social work 

remain much as they have always been. While technology is 

propelling us forward at breakneck speed, the field of social 

work remains firmly grounded in the values of social justice, 

service, dignity, and the worth of the individual. It is built upon 

a foundation of human connection and relies heavily on human 

relationships. 

 

As human beings our need for personal empowerment, a 

willingness and understanding ear to listen to our problems, a 

skilled professional to guide us as we seek solutions, and 

someone to sympathize with, encourage, or advocate for us, 

cannot be met by a computer. 

 

Every day across this province social workers use their 

knowledge, experience, and skills to meet these needs. Every 

day they work to help Saskatchewan people improve the quality 

of their lives. On behalf of this House, I sincerely thank the 

hundreds of highly trained, caring, and committed social 

workers who work tirelessly to help those in needs, their efforts 

to make this province a better place to live for all of us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Scott Blues Win Junior Boys’ Basketball Title 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, a week ago tonight, in thrilling 

style, the Scott Blues won its second Regina Intercollegiate 

Basketball League junior boys’ small city title in a span of four 

seasons when the Blues defeated the Lumsden Devils 56-50 at 

the University of Regina’s kinesiology centre. In a column he 

wrote last week, Leader-Post sports reporter Rob Vanstone said 

that, and I quote: 

 

There is not a better story in high school sports than the 

Scott Blues. 

 

And I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. Let me quote at length 

from Mr. Vanstone’s excellent column: 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Blues’ successes are remarkable when you consider 

that the inner-city school’s basketball program was 

dormant for 15 years until it was revived by head coach 

Corey Matthews in the fall of 2003. 

 

Despite Matthews’ immense contributions, he is quick to 

defer to the players. When approached for an interview 

after Monday’s gold-medal presentations, Matthews’ first 

words were: “Do you want to talk to one of the kids?” 

 

Matthews quickly introduced the reporter to Junior Pratt, 

whose involvement with Scott basketball precedes his 

enrollment at the school. 

 

To create interest in basketball, and to create alternatives 

for inner-city youth, Matthews has held open-gym sessions 

at Scott Collegiate. Pratt was one of the . . . [kids that 

showed up]. Look at him now. 

 

“It kind of reminds me of when I was back in Grade 8,” 

Pratt said after the city final. “I never thought I’d be here.” 

 

Daynen McKay and Brandon Ironchild used to be 

waterboys on Matthews’ team. This season, they were key 

contributors to a championship effort. 

 

“When we started this, we heard a lot . . . [that] the kids 

couldn’t do — that they couldn’t commit and they wouldn’t 

show up,” Matthews recalled. “The kids not only bought in, 

but they started to excel.” 

 

[And] the results speak volumes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my home neighbourhood, north central, we are 

very proud of Coach Matthews, Coach Nagel, and our city 

champions, the Scott Blues. And I’m very proud to bring word 

of their success to this Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

recognition of their significant contributions to this great 

province, March has been declared Rural Women’s Month in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We can never have enough opportunities to showcase the 

achievements of rural women in Saskatchewan. From the very 

first permanent settlers in this province, rural women have been 

there. It is through their hard work that Saskatchewan has 

prospered. Whether through working the land, educating the 

youth, or providing tireless volunteerism, we would not be here 

today without them. 

 

As a woman who has lived in rural Saskatchewan all my life, I 

have witnessed the hard work and contributions of rural women 

first-hand, especially in tough years when they have had to go 

out in the fields, run the machinery, and do the work of a hired 

hand so the family farm can survive for another year. It is this 

dedication and work ethic that has allowed rural women to 

nurture not just their families but the very land that they 

depended on for their livelihood. 

 

As Saskatchewan takes its place as a leader in the new West, 

our resource-rich rural areas will be critical. This showcases 

how rural women will continue to be the most critical resource 

for our province, as we would not last long without them. It is 

through their tireless efforts, leadership, and experience that 

Saskatchewan will continue to prosper. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Launch of Expanded Practical Nursing Program 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to receive an 

invitation to the February 14 launch of the expanded practical 

nursing program at the faculty of nursing at SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

Kelsey, 4th Avenue Centre in Saskatoon. I was invited to the 

launch by a number of constituents that work for the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have been part of the former 

government’s team that worked along with SIAST in the 

response to rapidly growing nursing education needs throughout 

our province. 

 

With increased accessibility to training throughout the province, 

delivery of this practical nursing program includes additional 

practical nursing seats, delivery partnerships with First Nations 

and regional colleges, and online program delivery. These 

elements help to ensure quality care to Saskatchewan residents 

who need acute care, home care, and long-term care delivered 

by well-trained, competent, professional nurses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these goals have long been shared and addressed 

by the former government, which recognized the importance of 

imaginative new ways to expand nursing education programs to 

meet continuous demands within Saskatchewan’s publicly 

funded health care system. The launch of this new program 

includes an expansion of SIAST Kelsey Campus to a downtown 

facility in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to commend SIAST, which continues to be 

widely acknowledged and recognized throughout the world for 

innovative programming and teaching as it offers courses and 

programs to almost 12,000 registered students. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Labour Relations Board 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Thursday we 

learned that the Sask Party had dismissed without cause the 

Chair and Vice-Chairs of the Labour Relations Board — three 

eminently qualified professionals. These firings were just the 

latest in a string of civil service firings which began less than a 

week after the Sask Party was sworn in. 

 

The minister has already announced a new Chair, but when 

asked why the former Chair was replaced, he ducked the 

question and refused to answer. Can he now tell the citizens of 

our province why he saw fit to replace the Chair and 

Vice-Chairs of the Labour Relations Board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

It’s the natural course of action, as governments come in, that 

changes are made. And these changes were simply reflective of 

the broader changes. I’m sure the member opposite will 

remember 1991 and ’92 when over 200 members of the civil 

service and boards and other agencies were let go. So the 

melodrama may stop now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think he’s including people 

who worked for the Grant Devine government in ministers’ 

offices in that number. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve established that the new Chair is a 

qualified man, but that does not mean that the previous Chair 

and Vice-Chairs were not. The minister responsible would like 

to focus attention strictly on the new Chair. He’d like to sweep 

his firings under the carpet. He’d like to repeat his three-line 

prepackaged answer, but that’s simply not good enough for the 

people of our province. 

 

On Friday he called any concerns, quote, “a tempest in a 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

teapot.” He did the same thing last fall in this House when he 

accused the NDP [New Democratic Party] of, I quote, “inciting 

unnecessary fear” by asking questions. Can the minister explain 

to the citizens of our province why he thinks that concerns over 

the removal of professional civil servants constitute a tempest in 

a teapot? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — I appreciate the question. Obviously the 

honourable member was not at the event which was the launch 

of the skills competition, and therefore she’s simply misquoting 

what exactly I said about a tempest in the teapot. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I think if your lips move on TV 

that’s actually a direct quote. 

 

Anyway the Saskatchewan Party has had it in for the 

Saskatchewan Labour Relations Board for some time. Their 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation once said that the Labour 

Relations Board, and I quote, is seen, “. . . as a board that is 

biased against management, and heavy-handed in the abuse of 

the powers that they . . . have.” 

 

The member from Biggar has called the Labour Relations 

Board and I quote, “unfair and biased and pro-union.” And even 

the Premier has said that the decisions of the board, and I 

quote,“ come down more often in favour of unions than they 

have in favour of employers.” 

 

Why won’t the minister just come out and admit it? Just admit 

that these people were fired because the government wants 

representatives that are closer to their version of pro-business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we see is the 

appointment of a gentleman with a tremendous skill set, 

relevant education, tremendous experience, a reputation that’s 

respected in the HR [human resources] community and the legal 

community, and we’re delighted that he’s serving the interests 

of the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier now 

raised a real brouhaha last year about the Labour Relations 

Board Vice-Chair who was not reappointed after his term 

expired. And here is what the Deputy Premier had to said to the 

Leader-Post and I quote: 

Krawetz told reporters outside the House that every person 

should be concerned when there is a question of political 

interference with an independent body of the government. 

 

Well we are concerned. Unfortunately now that the Deputy 

Premier finds himself as a member of government, he’s 

changed his tune. Compare the Deputy Premier’s statement 

with the minister’s excuse that these firings were part of, and I 

quote, “broader change.” Can the minister explain how come 

this flip-flop? 

 

Two years ago the Sask Party claimed to be very concerned 

about alleged political interference with the Labour Relations 

Board when the person’s term expired, and now they have their 

fingerprints all over the board before these three people’s terms 

expired as representatives on the Labour Relations Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Employment and 

Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the soliloquy, 

but the question actually is that the political legacy of the 

previous government, we’ve addressed that. And that’s why we 

were elected. This is part of being elected. There’s a change of 

government. There is a change of boards, agencies, and 

commissions. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re delighted with the 

individual that has been appointed to the LRB [Labour 

Relations Board]. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know he’s got three 

lines that he’s supposed to say. But, Mr. Speaker, he really 

should tell us the truth. And what he should tell us is that they 

simply want a Labour Relations Board that reflects their values 

and represents their version of what it is to be pro-business in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote again from the illustrious 

Deputy Premier. And he says: 

 

I believe it’s extremely important for everyone — workers 

and business owners — to know their labour disputes are 

dealt with fairly and expeditiously. I believe it’s important 

to conduct a very open and public investigation into these 

troubling matters. 

 

Well what else has he said? He’s said, and I quote, “To remove 

someone because of complaints without even bothering to 

investigate the legitimacy of these complaints is not proper.” 

Now what I ask the member opposite is, did the minister 

perform any investigations into the decisions and rulings of the 

members that were fired? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 



226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the member opposite 

can account for what happened to the LRB Chair in 1992. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know from last fall that it’s 

going to cost about $4 million to settle with deputy ministers 

that were fired. And earlier this year, we had another round of 

firings of professional civil servants. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Chair and the Vice-Chair at the Labour 

Relations Board were fired without cause. The Chair’s term was 

set to expire in October. One of the Vice-Chair’s appointment 

ran until July of next year, and the other Vice-Chair was to sit 

on the board until 2012. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these people are entitled to compensation. 

How much is the Sask Party vendetta against the Labour 

Relations Board going to wind up costing the people of our 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we thank the Chairs and 

Vice-Chairs past for their work, and obviously we look to the 

future. We have a person with a skill set, education, and 

experience that is set to serve the people of this province very, 

very well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he is using the same three 

lines that are made up down at communication central. But, Mr. 

Speaker, they didn’t just fire the Labour Relations Board. They 

fired them in the middle of a hearing. The Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour has likened the situation to firing the 

judge in the middle of a trial. Now meantime the part-time 

Minister of Labour hides behind The Trade Union Act and says 

the members can continue with their cases. Well let’s overlook 

the irony of that member using The Trade Union Act in his 

defence. Let’s look at what The Trade Union Act actually says 

and I quote: 

 

If the term of a member of the board expires after the 

member has begun hearing a matter before the board but 

before the proceeding is completed, the member may 

continue as if his or her term had not expired for the 

purpose of completing the proceeding. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these folks were fired. Can the minister 

explain what’s going to happen to the 30 cases that are 

presently before the fired Labour Relations Board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Employment and 

Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, no disruption was necessary. 

In fact verbal instructions were given that the cases could 

continue that had already been started. And as far as 

commenting on cases before the LRB, this minister won’t be 

engaged in that activity in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, The Trade Union Act is very 

clear. They can continue if their term has expired, but these 

three members of the Labour Relations Board were fired. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, does he have a legal opinion on this ranting 

of his that they can continue, because I don’t think he does. Mr. 

Speaker, if these members were to continue, is it possible that 

the losing party could in fact appeal the decision? Mr. Speaker, 

I ask the member: does he have a legal opinion saying that these 

fired members of the Labour Relations Board can continue their 

hearings on these 30 matters before the board, or is it simply a 

firing, Mr. Speaker, that is going to lead to hundreds of 

thousands of dollars being spent by both business and trade 

unions because of their incompetence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the member 

opposite’s views on incompetence. She probably has quite a 

track record to examine on that. But what I will say, Mr. 

Speaker, what I will say, obviously within the Act there is 

provision that these cases can continue, Mr. Speaker. The fact 

that there was a disruption actually speaks more to 

grandstanding than it does to anything in the Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, who is he accusing of 

grandstanding? Is he accusing one of the Vice-Chairs for 

indicating that she had been fired, Mr. Speaker? And she had to 

do this as a result of speaking to all three lawyers representing 

the unions and business, Mr. Speaker. Did they ask her to 

continue? Did they say that she could continue? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe the answer is no. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know this. I know that people apply for 

these positions through the Public Service Commission. Can I 

ask the member opposite to outline in great detail what kind of 

process was followed before hiring this individual? Did the 

minister discuss the potential openings with either business or 

labour? Did the Public Service Commission interview this 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

individual along with other individuals for this new Chair? 

 

Mr. Speaker, he needs to tell us precisely what process the Sask 

Party went through to appoint this individual as Chair of the 

Labour Relations Board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

works her way up to the minutiae, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are actually more interested in the 13,300 new, 

full-time jobs that have been created in the last year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — I think they’re more interested in 15,000 

people moving back to the province, Mr. Speaker. And the 

minutiae of these details, Mr. Speaker, what I can say is we 

have found a skilled, educated, experienced, insightful, 

qualified, capable Chair of the LRB, who will serve the 

interests of this province, and his record will stand the test of 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a quasi-judicial board 

that was fired by the Minister of Labour and the Sask Party 

government. Mr. Speaker, we have a board that was in the 

middle of a hearing that had gone on for some months, Mr. 

Speaker. We have 30 cases before the Labour Relations Board. 

This is going to cost hundreds of thousands of dollars for the 

people, both the unions and business to deal with this. Now he 

might call that minutiae, Mr. Speaker, but from where I come 

from, that costs money to the people who are before the Labour 

Relations Board. 

 

And I ask the member again, what process did he go through to 

hire someone to sit on that board, and did he have any legal 

opinion whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, that these hearings could 

continue? And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d be curious to know 

when that member knew that these people had been fired 

because I have a hunch he didn’t know until after the fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Employment and 

Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, during 

another time, perhaps didn’t know what was going on in her 

ministries, but I certainly know what’s going on in mine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we can say is we have 

a qualified, skilled, competent individual who, at the head of the 

LRB, the people of Saskatchewan are going to be well served 

by this individual. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Political Staff and Election Promises 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has a great deal of 

difficulty answering any questions. We’ll see how the Premier 

does today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier has made many very clear promises 

and commitments to people of Saskatchewan — one very 

specific promise about the cost of his and their political staff. 

On December 18, 2007, the member from Canora-Pelly stood in 

this House and said about the cost of their political staff, and I 

quote, “And above all, Mr. Speaker, the cost of government by 

the Saskatchewan Party . . . will be less than the cost of that 

former government.” 

 

That’s what he said. And do you know, Mr. Speaker, when he 

was pushed by the journalists out in the rotunda to explain that, 

what did he say? Well he said it’s so because the Premier said it 

will be so. 

 

And do you know in that, just that same month, Mr. Speaker, on 

December 20 the Premier said, and I quote, “We also promised 

them, Mr. Speaker, that we would have lower political costs 

than the outgoing government.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Does he stand 

by the statements that his Deputy Premier made and that he 

made in December of last year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Leader 

of the Opposition for his question. If I may, on behalf of the 

new government, we welcome he and his colleagues back to the 

Assembly as we welcome you back to the Assembly for this 

spring session of the legislature which will marked by this new 

government’s first budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the hallmark of that budget will be that this government 

will continue to keep its promises made in the election 

campaign, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Additionally, additionally the hallmark of 

this government will be to deal with an infrastructure deficit left 

behind by the outgoing administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And we will do that, we will do that to 

ensure we can keep the current momentum in the province 

moving forward, Mr. Speaker. That’s what people voted for on 

November 7. That we’ve set out to do since then, and we’ll 



228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

continue through the spring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I fear the Premier is now 

learning from his part-time Minister of Labour. I’m not sure if 

there was an answer there. 

 

Very simple question — does he stand by his commitment that 

the political cost of his government will be lower than the 

political staff costs of the former government? Because, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that ministerial staff in this building have 

done very, very well under this new Sask Party government. 

 

We know when they were elected, they were busy telling the 

people of Saskatchewan the fiscal circumstances of the province 

is stark. That’s what they were saying, but meantime behind the 

closed doors of government they were increasing, significantly 

increasing the salaries and pay to their political staff in their 

ministerial offices. 

 

So I have another question for the Premier. What today — Mr. 

Speaker, I ask the Premier — what today is the total cost of 

ministerial staff in the Legislative Assembly? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re happy to talk 

about promises made and promises kept. Just over 100 days in 

to this new administration, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that we 

made a promise for a smaller cabinet. We’ve kept that promise. 

We made a promise to eliminate the NDP used car sales tax. 

We’ve kept that promise. We made a promise to get tough on 

drunk drivers, get tougher on drunk drivers. We’ve already kept 

that promise. 

 

More accountable government, Mr. Speaker; that Bill was 

introduced in December. Mr. Speaker, the creation of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, asked and answered. Fixed election dates in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, another promise that was kept. There are 

16 promises already kept by this brand new government. 

 

And I’ll say this. Overall the cost of political staff of this 

government will be less than what we had under the NDP. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll say something else. The budget of this 

Premier’s office, the political budget of this Premier’s office, 

will be much lower than what we got — people can argue about 

whether it was a bargain or not — when that member was in the 

office I’m in now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier refuses to 

answer my question. Perhaps I can shed a little light on the 

answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Documents released by the Canadian Taxpayers Federation 

show that the annual cost of ministerial staff under this Sask 

Party government is now $4.7 million a year; information 

provided by this government to the Canadian Taxpayers 

Federation, released publicly when this government wouldn’t 

release it, $4.7 million a year. 

 

Now interestingly, since that information was made available to 

the Taxpayers Federation, they’ve been about hiring even more 

people in the ministerial offices so that the staff costs today 

exceed $5 million on an annual basis. Now that, Mr. Speaker — 

that, Mr. Speaker — is $13,000 less than the costs in the 

ministerial offices of the former government, with one less 

office, Mr. Speaker, one less office, and after 16 years in 

government where the staff had reached the top of their pay 

range. 

 

After three months, three months of this government, we have 

one fewer offices with virtually the same cost to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Is this how the Premier intends to keep his 

promises? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean I welcome the 

question. Ostensibly the question is, you are keeping your 

promise but just not good enough. I want to say to the Leader of 

the Opposition, the important part of these political costs to the 

taxpayers are also those costs in the office of Executive 

Council, in the office of the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made a commitment that we would provide 

that service to the people of Saskatchewan at a much lower cost 

than we had when the member for Riversdale was the premier 

of Saskatchewan. And that’s also a promise we’ve kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll see about the last statement 

the Premier just made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to talk about the Premier’s own 

office staff — his political staff. Now in December again the 

member from Canora-Pelly was indicating to all the people of 

Saskatchewan the cost of the Premier’s office staff would be 

considerably lower. He indicated, and I quote again, “Mr. 

Speaker, in the Premier’s office today the cost will be 

$193,000.” 

 

Now the Premier in the month of January said to the people of 

Saskatchewan, through the journalists, that he was shocked. 

Shocked was the word he used when he discovered that the 

costs of the Premier’s office staff on a monthly basis were not 

193 but 300,000 a month. 

 

Well my question is for the Premier: what are the costs of your 

staff today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

typically these kinds of questions — which are absolutely 

appropriate for this Assembly — are asked at the end of session 

during Premier’s estimates. 

 

But apparently the opposition has nothing else to talk about, 

Mr. Speaker, because they’re asking these on the very first day. 

I guess they don’t want to talk about the fact that today 

Saskatchewan is leading the country in terms of so many 

different economic categories — leading the country in terms of 

employment, leading the country in terms of growth, leading 

the country in terms of vehicle sales, Mr. Speaker. The message 

that we have for Canadians, and even for those in the United 

States, is a compelling one — that Saskatchewan is the place to 

be. 

 

And if I’m looking at some of the reviews already from the 

people of the province, even from online polls this very day, the 

people of Saskatchewan appreciate the fact that this new 

government is this province’s best hope to keep that great 

momentum going. And that’s exactly what’s going to happen, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, these questions are as much 

about the Premier’s credibility and his willingness to keep his 

word to the people of Saskatchewan as they are about the hard 

numbers. 

 

But here are the facts, Mr. Speaker, here are the facts. The cost 

of the Premier’s office staff today are not $193,000 as the 

deputy leader said they were. And they are not 300,000 as the 

Premier said he was shocked to find out. No, in fact today they 

are over $400,000 a month. That’s $100,000 a month more, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier: how does he 

explain this huge discrepancy from what he promised and what 

he said about political staff costs and the reality of today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The Minister of Health has asked, says 

usually after Premier’s estimates there’s a prorogue party. I’m 

not sure if there’s one planned over there or not. 

 

We’re prepared to stay here, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking 

forward to this session. We’re looking forward to introducing a 

budget that keeps still more promises in addition to the 17 

promises already kept. We’re looking forward to introducing a 

budget that very much keeps the promise that I have made, that 

costs for Executive Council will be lower than what we had 

under the NDP. It will be another promise made and another 

promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve been trying to follow the debate 

and listen to the discussion. I think it’s rising just a little bit. I 

ask members to respect the right of others to speak, and I 

recognize the Premier and allow him to finish his comments. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — November 7 has occurred in intervening . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I would just say that when we see the budget — 

and it will be tabled soon — without getting into the details, the 

budget will be about this government keeping its promise and 

keeping the momentum going in the province. One of the 

promises that we have made with respect to Executive Council 

costs being lower than what we had under the NDP will also be 

kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, then the Premier’s going to have 

to do some fast trimming in Executive Council and some fast 

trimming in his ministerial offices because here are the facts. 

 

Today in the province of Saskatchewan, with information 

provided in cabinet documentation and in information provided 

the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, on an annual basis the cost 

of the Premier’s political office, his staff, and the cost of 

ministerial offices on an annual basis will exceed ten and a half 

million dollars. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s $1.2 million more on 

an annual basis than what was being spent in the previous 

government after 16 years in government, Mr. Speaker. In three 

months, in three months they’ve raised it $1.2 million on an 

annual basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can we have confidence in anything that the 

Premier says or has said in the past? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve been having difficulty hearing the 

Leader of the Opposition place his question, and I would ask 

members to give the Leader of the Opposition the opportunity 

to place his question. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well let me . . . [inaudible] . . . in this fashion, 

Mr. Speaker. Would the Premier answer this question: why is it, 

why is it that rewarding his friends and his cronies, as they’re 

being called, why is it that rewarding his friends and cronies is 

more important than keeping his promises? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I look at the list of 

some of the people that have joined the government since the 

change in government, I see names like Myrna Bentley, 

nominated by the Saskatchewan Co-operative Association to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. Is she a crony of the Sask Party? 

What about Gary Merasty, Mr. Speaker, nominated by the 

Prince Albert Grand Council? Or Michael Fougere? What about 

Chief Darcy Bear or Chief Alphonse Bird? What about Janice 

MacKinnon, Mr. Speaker, also involved with the Government 



230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know maybe, maybe if that Leader of 

the Opposition were paying a little bit more attention to his new 

role as the Leader of the Opposition — difficult as it may be for 

all of us to get used to new roles and particularly that one — 

instead of focusing on things like a report card for the 

opposition, he also might want to weigh in on the fact that 

we’ve already received a report card, in fact significantly from 

the economy itself where Saskatchewan continues to post As 

and Bs in almost every category . . . is the talk of the country. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, that report card that we’re just 

watching today on two different online polls, 70 per cent of 

Saskatchewan people say A plus or B plus. That’s the grade for 

the government of Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Question period time has elapsed. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

The Midwifery Act 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

privilege to rise today to do a ministerial statement on The 

Midwifery Act and the proclamation of many of the sections. I 

want to apologize to the critic of Health from the opposition. I 

didn’t get the remarks over to her very early at all — in fact, 

just before session. But we’ll try and do better on that in the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to announce a proclamation of 

additional sections of The Midwifery Act, sections that will 

allow for the delivery or regulate midwifery services in 

Saskatchewan. This is a proud moment for the government, Mr. 

Speaker, and a proud moment in particular for midwives of 

Saskatchewan, some of whom are seated in the gallery and I’ve 

introduced earlier today. 

 

For years they have been working with other health care 

providers and the Ministry of Health to develop this legislation. 

And I want to thank them for their patience — their extreme 

patience — and dedication as they waited for this Act to be 

proclaimed. Establishing a new health profession in the 

province is a complex undertaking. But the Midwives 

Association of Saskatchewan and the other members of the 

midwifery implementation committee were steadfast in their 

commitment to ensure midwife services are available in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that we are proclaiming 

this legislation just a few days after International Women’s Day 

when we celebrated the economic, political, and social 

achievements of women. 

 

Midwives have been helping women through childbirth for 

thousands of years. Today, midwives are respected members of 

the health care community, providing safe and flexible care 

centred on the needs of the mother and her family. With this 

proclamation, midwives take their place among Saskatchewan’s 

provincial organizations and self-regulated health professionals. 

 

The Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region and the Saskatoon 

Health Region will be the first health regions to offer midwifery 

services, with midwives expected to be on the job later this 

year. Services will be expanded throughout the province as 

more midwives are licensed. 

 

Midwives will have privileges to do deliveries in the hospital 

or, if appropriate, in the client’s home. They will be able to 

order tests and assessments, including ultrasounds. They will 

also be able to prescribe and administer many common drugs 

that are used during pregnancy, birth, and throughout the 

postpartum period. 

 

The Saskatchewan College of Midwives will regulate the 

practice of midwifery in Saskatchewan. It will have the powers 

to enact bylaws and manage the affairs and business of the 

profession. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in developing this legislation, the government has 

consulted closely with the midwifery implementation 

committee. The committee has a membership representing the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the midwifery association of 

Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan College of Pharmacists. I 

want to thank all these parties for their involvement and hard 

work and support. 

 

In particular I would like to recognize the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons of Saskatchewan. The college has had to pass a 

bylaw under The Medical Profession Act that allows midwives 

to provide postpartum care, which was never in the legislation 

in the first place. During this session of the legislature we 

intend to amend The Midwifery Act to give legislative force to 

the right of midwives to provide postpartum care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has made an important 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan — a commitment to 

improve our publicly funded, publicly administered health care 

system. The midwives of Saskatchewan, who have waited so, 

so long for this day to come, will help us meet that 

commitment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank 

the minister too in saying that he’ll get to me earlier next time. 

But this one, I do know a lot about this Act and I do want to 

welcome the many people who are up in the gallery today, 

many of who I recognize from the work I did as the SUN 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] president. I sat on working 

groups for midwifery. 

 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

When the member from Nutana and I were associate minister 

and minister of Health, we actually had the pleasure of 

introducing The Midwifery Act. So I recognize many of the 

people and I thank them very much for their patience and for all 

the collaborative work that they did to get us to this point where 

there’s a lot of partners to make something like this happen. 

 

This is a new profession introduced into this province. As an 

obstetrical nurse I appreciate the valuable contributions that 

midwives will bring to women in labour and actually in 

postpartum and all through the pregnancy. I think this will be a 

wonderful contribution to a woman’s experience. 

 

And I do want to thank them again for their patience and for 

their hard work. And I am very happy today to see this 

proclaimed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MESSAGE FROM 

HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 

The Speaker: — Prior to orders of the day I have a message 

from Queen Elizabeth II regarding Commonwealth Day. I 

would ask members to rise as I read her message. 

 

Last year, Commonwealth heads of government met in 

Uganda on the edge of Lake Victoria and agreed to an 

action plan for tackling climate change. It was an 

appropriate place to do so: from there, the waters of the 

River Nile begin a three-month journey to the 

Mediterranean. 

 

The Nile, throughout history, has served humankind in 

many ways. But for all its impressive size and importance, 

this river is a fragile ecosystem and its vulnerability grows 

with the number of people dependent upon it, so that a 

single incident of pollution upstream may affect the lives 

of countless numbers downstream. 

 

The example of the Nile illustrates many of the challenges 

facing the global environment as a whole which cannot 

alone sustain our lives as once it did. The competition for 

fresh water by a growing population is itself becoming a 

source of potential conflict. Our own attitudes to the 

environment, and the use we put it to, may have 

consequences for people on every continent and for every 

ocean and sea. 

 

The impact of pollution falls unequally. It is often those 

who pollute the least — notably the world’s 

least-developed nations — who are closest to the razor’s 

edge: most affected by the impact of climate change and 

least equipped to cope with it. 

 

And it is most important to remember that the 

environmental choices available in some countries may 

not be an option for others. In some parts of the world, for 

example, fossil fuels can be used more sparingly and 

buildings can be made of more efficient, sustainable 

materials; but it is far harder to expect someone to adapt if 

he or she relies on the trees of a local forest for fuel, 

shelter, and livelihood. If we recognize the interests and 

needs of the people who are most affected, we can work 

with them to bring about lasting change. Happily, this 

approach has always been a strength of the 

Commonwealth. An awareness of environmental issues is 

now widespread with the determination that future 

generations should enjoy clean air, sufficient fresh water, 

and energy without risking damage to the planet. Few are 

more aware or energetic in controlling climate change 

than young people, and we should support them. 

 

In the Commonwealth, governments, businesses, 

communities, and individuals should each strive to match 

words and good intentions with deeds. Every contribution 

has its part to play. Whatever we do or wherever we live, 

our actions in defence of the environment can have a real 

and a positive effect upon the lives of others, today, and 

into the future. 

 

Thank you. Please be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the 

day it is my pleasure to submit supplementary estimates 

accompanied by a message from his Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Will all members please rise for the message 

from the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31, 2008 and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Hon. Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor, 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 1, The Growth and 

Financial Security Act. 

 

This Bill reflects that this government and its economic growth 

agenda will be built on a foundation of sound financial 

management. It recognizes that sound financial management 

requires more than just fiscal stabilization. Sound financial 

management will be achieved through balanced budgets, the 

establishment of the Growth and Financial Security Fund, the 

establishment of a Debt Retirement Fund, stipulations on the 



232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

use of annual surpluses, and ensuring efficient government 

services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Bill the government is required to plan for 

and achieve a balanced budget each and every year with 

exceptions only in the event of natural disaster or war. To 

ensure long-term planning, each year a financial plan and a 

public debt management plan for the next four years are 

required to be tabled. 

 

This Bill establishes a Growth and Financial Security Fund for 

the purpose of providing for financial security from year to year 

and promoting and enhancing the economic development of 

Saskatchewan. The Debt Retirement Fund is established for the 

purpose of assisting with the long-term objective of the 

Government of Saskatchewan of eliminating the accumulated 

deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill designates the use of annual surpluses of 

the General Revenue Fund. One-half of the General Revenue 

Fund surpluses will be transferred to the Growth and Financial 

Security Fund, with the other half going to the Debt Retirement 

Fund. 

 

Treasury Board will be required to review existing and 

proposed programs and expenditures of ministries. This review 

will assess the adequacy, economy, efficiency, and 

effectiveness of programs and will ensure that there’s 

accountability to the Legislative Assembly respecting 

government expenditures and programs. Treasury Board is also 

to monitor the size of the public service as compared to the size 

of the population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve committed to strong economic growth and 

sound financial management. And The Growth and Financial 

Security Act takes a number of steps to ensure this happens. Mr. 

Speaker, I move second reading of The Growth and Financial 

Security Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 1, The Growth and Financial Security Act. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

speak to Bill No. 1, An Act respecting Saskatchewan’s Growth 

and Financial Security and repealing certain Acts. I understand 

that shortly the Assembly will move to condolence motions for 

former MLAs who’ve recently passed away. And in the 

interests of time and to ensure that my full remarks will not be 

interrupted later when we move to these condolence motions, 

and to preserve my place in the speaking order, I would like to 

move that the debate on Bill No. 1 be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 1. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to accept 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007/Loi 

de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative 

et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007. Mr. 

Speaker, the amendments to The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act introduced today will implement the 

promise that the government made to establish fixed election 

dates in Saskatchewan. 

 

As announced by the Premier the morning after the election, the 

next election will be held November 7, 2011 and every four 

years thereafter on the first Monday of November. Mr. Speaker, 

this will apply whether or not the last general election was held 

on the fixed four-year cycle or as a result of an intervening 

dissolution of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Where an intervening snap election, general election is required, 

the fixed election dates will continue to prevail in the fourth 

calendar year after that snap election on the first Monday in 

November. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a constitutional requirement that an election 

must be held at least once every five years. It is currently the 

sole prerogative of the Premier to choose an election date and 

ask the Lieutenant Governor to dissolve the Legislative 

Assembly for the purposes of a general election. This is often 

done to match as best as possible the political conveniences of 

the governing party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this fixed election legislation will remove the 

guesswork and political opportunism that far too often dictates 

the timing of elections where a governing party seeks to set an 

election date to its own advantage. These changes will remove 

the built-in advantage held by governing parties who can plan 

for an election that only it is aware of. 

 

Fixed election dates will give all parties and candidates equal 

opportunities to foresee upcoming elections. More importantly, 

the legislation will ensure that members of the public can assess 

the performance of the government. This new legislation will 

ensure greater democratic accountability going forward into the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed Bill will not alter the constitutional 

power of the Crown to prorogue or dissolve the Legislative 

Assembly in advance of the fixed election date should the 

government of the day lose the confidence of the Assembly. 

The Premier will retain the ability to advise the Lieutenant 

Governor as to the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly prior 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

to an election. However, barring such unusual circumstances, 

these measures will otherwise impose a degree of certainty into 

the electoral process by fixing the timing of regular elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fixed election legislation is currently in force in 

Ontario, British Columbia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward 

Island, Newfoundland and Labrador, Northwest Territories, and 

the federal government. It was promised by this government as 

the right thing to do — promised and now delivered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and Executive Council 

Act, 2007. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 4, The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed 

Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 be now read the second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

speak to Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act, 2007. I realize there has been an 

agreement between the House leaders to expedite proceedings 

so that we can move to condolence motions, so in the interest of 

time and to ensure that my full remarks will not be interrupted 

later, I will suggest that we move to the condolence motions. 

 

But I do want to point out before we get there, Mr. Speaker, a 

couple of times over on the other side we heard the Minister of 

Justice refer to the fixed election legislation. Now I realize that 

that may be some kind of Freudian thing going on over there 

but of course we’re talking about fixed election dates, Mr. 

Speaker. And I look forward to getting to those. 

 

As such, I move that Bill No. 4 be now adjourned. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of accepting the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly 

I’d like to move a series of motions with respect to condolences 

to families of former members of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 

what we’ll do is we’ll wait for leave now of the Assembly and 

then we’ll proceed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to move a 

series of condolence motions. Is the Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

CONDOLENCES 

 

John Edward Neil Wiebe 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This first motion 

moved by myself, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the 

Opposition, the member for Riversdale: 

 

That this Assembly unite in paying tribute to the memory 

of the Hon. John Edward Neil Wiebe, 18th lieutenant 

governor of Saskatchewan, who passed away on April 16, 

2007. 

 

John was born on May 31, 1936 in Herbert. He attended 

the Herbert elementary and high schools before continuing 

his study at Luther College in Regina and then the 

University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Wiebe married Ann 

Lewis on October 7, 1961. He is survived by his wife, 

three daughters, and eight grandchildren. 

 

In his private life, Jack carried on the family tradition of 

farming. He was the owner and president of L&W Feeders 

Ltd. from 1970 until 1985 and continued to operate the 

family farm until 1994. 

 

Mr. Wiebe’s rural and agricultural background were 

reflected in many of the organizations that he chose to 

support. The Main Centre Wheat Pool committee, the 

Herbert Credit Union, the Herbert Co-op, and his local 

4-H club were among the organizations that benefited 

from his involvement. He was a member of the Herbert 

Lions Club and guided young hockey players as a coach 

and as a referee. Mr. Wiebe also served as the director of 

the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and VIA Rail 

Canada Inc. 

 

Jack’s dedication to his fellow citizens was evident in his 

distinguished record of public service as an elected 

representative, a senator, and as a member of international 

trade commissions. 

 

Mr. Wiebe became involved with politics at an early age 

within the Liberal Party. After serving in various roles as a 

strategist and fundraiser, he sought election to this 

Assembly in a by-election in 1971. He continued to 

represent the constituency of Morse following the 1975 

general election and he remained the member until 1979. 

Mr. Wiebe was appointed to the Senate of Canada in 2000 

and served until his retirement in 2004. 

 

Mr. Wiebe was installed as the 18th lieutenant governor of 

Saskatchewan on May 31, 1994. Throughout his term he 

sought to raise public awareness of the role of the Crown 

in Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, at this point, I recall as a brand new 

member elected to this Assembly in 1999 that it was then His 

Honour the lieutenant governor, Mr. Wiebe, who made the 

presentation to all of the new members about the role of the 

monarchy within our parliamentary form of government. And 

while I had heard similar presentations at various seminars and 

lectures at university, I had the chance to tell His Honour 

afterwards that I hadn’t heard it put as compellingly, frankly — 



234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

the case for the role of the Crown and the monarchy in our 

system of government — that I had not heard it put as 

compellingly as he was able to do for all of us new members. 

And I know there were perhaps a few there that had questions, 

frankly, about the role, and I think I can speak for some of them 

when I say . . . and had the chance to visit with them after that 

particular orientation session, that for some of them a number of 

the questions were answered by the able presentation of the 

then lieutenant governor, Mr. Wiebe. 

 

His legacy was reflected in the creation of the J.E.N. 

Wiebe Interpretive Centre at Government House. 

 

Mr. Wiebe retained an abiding interest in the welfare of 

rural communities and was instrumental in the 

establishment of the Lieutenant Governor’s Award for 

Outstanding Service to Rural Saskatchewan. His 

commitment to the military community led to his 

appointment as the honorary colonel of the 38th artillery 

tactical group, 10th Field. He later served as the 

Saskatchewan Chair of the Canadian Forces Liaison 

Council. Mr. Wiebe’s style, enthusiasm, and vitality in 

fulfilling his duties as the Queen’s representative endeared 

him to people across all of Saskatchewan. 

 

The breadth of Mr. Wiebe’s contribution to the province 

was recognized by numerous awards. He was inducted 

into the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of Saint 

John of Jerusalem in 1994 and held the grade of knight. 

Mr. Wiebe was also awarded the Queen’s Golden Jubilee 

Medal and the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal. 

 

And just before I get to the final elements of the motion here 

and turn it over to the Leader of the Opposition, I want to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that many in this Assembly here today had to 

opportunity to attend the funeral, Mr. Wiebe’s funeral, that was 

held in Swift Current at the United Church there and then the 

gun salute and the flypast. And I think all of us certainly were 

very moved by all of those who had the chance to eulogize Mr. 

Wiebe at that particular funeral service. 

 

But what was most compelling at that funeral service, I think, 

for many of us, was when family members and particularly the 

grandkids of Mr. Wiebe had their chance. And we got to learn 

even a little bit more about a person who obviously served this 

institution honourably but who also served our Senate of 

Canada with honour and carried out his duties as our lieutenant 

governor with class and with the true and honest affection for 

the entire province and a dedication to see as much of it, to visit 

as much of Saskatchewan and as many Saskatchewan people, as 

he could. 

 

And those words at that funeral will go far beyond anyone’s 

ability here to be able to properly tribute and commemorate the 

memory of Jack Wiebe, but we do so, however inadequately, 

here again today. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s my 

pleasure to follow the Premier in addressing the remembrance 

of this Assembly of the Hon. Jack Wiebe and his memory. 

 

The Speaker: — . . . again. I need to place the question. Pardon 

me, members. The Premier has moved a motion that we extend 

condolences to the Hon. Jack Wiebe’s family and has moved 

that motion forthright. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt that motion? I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is, as I 

was saying, my pleasure to follow the Premier on this 

condolence motion of the Hon. Jack Wiebe. Jack was a 

neighbour of mine as I grew up, in a manner of speaking. We 

shared the South Saskatchewan River and we could look from 

the living room of our house to Main Centre, Jack’s 

community. And we were divided first by the South 

Saskatchewan River and we were divided by then Lake 

Diefenbaker after that happened. So geography separated us. 

But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, geography connected us, 

because Jack Wiebe was a Saskatchewan citizen. Jack Wiebe 

knew what his roots were. He knew his community, he knew 

his family, and he knew his province. 

 

Politics also separated the Wiebes from us. Jack was a Liberal; I 

was a New Democrat. But interestingly, politics connected us in 

a way that only politics can do and indeed it was my great 

honour to get to know Jack Wiebe, particularly after he became 

lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan and then later on senator. 

And then I had the joy of bumping into him a time or two after 

that. 

 

I mentioned that Jack knew he came from his family roots, and 

the Premier spoke a little bit about the importance of family as 

it was presented at Jack’s funeral in Swift Current. And indeed 

it was such a great treat to hear the remembrances of family and 

friends that had visited the Wiebes’ farm, visited Jack and Ann, 

and always had a story of the remarkable support that they 

provided to everyone. It truly spoke very, very greatly of Jack 

and Ann. 

 

There was one day in particular that I wish I could live over 

again. And that was a day in my constituency, we had the Ed 

Schreyer build. This was a Habitat for Humanity build. There 

were six houses being built all in a row in my constituency, and 

I spent a glorious day volunteering as the local MLA, and they 

paired me up with Ed Schreyer and Jack Wiebe. So I spent just 

this fabulous day merely being an MLA and a volunteer but in 

amongst greatness. I had the lieutenant governor of 

Saskatchewan. I had a former governor general of Canada, and 

we were building a fence. In many ways, for Jack and myself 

— two old farm boys— we were just out fencing. And we were 

swapping stories. And we were talking about the people that we 

knew in common. We were talking about our shared values. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I felt more connected 

with Jack Wiebe that day than you can ever imagine. He knew 

where he came from, and he always honoured that. And he 

always tried to live up to his roots, his family, his neighbours, 

and his community. It was truly a joyous day for me. We even 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

joked gently about our differences. And I want to assure 

everyone that it was gentle jesting on both of our parts. And I 

just was so pleased with the gentleness of Mr. Wiebe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jack Wiebe passed away younger than we would 

have liked. But it was interesting to me that, even in his passing, 

in his relatively short illness, he passed away or he suffered 

through that on his own terms. And indeed, many of us didn’t 

even realize that Jack was terminally ill until he had passed on. 

 

But he leaves truly a remarkable legacy. And indeed I’m sure 

that there are many people from the Morse constituency and 

even wider that will go through life trying to emulate Jack 

Wiebe. 

 

So on behalf of myself, I want to offer my condolences to 

Jack’s widow, Ann, their three children, and their eight 

grandchildren, and the much broader community in the Morse 

constituency, and the even broader community in 

Saskatchewan, Ottawa where Jack served as a senator, indeed 

all of Canada — condolences all around. 

 

Today it is my honour to honour a truly fine and great 

gentleman, being Jack Wiebe. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s indeed an honour to rise today to give 

condolences to the family of the late Jack Wiebe, who passed 

away on April 16, 2007, at a very early age of only 70 years. 

 

I would like to acknowledge Mr. Wiebe’s profound contribution 

to the public life of Saskatchewan and also to Canada. Mr. 

Wiebe was a farmer, and he was a former Liberal member of 

the Legislative Assembly for Morse from 1971 to 1978 and 

lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan from 1994 to 2000 — 

information that we’ve already received, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the first times that I had the pleasure of 

talking with Jack Wiebe was immediately after my election on 

June 21, 1995. And within a day or two, I was fortunate to be 

invited to a very large celebration in Kamsack of the 

Doukhobor Society and of course the lieutenant governor was 

present as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my election in 1995 was not of a huge plurality. In 

fact I believe I was the member at that time who was elected 

with the smallest plurality. And when I spoke with Mr. Wiebe 

at the function in Kamsack, I guess I must have expressed a 

degree of concern that there might be a recount and there might 

. . . you know, there was uncertainty about it. And I recall Mr. 

Wiebe saying to me in his own calm, cool, collective manner, 

he said, you know it doesn’t really matter. He says, you have 

won and the amount of the plurality isn’t dependent upon 

whether it’s a number like 12 or 15 or 500. And he said to me, 

he said that in his election in 1971, he also was fortunate to be 

elected by a small plurality. And he also was known as 

landslide Wiebe in that election in 1971 and, you know, served 

this province admirably as a member of the Legislative 

Assembly here in this room, as well as the lieutenant governor. 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wiebe’s public service to the people of 

Saskatchewan was recognized in 1994 when he received the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit upon accepting his appointment 

as the lieutenant governor of this province. The Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit is an award for the highest level of individual 

excellence and achievement in any field. And we all know that 

Mr. Jack Wiebe was indeed a very worthy recipient of that 

award. 

 

Mr. Wiebe’s public service extended beyond his term as the 

lieutenant governor when in the year 2000 he was appointed to 

the Canadian Senate. There he served as the Vice-Chair of the 

Senate standing committee on agriculture and forestry and was 

a strong advocate for agriculture. Mr. Wiebe was a hog farmer 

who had close personal and business ties to the farm 

community his entire life. 

 

After Mr. Wiebe retired from the upper Chamber in 2004, he 

and his wife Ann moved to Swift Current where they spent time 

with family and friends. And as the members opposite have 

indicated, family was very dear to him, and he loved talking 

about his grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Wiebe continued to contribute to his community through 

volunteer work, especially with the Dr. Noble Irwin Regional 

Healthcare Foundation in Swift Current. He was also involved 

in various service clubs, as well as the co-op, credit union, and 

the regional park in Herbert. 

 

Fellow senator Marilyn Trenholme Counsell said this following 

Mr. Wiebe’s death, quote, “. . . the Honourable Jack Wiebe saw 

things clearly, responsibly, and simply. No pomp, no 

pretension, only principle.” Jack Wiebe conducted himself in 

this manner in every public office that he held, and the people 

of Saskatchewan sincerely thank him for that. 

 

On behalf of my colleagues in this Legislative Assembly, I 

would like to send my sincerest regards to the friends and 

family of the late Jack Wiebe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think any of us who 

knew the Hon. Jack Wiebe come to this day with many 

wonderful memories, particularly those of us who had the 

opportunity to be part of the state funeral in Swift Current 

because, Mr. Speaker, it is rare, it is rare that you will have in 

the memory of one man, the love and respect of a nation 

expressed, the love and the respect of a province, the love and 

respect of friends and neighbours, and the love and the respect 

of a family — all at one time and in one place. 

 

And you know, Jack Wiebe — Mr. Speaker, in my experience 

— was a man who could walk into Buckingham Palace or walk 

into the Senate Chamber of Canada or walk into the Herbert 

United Church and meet and treat people all just the same. 

 

I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that when Jack Wiebe has his 

portrait painted as our lieutenant governor for the gallery in the 

lower level of this building, that he chose to have his portrait 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

painted outdoors, outside the walls, the bounds of Government 

House. And it strikes me that this was the Jack Wiebe that we 

knew, a man who never lost his root in this prairie, a man who 

never lost the common touch, always with the people that he 

represented so ably. 

 

And let me say this, Mr. Speaker. Jack was a formidable 

Liberal; there is no doubt about that, a formidable fundraiser for 

the Liberal Party. He was a formidable MLA. And I guess as 

senators go, he was a good senator and an exceptional 

lieutenant governor; an exceptional resident of Herbert, Swift 

Current; exceptional father, husband, and grandfather. And on 

behalf of the official opposition, I join with the Premier and the 

government in expressing condolences to his family through 

Ann to their entire family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 

add a few words of condolences to Ann and the family. Jack 

was a very positive man to work with. And as others have 

noted, he wore the Liberal badge proudly, but he wore his 

Saskatchewan prairie badge even more prominently. 

 

I first met him I think through a couple of my friends who were 

his neighbours just north of Rush Lake, up by Main Centre, and 

that’s many, many years ago. But when I was elected, then he 

became quite involved in the life that I had as the attorney 

general because I worked with him on different kinds of 

questions that he would have. A lot of people don’t realize that 

there is a bit of a special relationship between the Lieutenant 

Governor and the Attorney General in the same way there’s a 

bit of a special relationship between the Premier and the 

Lieutenant Governor. And quite often I would go and just have 

a conversation with him at Government House, and it would 

include official things but also unofficial things. 

 

He was also very proud to have been a graduate of Luther 

College in Regina. And he often talked about how that really 

changed his life as he met Ann at that place, and it gave him an 

understanding of what it was like to live in the city. And that 

ended up, I think, being a part of his ability to go into new 

situations and be a genuine friend to people all across the board. 

 

I just wanted to say one other . . . or tell one other little story 

about Jack. His house as lieutenant governor is just close to 

where I live. And quite often I would see the official car go by 

with the flags. Jack and Ann would wave at me if I was out in 

the yard and about five minutes later, Jack would have changed 

out of his black suit and all that, put on his other sort of 

ordinary clothes and was driving back the other way to go to 

Canadian Tire or Safeway or wherever he wanted to go, and he 

usually would stop and say hello. And so we had some good 

visits then. 

 

But one of those trips going back and forth, he said to me, you 

know, it’s not often known but the Government House is a 

place where you can have meetings and the press can’t come 

unless they’re invited. And I think the Premier knows about 

this, and the former premier knows about this. And obviously I 

knew about it. 

Well it was that little hint to me that allowed us to move 

forward and sort out a number of the lawsuits that we had with 

the judges of Saskatchewan. So we went at his invitation over 

to his place, and it provided a safe haven for us to look at some 

issues which eventually resolved some very complicated things. 

 

So I want to say to Ann and to the family that we all in 

Saskatchewan respected Jack and we miss him, but we also 

want to thank him for the contributions that he made. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I would ask leave to make a few 

comments in regards to Mr. Wiebe. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. It was my pleasure to work with 

Mr. Wiebe as a member of the Saskatchewan prayer breakfast 

committee. And when I first think back to Mr. Wiebe, it goes 

back an awful lot of years. Now I didn’t get to meet Mr. Wiebe 

personally, but followed politics a little bit, and I remember 

when he was first elected. Of course we had John Gardner as 

the member from the Moosomin constituency. 

 

And for those of us who followed politics even when we were 

still in high school . . . You may think back and say, now why 

in the world would you do that? But you know it’s always 

interesting following individuals in the political realm. And 

many people would go back to the Tommy Douglas era or 

whatever. 

 

But what I remember of Mr. Wiebe was a gentleman of 

principle and a gentleman who really had really endeared 

himself to what Saskatchewan and Canada was all about and 

the fact that we should be really training up our young people to 

respect not only people around them but really think highly of 

their province and their country. 

 

However, as some of the members have already mentioned, Mr. 

Wiebe was also a farmer at heart. And there are little things that 

he found a little hard to change, some of the changes in his life. 

I remember one of the first meetings we had is when he became 

a member of the prayer breakfast committee, and we were 

talking about our different roles. And I asked him how he was 

enjoying the job of lieutenant governor and he said, well you 

know I’m really enjoying it but, he said, I’m having a hard time 

to get used to one thing. He said, the first time I went out to the 

car I went to the passenger’s door and I opened the door and the 

chauffeur came along and said, Your Honour, I open the door; 

you sit in the back. And he said, you know, it took me a little 

while to get used to that fact, that I couldn’t just walk up to the 

car any more — outside of when he got into his civvy clothes 

and then he could go wherever he wanted. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But I believe as I got to know Mr. Wiebe a little bit and his 

input into the prayer breakfast committee, his commitment to 

ensuring that people recognize our heritage and the principles 

that made this province so great is something that will long live 

in my life. And I extend as well my condolences to his wife and 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

the family and the many friends that were so endeared to the 

Hon. Jack Wiebe. 

 

It has been moved by the Premier, seconded by the Leader of 

Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition: 

 

That this Assembly unite in paying tribute to the memory 

of the Hon. John Edward Neil Wiebe, the 18th lieutenant 

governor of Saskatchewan. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

David Boldt 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Continuing with 

the series of condolence motions, including this one: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of the Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

David Boldt, who passed away on December 31, 2007, 

was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1960 

until 1975. He represented the constituency of Rosthern for 

the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Boldt was born on January 21, 1918 in Osler. He 

attended public school in Osler before completing his 

studies in agriculture at the University of Saskatchewan. He 

then pursued further training at the Edmonton Welding 

School. 

 

On October 14, 1945, Mr. Boldt married Anne Enns. He is 

survived by his wife and their three children, four 

grandchildren, and four great-grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Boldt retained an interest in farming throughout his 

life. He began by assisting on the family farm before 

starting his own grain operation nearby with his wife. Even 

after his retirement into the city, he continued to assist with 

the spring seeding and harvest. 

 

Mr. Boldt was very involved with his church and with the 

Gideons and served both organizations in a number of 

capacities. 

 

Mr. Boldt’s involvement in politics began at the local level, 

but broadened to include the provincial political scene. He 

was first elected to the Legislative Assembly in 1960 and 

retained his seat in the following three elections. He was 

appointed to cabinet in 1964 and remained in the executive 

until 1971. Mr. Boldt first served as minister of Social 

Welfare and Rehabilitation, and then in the Welfare 

portfolio. He led the departments of Highways and 

Transportation for several years and was also responsible 

for the Saskatchewan Government Insurance corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noticed something about the way Mr. Boldt’s, or 

maybe I should say Oomkje Boldt’s, name is printed in this 

official condolence motion. I’m guessing from his last name 

and also from where he grew up that he and I and a few 

members may share the same heritage. I note as well what isn’t 

surprising then that, Mr. Oomkje Boldt does not have a middle 

initial or name listed in the official condolence motion. That 

may well be that he simply wasn’t given one by his parents as 

has often has been the case with people from Plautdeutsch 

backgrounds or of Mennonite origin. They thought it was too 

presumptuous, maybe a little too worldly, to be given more than 

one given name. And you know the same is true for my dad, 

actually, and a number of others. 

 

But I would say this: when you look at this condolence motion, 

when you understand and contemplate the depth of Mr. Boldt’s 

involvement in his community, his dedication to the province of 

Saskatchewan, eventually his service in the Executive Council 

and the government, that people like Mr. Boldt don’t need a 

middle name or a middle initial. Their life speaks for itself. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, we offer to his family, to his kids and the 

grandkids and the great-grandchildren our deepest condolences. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, Mr. 

Speaker, the motion says: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy for 

the members of the family of David Boldt. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

join the Premier again in seconding this condolence motion to 

the family of Mr. Dave Boldt and to his friends and the 

community of Rosthern. I’m sure there are many in that 

community and that neighbourhood of our province who will 

have very fond memories of Dave Boldt. 

 

He served 15 years, Mr. Speaker, in this Chamber, not with any 

of us who are here currently, but I think all of us who are here 

currently will recognize the commitment that 15 years of 

service to this legislature in both government and opposition 

meant, not only to himself but to the family whose condolences 

we send today. 

 

I note in Mr. Boldt’s public office career that he served as 

minister of Highways. He would have served as minister of 

Highways in the Thatcher government of the 1960s when many 

of us were growing up and experiencing those highways for the 

very first time. And I think ministers of Highways sort of get a 

lot of attention, then and now, and I can recall Dave Boldt, the 

minister of Highways. I may not recall what my father was 



238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

saying about the state of the roads in those days, but I can 

certainly recall the name Dave Boldt. 

 

The commitment that he brought to service in this legislature 

and through this legislature to the people of Saskatchewan and 

the people of Rosthern and that neighbourhood of our province, 

we recognize today. I’m sure there will be those who remember 

his service with the Gideons as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased on behalf of the official 

opposition to join with the Premier and government in offering 

our deepest condolences to the Boldt family on his passing over 

the course of the past year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Rosthern. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m in the 

humbling position of representing a constituency that’s been 

represented by a long list of very honourable men. I follow in 

the footsteps of people such as David Boldt, Bill Neudorf, and 

my father, Ben Heppner. Some of these men had the official 

title of honourable because they were cabinet ministers, but all 

were truly honourable because they were men of faith and 

integrity. And today it is my pleasure to rise to pay tribute to 

one of these men, David Boldt. 

 

Mr. Boldt was born and raised on a farm near Osler, the same 

area where he chose to farm and raise his own family along 

beside his wife, Anne. He carried the work ethic from that life 

to his political life as he served as the Liberal MLA for the 

Rosthern constituency from 1960 to 1975. While he began his 

political career in opposition, his party did form government. 

He served as Highways minister, and in my constituency we 

still drive on the roads that were built under his tenure in that 

portfolio. However after the last 16 years of NDP 

administration, they’re not quite in the same shape as they once 

were. He also served as Social Welfare minister and the 

minister for SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 

 

While I didn’t know Mr. Boldt personally, I do know that he 

was extremely well respected by his constituents regardless of 

voters’ political affiliations. To get a sense of who he was, I 

read through his maiden speech from February 17, 1961, when 

he was a new MLA in opposition. In his speech he promoted 

new business in his constituency, the same constituency that 

still is a place where innovative and industrious people work 

hard to make a better life for their families. He railed against the 

CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] government for 

wasting taxpayers’ money while ignoring farmers. Some things 

never change. 

 

I also spoke with folks from the constituency who knew Mr. 

Boldt when he first got involved in politics. They used words 

such as dedicated and hard-working to describe him. He was 

dedicated to the issues he believed were important and fought 

hard to make sure that the interests of his constituency were 

defended. 

 

What I have learned about Mr. Boldt is that he was a man of 

priorities and convictions, and he didn’t hide those. People who 

met him and worked with him knew exactly where he stood. 

 

In closing, I would like to quote from the eulogy delivered by 

John H. Neufeld at Mr. Boldt’s funeral: 

 

He had a set of biases rooted in his upbringing and his 

faith. He had a bias about the work of the family farm. He 

had his bias politically. But he was not engulfed by politics. 

Nor did he take his cues only from the world of business or 

of politics. His bias, his life’s direction was faith based. Did 

he always get it right? I doubt it. But the direction in which 

he was heading as a believer was never in doubt. That is 

part of his legacy and his challenge to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us who sit in this Chamber understand that 

to do so we sacrifice time with our family and friends. And to 

those who knew Mr. Boldt best and loved him most, we thank 

you for your generosity in allowing him to serve his 

constituents and his province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family of David Boldt. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

George Reginald Anderson Bowerman 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour today to move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to his 

province. 

 

George Reginald Anderson Bowerman — Ted — who 

passed away on December 20, 2007, was a member of this 

Legislative Assembly from 1967 to 1982. He represented 

the constituency of Shellbrook for the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

Mr. Bowerman was born on November 3, 1930 in 

Shellbrook. He received his early schooling at the 

one-room Rayside School. He furthered his education by 

taking correspondence courses and vocational training in 

agriculture and in resource management. 

 

Mr. Bowerman married Dagmar Christiansen on February 

14, Valentine’s Day, 1959, and they had three sons. He was 

predeceased by his wife and one son. 

 

Mr. Bowerman’s dedication to his fellow citizens was 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

evident in his lengthy and diverse public service. In 

addition to owning and operating a family farm from an 

early age, he was employed by the Department of Natural 

Resources for 18 years. 

 

He joined the Saskatchewan smoke jumpers in 1949 and 

became part of Canada’s first aerial firefighting and search 

and rescue team. Mr. Bowerman subsequently trained as a 

field officer and a game warden and was stationed around 

the province developing the commercial fishing industry. 

In his private life, Mr. Bowerman volunteered his time and 

knowledge to benefit organizations and groups and his 

local community. 

 

Mr. Bowerman was first elected to this Assembly in 1967 

and retained his seat in the following three elections. He 

entered cabinet in 1971 and remained in the executive until 

his retirement from elected office. Several of the portfolios 

Mr. Bowerman held reflected his personal interests and 

background. He first served as minister of Mineral 

Resources and later Natural Resources. He then led the 

Departments of Northern Saskatchewan and the 

Environment for several years. Mr. Bowerman also held 

the Saskatchewan Indian and Métis portfolio for a brief 

period of time. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with the members of the bereaved family of George 

Reginald Anderson Bowerman. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

opportunity to add a few words to the motion of condolence, 

and to second the motion of the Premier in reference to Ted 

Bowerman, whose passing was very untimely — just following 

Christmas this past year in a tragic accident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us have many memories of Ted 

Bowerman. Like Dave Boldt, he also served in this House for 

15 years, and I expect that most who met Ted Bowerman will 

have had the first impression that I had — here is a very large 

man, a very large man, very tall, a very large man, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’m not sure that I’ve ever met in my life a more gentle 

giant. For his physical stature, this man was a gentle man. 

 

Ted, if he were to, I think, hear us today and hear the motion of 

condolence and had to pick out that one part of it that would 

please him the most, I think it would be perhaps not his service 

in the legislature, but in his career as a smoke jumper. 

 

I don’t think Ted ever found anything in this life that came 

anything close to his career as a smoke jumper. In some ways 

he kind of pioneered smoke jumping in this province, and the 

stories are still told within government. And when Ted 

Bowerman was in the cabinet, Minister of the Environment, 

Natural Resources, he would be around the province in the 

government airplane and he would insist, Mr. Speaker, he 

would insist that airplane fly so close to the ground that he 

could recognize his neighbours’ faces on their tractors — that 

directly from his experience as a smoke jumper. He loved that 

work and never forgot it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough in our motion of condolence 

today there was something which is not included which I think 

Ted would want included, and that is that he, as well as his 

public service and his service to the community, also served his 

church. And Ted was a minister in the reorganized Church of 

Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In fact my first experience of 

Ted Bowerman was to meet Ted at a wedding as he performed 

that wedding for some very, very close friends of both of ours. 

 

So today we remember and we express our condolences to the 

Bowermans and to his many friends for his very untimely 

passing. 

 

We remember today a giant of a man who served gently and, 

Mr. Speaker, who had, way before his time, a very deep 

understanding and if I may say a special relationship with First 

Nations people in this province. And in many ways, it was Ted 

Bowerman who was pivotal in the establishment of the treaty 

land entitlement process in this province. 

 

And so, a friend of First Nations, one who deeply understood 

his neighbours in First Nations, who deeply worked with his 

community, who loved the play of politics, and who loved most 

of all to be a smoke jumper. A giant of a man but a gentle giant. 

And so we join with government in expressing our condolences 

to the Bowerman family. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to give my sincere condolences to the family of the late 

Ted Bowerman. And as the Leader of the Opposition just 

mentioned, he was a gentle giant. A big man but a gentle giant. 

 

Ted Bowerman was the youngest of six children on the 

Bowerman farm in the Rayside district. He was born at the 

beginning of the Great Depression which hit the Prairies harder 

than other areas. Those early rural hardships may have been 

why Mr. Bowerman was born into a very political household. 

 

Just a little bit of trivia. Mr. Bowerman’s father was an MP 

[Member of Parliament]. His name was Edward Bowerman. 

Mr. Edward Bowerman, he beat William Lyon Mackenzie King 

for the Prince Albert seat in 1945. Although Edward Bowerman 

only served one turn, just to defeat the Prime Minister speaks to 

an outstanding he had and must have had on local issues that 

affected the working Saskatchewan people. 

 

We know Ted Bowerman understood hardships facing 



240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

hard-working people in the province of Saskatchewan. As the 

Premier said, he has dedicated 15 years of his life to serve the 

people of Shellbrook, Torch River at that time, and the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Ted Bowerman worked very hard to improve the way that 

government served them. 

 

I’d like to tell a little story regarding Mr. Bowerman and that 

was in 1999 when I first ran for election to this Assembly. And 

one day I was in Shellbrook, campaigning on the streets of 

Shellbrook, and I ran into Mr. Bowerman. No doubts, you 

couldn’t miss him — a giant of a man. We both came from 

different political stripes, but yet he saw to sit and talk to me, 

and we must have talked for probably a half an hour, 

three-quarters of an hour. What we talked about was not the 

political stripes he ran or what I ran, but what we talked about is 

being a politician and the sacrifices one has to do to be a 

politician, the sacrifices your family has to go through just to be 

a politician. 

 

But above all, he said — and I remember him stating this over a 

couple of times — was, remember when you’re a politician, 

serve your constituents. That is the most important thing to 

being politician, to being an MLA because remember, he said, 

when you are a politician and an MLA for that constituency, it’s 

the constituency that put you here. So remember them and do 

what they ask you within reason to serve the needs and the 

issues that they have. And you are the voice that brings them 

down to Regina. 

 

And, you know, after talking with him a great deal of time I 

thought, you know, if I could just be half the politician he was, I 

wouldn’t be a bad politician. And for the eight years I’ve tried 

to serve my constituents because I remember my constituents 

are the one that put me here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ted Bowerman was a kind, hard-working man. 

It’s unfortunate he died at an early age. Mr. Bowerman was 

involved in the local church. He sat on boards of four co-ops 

and was the driving force behind the Prince Albert Community 

Clinic. He was a humanitarian in the community who always 

looked ahead but always be available to help others. 

 

Mr. Bowerman won the Shellbrook-Torch River constituency 

election first in 1967, served for 15 years as an NDP member. 

He was re-elected again in 1971 and served under Premier 

Blakeney until 1982. 

 

Mr. Bowerman was trusted. For Mr. Bowerman to have gained 

the trust really speaks to the type of person Mr. Bowerman was. 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Bowerman lived a life that amplified the 

Saskatchewan spirit — honesty, hard-working, family oriented, 

and community minded. He served this province in many 

capacities for more than 30 years. 

 

For his years of service we pay tribute to him today. On behalf 

of my colleagues in this Assembly I would like to thank . . . or 

to send my sincere regards to the family and friends of Mr. Ted 

Bowerman. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to briefly enter into this memory of the Honourable Ted 

Bowerman, who tragically passed away in December, just last 

year. 

 

I want to start, Mr. Speaker, by admonishing parents, be careful 

what we do to our children because Ted Bowerman, at the 

tender age of 15, helped his father defeat William Lyon 

Mackenzie King for a federal seat in Prince Albert. At the age 

of 15 he was introduced first-hand to campaigning. And it was a 

lesson that of course Ted took to heart and in 1967 was his own 

candidate for the CCF — won that election. 1971 rolled along; 

he won that election. Then incoming Premier Blakeney 

appointed him into cabinet where he stayed and Ted Bowerman 

won in 1975 and again in ’79. He lost in 1982 in the Devine 

Conservative sweep. 

 

But my memory growing up was every time I would open up 

my favourite newspaper, which was The Commonwealth — 

again I’d admonish parents be careful what you do to your 

children — I would open it up and there would be Ted 

Bowerman and others, friendly, smiling faces that you just 

knew you could trust. And the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook 

said Ted Bowerman was trusted. He had a trusting face. He 

earned that trust as has been stated by others. Just a straight 

ahead type of a guy. 

 

And in 1986 Ted Bowerman was a candidate for the New 

Democratic Party for the last time. And I was a first-time 

candidate for the New Democratic Party, and I got to know Ted 

just briefly. As all members of this legislature would know, you 

meet candidates and some of us are successful and get elected 

and some are not, and it’s rare that you become fast and close 

friends beyond that. But it was my honour to run at the same 

time as Ted Bowerman did. 

 

I offer my condolences to Dagmar and their three boys, Ted and 

Dagmar’s boys, Stephen, Curtis, Mark, and the entire 

Bowerman family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I would just like to join with my colleagues today to 

make a few comments about Mr. Bowerman. I read with 

interest a memorial and some of the information, just some of 

the information that was passed out about the many exploits 

that he had during his life and his many endeavours, whether 

from the original smoke jumpers in 1949, I mean, to the other 

paths that his life took, from working as a resource officer for 

the Department of Natural Resources or commercial fishing or 

farming. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I went through and I was reading some of 

the information, there was one line in the memorial that really 

jumped out at me, and it says, “His strong faith and love of life 

led many to respect him as an individual.” And that’s when it 

struck me that I never had the privilege of meeting Mr. 

Bowerman, but I had learned of him through my colleagues. At 

various meetings, at various events his name would often be 

brought up as an example or an incident that would be relayed 

to the rest of us. But each time his name was brought up or an 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 241 

incident was talked about, there was always respect and warmth 

in the voice of the person who was relaying the message. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you think of an individual such as this 

who served the province, served his community, had a strong 

faith and a love of life, it truly speaks to the essence of what we 

are as human beings and the things that we need to do to make 

sure that we have an impact on our communities and on our 

families and leave that sense of warmth and faith to those that 

come after us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my condolences to the 

family; to Mr. Bowerman’s sons, Curtis and Mark; their 

families and grandsons especially. It was a life well lived and a 

life that truly left a mark on our province as a whole and to 

many citizens in it. And I would like to pass along my 

condolences also. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

January 2 a celebration of Ted’s life was held in Prince Albert, 

and I had the privilege of attending that memorial service along 

with my dad and hundreds of other people who were Ted’s 

friends and neighbours, but also former political colleagues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it was nothing short of a shock to hear that 

Ted had been killed in a car accident on December 20 when he 

was on his way to Cochrane, Alberta to spend Christmas with 

his sons and their families. And it sent shocks throughout the 

New Democratic Party, but also throughout the whole area of 

Shellbrook and Prince Albert because Ted was the kind of 

fellow . . . given his history of being a smoke jumper and all of 

the various physical activities he’d engaged in in his life, he 

was not someone that you would think would have been 

tragically killed in a car accident. 

 

When I think of Ted Bowerman, I think of him as the former 

minister of the Environment. He was the Minister of the 

Environment in the Blakeney government in the early 1980s. 

And he was a remarkable fellow because not only had he spent 

his time in the North as a conservation officer or a warden, I 

guess you would call it in those days, a smoker jumper, but he 

also had a huge love of the outdoors and nature. And it was at 

the time when there was a decision being made whether or not 

to name . . . to put the Grasslands National Park into a park. 

And it required the approval of the Government of 

Saskatchewan because quite a bit of that land was Crown land. 

And I think one of the things that Ted Bowerman should take 

credit for is working with the federal government to have a 

Grasslands National Park come in to existence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the thing that I think about Ted is his size, 

obviously as has been alluded to, but also he had a wonderful 

smile and laugh and it was a hearty laugh. Ted Bowerman was 

an honourable man. He was a trustworthy man. He was loved 

by his colleagues and his constituents. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan has lost a true friend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to Ted’s children, Mark and Curtis, I want to pass 

on once again my condolences, as well as their spouses and 

grandchildren. This institution, this parliamentary institution 

has lost an honourable friend. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family of George Reginald 

Anderson Bowerman 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Michael Feschuk 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for 

me to move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and his province. 

 

Michael [Mike] Feschuk, who passed away on November 

12, 2007, was a member of this Assembly from 1971 until 

1982. He represented the constituencies of Prince Albert 

East and Prince Albert for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Feschuk was born on January 6, 1932, at Meath Park. 

He spent his formative years on the family farm and 

attended local schools in Meath Park. Mr. Feschuk married 

Helen Mychaluk on January 25, 1953, and they had one 

daughter. He is survived by his wife, his daughter, four 

grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Feschuk’s professional career encompassed many 

fields. He initially continued the family tradition of farming 

and later assumed responsibility for his parents’ farming 

operations. In the 1980s, Mr. Feschuk was employed as a 

real estate agent before joining Statistics Canada. 

 

In his personal life Mr. Feschuk sought to alleviate the 

hardships faced by others in his community. He 

volunteered his time to mentor new Ukrainian immigrants, 

to assist farmers with annual harvest, and support those 

looking for employment. Several community organizations 

benefited from Mr. Feschuk’s contributions, and he was 

awarded the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal in 

recognition of those efforts. 

 

Mr. Feschuk’s involvement with politics began with the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and continued 

with the New Democratic Party. He sought election to this 

Assembly in 1971 and successfully retained his seat in ’75 

and 1978, in the general elections in those years. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 



242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

[15:30] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family of Michael Feschuk. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to be 

able to add a few words to the condolence motion to the 

Feschuk family and to second the motion of the Premier, with 

just a few observations about Mike Feschuk, a very, very good 

friend of many in Prince Albert; a very, very good friend of the 

New Democratic Party and, before it, the CCF; and a very hard 

worker. And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, right up until his very 

latter years of life, Mike Feschuk was very much involved in 

political activity in Prince Albert. 

 

There is in the annals of our political movement, Mike 

Feschuk’s nomination, his first nomination remains in the 

category of special and history. Mike ran for that nomination, 

back before 1971 I think against seven or eight other candidates 

for the nomination. The nomination meeting, Mr. Speaker, was 

held on a cold, cold winter night — 40 below — and it lasted 

until 3 a.m. in the morning. And it was always suggested that 

Mike Feschuk won it because he was the farm candidate from 

Meath Park and all the farm folks stayed around and all the 

town folks went home and that’s how Mike won. And the 

people of Prince Albert Meath Park and that entire area were 

well served as a result of that nomination before 1971. 

 

Mike served right in this Chamber up until ’82. He always 

brought to his work his personality which was a quiet 

personality — very determined but quiet. In fact Mike made 

very few speeches within this Chamber as a member, but was 

perhaps one of the most effective members that have every 

taken a chair in this place in terms of serving his constituents. 

 

When Mike served, it was before the days, Mr. Speaker, of our 

constituency offices and so on and MLAs worked out of their 

home. And Mike worked directly in the homes of his 

constituents. He was like the old house-call doctor. Mike used 

to go around and help people with any connection they may 

have had with provincial government. And this was particularly 

true, Mr. Speaker, when it came to Ukrainian people and people 

of Ukrainian origin. Mike, being fluent in Ukrainian, was 

always first to help the Ukrainian people of Saskatchewan, of 

his own community. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, Mike Feschuk 

made several trips to Ukraine, taking with him care packages 

for the people of Ukraine from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

He was one of those members of the legislature whose first and 

primary efforts were to help the constituents he represented and 

the communities where he belonged, and I’m not sure I’ve ever 

met a man who did it more diligently or with more passion. You 

will find few entries, Mr. Speaker, in the Hansards of this 

Chamber, but you will find many memories of Mike Feschuk in 

Prince Albert, in Meath Park, and in that area of this province 

that he so proudly represented. 

 

So I’m pleased to join with the government today on behalf of 

the official opposition in offering our condolences to Mike’s 

family and his many, many friends that yet remain in Prince 

Albert. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: —Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to rise today to 

speak about a man who is truly revered in Prince Albert. I was 

10 years old when Mike Feschuk last served as an MLA in 

1982, yet his legend, influence, and respect of community was 

still very much alive in my first election, November ’07. Mike 

was still very involved in politics in the constituency, and he 

was a powerful role model — an example of what a politician 

should be. 

 

His commitment to improving the lives of others was strong 

until his death, Mr. Speaker, and he always believed in helping 

others in any way that he could. 

 

Before he was elected in 1971, Mike farmed for over 30 years 

in the Meath Park district. He took on many other jobs in his 

lifetime including construction work, mining, real estate sales. 

He also worked for Stats Canada for many years. 

 

He always believed in serving his community. He served on the 

National Farmers Union and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. He 

was a member of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and the 

Masonic lodge. After Mike moved to Prince Albert, he joined 

local service clubs and worked very hard on their fundraising 

endeavours. 

 

Prince Albert has a large and vibrant Ukrainian community, and 

Mike was very involved in that community. In recent years, 

when immigrants from Ukraine came to Prince Albert, he was 

the first to welcome and assist them with paper work that 

sometimes threatens to overwhelm new Canadians. Many times 

Mike was the contact person for people from Ukraine wanting 

information on how to apply and come to Canada. He would 

take it upon himself to help with documentation, translating, 

contacting government officials and departments on behalf of 

would-be residents. Mike did this because of his great 

compassion for those who were less fortunate, and he took great 

joy in assisting each new citizen and watched with pride as they 

became accustomed to their new country. 

 

Many times Mike did not wait to be asked for help but reached 

out to those who needed help. When Mike became aware of a 

little girl in Ukraine who needed surgery and therapy in order to 

have a chance to walk, he raised funds to bring she and her 

mother to Canada. He convinced doctors in Prince Albert and 

Saskatoon to provide care for her at no charge. He arranged for 

therapy to be provided to her as well. He and his wife, Helen, 

opened their home and hearts to she and her mother. Many 

people in Prince Albert have told of Mike’s commitment and of 

his pride and joy as she became stronger and healthier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mike was like everybody else in that he did have a 

fault or two. I’ve heard stories from his former colleagues who 

tell that, when on the road, he needed at least a two-hotel-room 

buffer zone from Mike due to what has been described as, and I 

quote, “snoring sounding like a locomotive continuously going 

through your room.” In fact it got so bad on occasion that a 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

hotel would book one wing at the hotel for the rest of caucus 

and another wing solely for Mike. 

 

But I digress. As a result of his life’s work as an advocate, in 

2005 he was presented with the Commemorative Medal for the 

Centennial of Saskatchewan. This medal recognizes individuals 

that made a significant contribution to Saskatchewan, and Mike 

was certainly deserving of that recognition. He proudly 

accepted the medal from Her Honour, lieutenant governor, 

Lynda Haverstock. 

 

As an MLA, Mike was truly devoted to his constituency. His 

tenacity was legendary. If a constituent went to Mike with a 

problem, he would make it his personal mission to find a 

solution. There are many stories of Mike sitting in cabinet 

ministers’ offices and not leaving until he had a suitable 

resolution to his constituent’s issues. Mike believed that his job 

as a member of this legislature was to serve the people he 

represented, and serve them he did. He was a quiet and 

unassuming man in many ways, but he was always a forceful 

and strong advocate for the people he served. 

 

As an MLA in Blakeney’s administration, he served on the 

legislature’s special committee on welfare. He also served on 

the special committee on liquor regulations. In ’74 he was 

appointed legislative secretary to the minister of Agriculture. To 

each of these committees, Mike brought his strong belief that 

those who serve in government must always act in the best 

interest of the people they serve. As such, he took these roles 

very seriously. He worked very hard and was truly an asset on 

the special committees and as a legislative secretary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, five days after my election, I was saddened to hear 

that Mike had passed away. He’d been active on the P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Northcote NDP executive until the time of his 

death, and I will sorely miss his guidance and counsel. He will 

be greatly missed in Prince Albert by so many people because 

he’s touched the lives of so many. His quick smile, his 

friendship, compassion, and his leadership was all a part of who 

Mike was, and his passing has left a void that will not be filled. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

pass my condolences on to the Feschuk family as well. 

 

Michael Feschuk, who passed away November 12, 2007, 

was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1971 

until 1982. He represented the constituencies of Prince 

Albert East and Prince Albert for the New Democratic 

Party. 

 

Mr. Feschuk was born on January 6, 1932, at Meath Park. 

He spent his formative years on his family farm and 

attended local schools in Meath Park. Mr. Feschuk married 

Helen on January 25, 1953, and they had one daughter. He 

is survived by his wife, his daughter, four grandchildren, 

and three great-grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Feschuk’s professional career encompassed many 

fields. He initially continued the family tradition of farming 

and later assumed responsibility for his parents’ farming 

operations. In the 1980s, Mr. Feschuk was employed as a 

real estate agent before joining Statistics Canada. 

 

In his personal life Mr. Feschuk sought to alleviate the 

hardships faced by others in his community. He 

volunteered his time to mentor new Ukrainian immigrants, 

to assist farmers with the annual harvest, and to support 

those looking for employment. Several community 

organizations benefitted from Mr. Feschuk’s contributions, 

and he was awarded the Saskatchewan Centennial Medal in 

recognition of his efforts. 

 

Mr. Feschuk’s involvement with politics began with the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and continued 

with the New Democratic Party. He sought election to this 

Assembly in 1971 and successfully retained his seat in the 

1975 and 1978 general elections. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 

members of the bereaved family, as do I. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family of Michael Feschuk. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Calvin Henry [Cal] Glauser 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 

move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of the Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and his province. 

 

Calvin Henry [Cal] Glauser, who passed away on 

February 5, 2007, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly from 1982 until 1986. He represented the 

constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair for the Progressive 

Conservative Party. 

 

Mr. Glauser was born on April 2, 1923, in Delisle. He 

spent his childhood on the family farm and received his 

education in local schools. In 1941 Mr. Glauser moved 

with his family to Saskatoon, where he joined the Royal 

Canadian Air Force. In early 1943 he travelled overseas as 

a member of the ground crew. Later that year he was 



244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

attached to the Quebec Les Alouettes 425 Squadron and 

deployed with them to North Africa for nine months. He 

served the remainder of the war in England. Upon 

receiving his discharge from the air force in 1945, Mr. 

Glauser returned to Canada. 

 

Mr. Glauser married Marjorie Schauss on July 12, 1947. 

He is survived by his wife and their four children, seven 

grandchildren, and two great-grandchildren. Mr. Glauser’s 

career with the Royal Bank extended over 28 years. He 

served at branches in Saskatoon and Regina before 

retiring in 1982 as the north region marketing manager. 

 

Shortly thereafter, Mr. Glauser was elected to this 

Assembly. He served as Vice-Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts, and as a member of the 

Estimates Committee. Mr. Glauser served as the 

legislative secretary to the minister of Health. He also held 

appointments on the caucus legislative review and 

industrial review committees. 

 

In his private life, Mr. Glauser was an active volunteer in 

a number of community organizations. His involvement 

with the Cosmopolitan Club extended over 23 years. Mr. 

Glauser took particular pleasure in researching and 

publishing a history of his own family dating back to its 

Swiss origins in the 1650s. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

the members of Cal’s family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with the members of the Calvin Henry Glauser family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again to join 

with the Premier and the government in expressing the 

condolences of the opposition to the Glauser family. As I, not 

having known Cal Glauser, listening to the condolence motion 

as read by the Premier, it is pretty clear that this individual’s life 

was characterized by service. Like many of his generation he 

was called to service on behalf of the nation during the Second 

World War, and served with distinction — as indicated by the 

condolence motion — in that Second World War conflict. 

Marrying as many did following that war, beginning their 

family, and then serving this province and citizens of this 

province through a long career with the Royal Bank of Canada; 

working in a variety of communities including Regina and 

Saskatoon and then becoming engaged in public life. 

 

After many would have said, I have contributed sufficient, Cal 

Glauser decided to run for public office, and those of us who 

occupy public office respect that commitment. And I read in his 

condolence motion how many years he spent with the 

Cosmopolitans in Saskatoon, likely engaged with Cosmo 

Industries and so on. And from the indication in the condolence 

motion, a deep commitment to his own family. 

 

And so we recognize this life of service, Mr. Speaker, 

characterized in part by his service to the people of 

Saskatchewan through this legislature, if for only that one term 

in the early 1980s. And so we join with the Premier and 

government in expressing our condolences to the Glauser 

family in their loss in the past year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to stand 

before this legislature to pay tribute to a man who worked 

endlessly to represent the people of our great province. Calvin 

Henry Glauser passed away in February 5, 2007 in Victoria, 

British Columbia. 

 

We hope that our best wishes will give some solace to Cal’s 

family in their time of loss, his wife of 59 years, Marjorie, his 

children and grandchildren, and the many friends he made 

throughout his life. Cal Glauser will be fondly remembered by 

his colleagues and all who knew him. 

 

Mr. Glauser was born in Delisle, Saskatchewan on April 2, 

1923. He began his working career at the Royal Bank where he 

served for 28 years. His devotion to the community helped him 

make the decision to run for office after his career at the Royal 

Bank. I met Cal and worked with him in the 1982 election. Mr. 

Glauser was elected as a Progressive Conservative MLA for 

Saskatoon Mayfair in that election in 1982. 

 

In his maiden speech he stated, “I have believed in the 

principles of integrity, responsibility, and accountability. This is 

the manner in which I intend to serve my constituents in the 

House.” Mr. Speaker, he took great pride in the people of his 

constituency — the farmers, labourers, professional people, and 

educators. It was on their behalf that he took up political office. 

 

In that maiden speech Mr. Glauser spoke of the importance of 

consultation between government and the people of 

Saskatchewan, the need for adequate funding in education, the 

importance of population growth, the need to care for seniors, 

and the significant role of volunteers in Saskatchewan. Cal 

Glauser truly understood the issues in Saskatchewan. These are 

many of the same concerns that the people of Saskatchewan 

have today. 

 

Mr. Glauser worked hard to promote non-partisan politics in his 

constituency, inviting the people in his constituency to phone 

him and I quote, “ regardless of their political affiliation.” He 

also understood that the relationship between business people 

and government had not been strong in the past and he worked 

hard to rectify that disparity. 

 

During his time in the Assembly he served on the Public 

Accounts Committee. He served the people of Saskatoon 

Mayfair in the Legislative Assembly until 1986 when he 

decided not to run for re-election for personal reasons. In 1989 

Cal and Marjorie moved to Victoria where they enjoyed their 

well-deserved retirement. 

 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

On behalf of my colleagues in this Assembly, I want to send my 

sincere condolences and regards to the family and friends of Cal 

Glauser. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Calvin Henry Glauser family. 

 

Is this Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Norman Lusney 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it’s 

an honour to move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to his 

province. 

 

Norman Lusney, who passed away on December 10, 

2007, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 

1977 until 1986. He represented the constituency of Pelly 

for the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Lusney was born on February 10, 1937 in Kamsack. 

He spent his childhood contributing to the operation of the 

family farm and attending the McGillvray School. Mr. 

Lusney married Loretta Horkoff on October 10, 1958 and 

they had two daughters. He is survived by his wife, their 

daughters, and five grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Lusney followed many career paths during his life. He 

first sought employment in the mining field in British 

Columbia and in Alice Arm. Later he worked on the 

railroad in Ontario, in the dairy industry in Moose Jaw, and 

for Canada Post in Roblin, Manitoba. Mr. Lusney was also 

a businessman, operating a service station and a family 

farm for many years. 

 

Mr. Lusney was an active participant in the affairs of the 

communities in which he lived. At the local level he served 

on a number of boards of several organizations. At the 

provincial level, Mr. Lusney’s public service was reflected 

in his membership in this Assembly. He was first elected 

into this Assembly after a by-election in 1977, and he was 

re-elected in the following two elections. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of Mr. Lusney’s family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Norman Lusney family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to be able to say a few words on behalf of the official 

opposition and myself in regard to Norm Lusney and the 

condolence motion to the Lusney family. 

 

Norm was a quiet man in many ways. And those of us who 

knew him politically knew him to be a very quiet but very 

determined and very sincere individual. And when I think of 

Norm Lusney’s life experience, it is, by a country mile, it can 

only be described as a varied experience. I mean, Norm Lusney 

knew about farming and farmed. He knew about working in an 

industrial setting. He knew about running his own business. 

And he knew about the public service and public life. 

 

And those who worked with Norm at the constituency level will 

reflect that he was always viewed as a very straight shooter. 

And you knew what Norm Lusney said, he meant. And there 

was never any misunderstanding or unclarity about where Norm 

stood on issues. 

 

He built a high regard in his constituency and among his 

constituents for service in this building, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think the testimony to that, the testimony to that is that he 

survived the 1982 election as a New Democrat when very few 

survived in ’82 — particularly in rural Saskatchewan. Norm 

Lusney survived. And that was built on the reputation and the 

confidence that he had built among the people of his 

constituency. 

 

So we recognize in the New Democratic Party and in the caucus 

the exceptional service that Norm Lusney not only played to his 

constituents, to government, but then also in that time of 

opposition. We recognize that today, and we extend our 

condolences with this House to the Lusney family. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise to give my sincere condolences to the family 

of the late Norman Lusney, who passed away on December 10, 

2007, also at a very early age of 70. 

 

Mr. Lusney was a predecessor of mine in the Pelly constituency 

and served in this Assembly as a member of the New 

Democratic Party from 1977 to 1986, as indicated by the 

previous speakers. And of course, Mr. Speaker, I have the 

honour of representing Canora-Pelly which is a combination of 

the then Pelly constituency that Mr. Lusney represented and 

Canora in the last redrawing of constituencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during his tenure as a member of the legislature he 

was a great advocate of the provincial government’s role in 

health care and the need for a strong agricultural framework 



246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

throughout the entire province. Norman supported farmers in 

tough times and he stood with Swan Plain farmers in their fight 

to stop foreclosures after the 1983 crop failure. 

 

Norman never backed away from a challenge. One example of 

this is when he worked to persuade the federal government to 

oppose American agricultural subsidies — something, Mr. 

Speaker, that is also still in the news today. Mr. Lusney’s 

passion for world concerns can be traced back to his upbringing 

in the Stony Creek district of Saskatchewan where he worked 

on the family farm and was educated at McGillvray School. 

Norman had an innate understanding of life on the farm and the 

struggles rural people have seen in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Lusney left Saskatchewan at an early age to pursue a career 

in the mining industry in British Columbia, and later moved to 

Ontario where he worked on the railroad. He returned to 

Saskatchewan and married Loretta Horkoff in Kamsack on 

October 10, 1958, and they were blessed with two daughters, 

Kim and Kristy. And after that the family moved on to Moose 

Jaw. Norman would go on to work at the Silverwood Dairies 

and later owned and operated a highway store service station in 

Roblin, Manitoba. 

 

Norman returned to Saskatchewan to take over his family’s 

farm when his parents fell ill. Loretta and Norman proceeded to 

work the farm for 32 years and became committed members of 

the community. Norman belonged to many boards and I 

understand he even pitched for the Kamsack seniors’ slow pitch 

team. Norman had the good fortune to work not only in 

agriculture but also in industry, and I believe that this prepared 

him well for the diverse work that goes on here in the 

Legislative Building in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in his maiden speech in the legislature, Norman 

Lusney was proud to say, and I quote, “It is my humble opinion 

that the best people to be found anywhere are those in the Pelly 

constituency.” Although Norman and I laboured on opposite 

sides of the political fence, we both would agree with that. 

 

Norman Lusney was motivated by a deep respect for the people 

of Saskatchewan and this was reflected in his personal and 

public life. On behalf of my colleagues in the Legislative 

Assembly, I would like to send my sincerest regards to the 

friends and family of the late Norman Lusney. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

follow the hon. member for Canora-Pelly in honouring Norm 

Lusney, the former member for the constituency of Pelly. 

 

Norm was a candidate last for the New Democratic Party in 

1986. Again I remind members it was the year I first ran and so 

I got to see Norm then. But I’d seen him earlier in action as 

well, certainly in all of the time I was a nominated candidate. 

And there was a very small opposition from ’82 to ’86. The 

New Democrats were very, very small. But Norm was part of 

that small yet determined rump of an opposition, if I can 

describe it that way. 

 

And I came to know that Norm Lusney was a man of his word, 

a man of conviction. And he came from his constituency of 

Pelly. He honoured the people that honoured him with their 

votes and he honoured those that didn’t by trying to be the best 

representative in his area that he could possibly be. And 

certainly the fact that he won in June 8, 1977 in a by-election 

speaks very highly of Norm. 

 

But there’s a quote I want to read out of the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix that for me really sums up a great deal. And it’s 

just a great little paragraph. The byline on the Pelly by-election 

is “Lusney betters NDP hopes.” And the quote I want to use is 

from Norm Lusney himself. And I quote: 

 

I think it goes to show at this point the people are 

supporting the policies of the government — potash, land 

bank . . . I think the Opposition parties will have to work a 

little harder if they expect to be the next government. 

 

And I say in a partisan way that Mr. Lusney made a big 

impression on me with that because it wasn’t about Stormin’ 

Norman. It wasn’t about Norm Lusney. It was about the broader 

picture and the group that he was running as a part of, and he 

was passing on that it isn’t about me as an individual. It’s about 

our great party. 

 

So again I guess I’ll close where I started and just trying to 

honour Norm Lusney, a man of his word, a man of conviction, a 

dedicated servant of his constituency. Pelly and area are better 

for the service that Norm Lusney gave, and I know that our 

province is better for his life. Thank you. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also 

would like to pass along my condolences to the Lusney family 

and also say a few words about Norman who passed away on 

December 10, 2007, and was a member of this legislature from 

1977 to 1986 and represented the constituency of Pelly for the 

New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Lusney, from all of the comments from my colleagues, had 

a very wide and varied career, going from the mining fields in 

British Columbia at Alice Arm; working for the railway in 

Ontario; Canada Post in Roblin, Manitoba; and even for 

Silverwood Dairies in my community of Moose Jaw. Norman 

was also a businessman operating a service station and spent 

many years on the family farm. 

 

He was also an active participant in many affairs of the 

community in which he lived. And that’s evident, Mr. Speaker, 

when we sometimes as politicians think that politics has a 

tendency to kind of overtake our lives and sometimes be all 

consuming. But when we look at the memorial that was printed 

for Norman Lusney, we see that politics is really one short 

sentence. Nine years was one short sentence in his memorial, 

and the column was full of other activities that Norman had 

participated in and taken part in right across — actually right 

across —Canada in his career and in his community most 

definitely. 

 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with my colleagues to pass 

along my condolences to Loretta and to also his daughters Kim 

and Kristy and their families at the passing of Norman and say 

that he really has earned a place in the history of Saskatchewan. 

And it’s a rare privilege that we all have to have a seat in this 

House. And while it doesn’t always define us totally as Mr. 

Norman Lusney has quite clearly shown, it was a part of his 

life. And I would like to join with other members of the House 

by passing along my condolences to his family. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join in this condolence motion. I am honoured to take part, and 

I would like to take this opportunity to pass my condolences to 

Loretta and Norman’s family. 

 

I had the opportunity to first meet Norman back in the winter of 

1969-1970 when I was then acting as a campaign manager for 

the then-candidate for Pelly constituency, Leonard Larson, and 

we were travelling throughout the constituency. And Leonard 

stopped in to introduce me to Norman, who at that time was 

running the highway service station and local coffee shop and 

bulk dealership at the Wroxton corner near Wroxton, 

Saskatchewan. And I remember my very first impressions of 

Norman as a very warm and inviting individual, a very open 

person, and a very easy person to talk to. I soon realized as 

Leonard and I drove through that area, and visiting with 

constituents in that area, that Norman had a reputation there of 

being a very honest, a very straightforward business person, a 

person that you could rely on, and a person whose word was his 

bond. 

 

And Norman had all kinds of respect in that area and beyond 

his immediate area. And I guess that’s probably why he was 

successful in 1977 winning the NDP nomination in a field of, I 

believe there was, four candidates — Norman being one of 

them — and Norman was able to emerge the winner for the 

NDP nomination and then went on to win the by-election in 

1977. He also won the re-election in ’78 and in ’82. And as has 

been mentioned earlier, I think the fact that Norman was able to 

withstand the pressures of the Grant Devine sweep in ’82 was a 

testimony to the reputation that he had as an individual within 

his constituency. 

 

And Norman was a quiet fellow, and I know that after he was 

elected and became a member of the legislature here he picked 

up the nickname of Stormin’ Norman, and that nickname stuck 

with him. And it was meant with the most affection and used by 

people in his constituency very affectionately. 

 

I had the privilege of serving on the NDP executive for Pelly 

constituency during the period of time that Norman was the 

MLA there. In fact I believe I served as the constituency 

president from about 1984, ’85, and ’86; and Norman was a real 

hard worker when it come to campaigning. He would cover the 

entire constituency. And he would leave early in the morning 

from home or from the campaign office in Kamsack, and he 

would be out door knocking and visiting with folks, not only on 

the farm, but in the small communities throughout that 

constituency. And he built up a reputation for being a 

hard-working MLA not only at election time but also in 

between, serving his constituents. 

 

I can think of a number of constituents who had issues with the 

provincial government, who would contact Norman, and 

Norman would take up their cause and work it through until he 

had a satisfactory conclusion. 

 

So with that, I’d like to wind up my remarks by once again just 

offering my condolences to Loretta and their family. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Norman Lusney family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Maria Margharita Sally Merchant 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s my privilege, Mr. Speaker, to move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of the Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution she 

made to her community, her constituency, and to her 

province. 

 

Maria Margharita Sally Merchant, Sally, who passed 

away on April 1, 2007, was a member of this Legislative 

Assembly from 1964 until 1967. She represented the 

constituency of Saskatoon City for the Liberal Party. 

 

Mrs. Merchant was born on October 1, 1919, in Yorkton. 

She began her schooling at the Victoria Public School in 

Yorkton and then at the Loretta Convent in Sedley. She 

completed her secondary education at the Convent of 

Sacred Heart in Halifax and Montreal. 

 

Mrs. Merchant graduated from Dalhousie University in 

1940 with a Bachelor of Arts degree and later received a 

Bachelor of Education degree from the University of 

Saskatchewan in 1955. 

 

Mrs. Merchant married Evatt Merchant in 1941 and is 

survived by their two children and nine grandchildren. 

Mrs. Merchant pursued many careers over her lifetime. As 

a broadcasting pioneer, she hosted a series of interview 

programs on the local CFQC television station. She later 

served as a member of the Canadian Radio and 

Telecommunications Commission. As a public servant, 

Mrs. Merchant joined the federal department of Consumer 

and Corporate Affairs in 1969. 

 

Over the following 14 years, she left an indelible mark on 



248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

the development of the new department and on the 

policies, initiatives, and protocols in the consumer 

protection field. Mrs. Merchant was also an academic and 

passed on her knowledge and experience to students at the 

University of Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan. She 

later served as the assistant director of development at her 

alma mater in Saskatoon. 

 

Mrs. Merchant was an active participant in the affairs of 

the communities in which she lived. Mrs. Merchant’s 

professional interests were reflected in the organizations 

she chose to support. She was a member of the Canadian 

media club, Consumers’ Association of Canada, the 

Canadian Institute of International Affairs, and the Liberal 

Party of Canada. 

 

Mrs. Merchant’s personal interests and concern for the 

welfare of others were also reflected in her memberships. 

She was a life member of the Saskatoon Council of 

Women and an honourary member of the Soroptimists 

International. And I’m sure she could pronounce it more 

effectively than I just did, Mr. Speaker. Other 

organizations dedicated to assisting those in need also 

benefited from her involvement. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of Sally’s family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Maria Margharita Sally Merchant 

family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

again with the Premier in seconding the condolence motion this 

afternoon, this time expressing our condolences to the Merchant 

family on the passing of Sally Merchant — a name that is well, 

well known in the province of Saskatchewan. And as we hear 

the condolence motion and think about Sally Merchant’s life in 

our province, I think it is fair to say that this was indeed a 

pioneering woman — a strong and a pioneering woman whose 

service is broad and whose experience was broad. Part of that 

service was here in this Chamber, here in this legislature, but 

for a relatively short period of time of three years. Much of her 

work was done outside of this Chamber, and we recognize that 

as well, even though it is today the condolence of the 

legislature. 

 

As we review Sally Merchant’s life, we understand her career in 

broadcasting; we understand her career with the federal 

government, in particular her work in consumer protection. We 

recognize her academic work. We recognize that she has been 

the matriarch of a very political and important family in the 

history of Saskatchewan. But not recognized perhaps in some of 

the short motion of condolence will be Sally Merchant’s work 

as the Saskatchewan chairperson of UNICEF [United Nations 

Children’s Fund], for instance, Mr. Speaker, or her work with 

the Red Shield Appeal and the Salvation Army or her work with 

the Abilities Council, a woman that gave a great, great deal to 

the province of Saskatchewan. Some of that commitment we 

saw through the process of this legislature in the 1960s, but 

we’ve seen it over a lifetime. 

 

And with the Premier and the government, on behalf of the 

official opposition, we extend our deep condolences to the 

Merchant family at the loss of their mother and grandmother. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 

speak to the House today with my sincere sympathies for the 

Merchant family. I want to take this opportunity to remember 

Sally Merchant, a dear friend who passed away about a year ago 

on April 1 at the age of 88. 

 

I was fortunate to have counted Sally as my friend and greatly 

admired her professional and personal accomplishments. We 

met through the Saskatoon branch of the Canadian Institute of 

International Affairs in the mid 1990s and remained in close 

contact. I can remember one evening she was hosting the annual 

meeting at her house, and I was running late. My daughter had 

just been born, and I dropped off my daughter at the 

caregiver’s, and I was running more than a few minutes late. 

Sally tactfully, skilfully, seamlessly inserted me into the 

meeting and, with a bit of a loud laugh, said I’m sorry, Rob, but 

there was a bit of a mix-up as far as the time. That was Sally’s 

grace. 

 

Obviously she was widowed at an early age. She took great 

pride in her two children and in her grandchildren. She made 

contributions in the media, especially in Saskatoon, and as well 

within this Chamber. She went on to have other successful 

careers, obviously with the federal government, but she also 

was a participant as part of Canada’s delegation to the United 

Nations, a topic of which she would like to share stories. 

 

She lectured, obviously, prairie universities and made 

contributions across our community: the Abilities Council, the 

Council of Christians and Jews, the John Howard Society 

among others. Over the course of her life, Sally Merchant 

worked tirelessly for her family, for her community, for her 

province, and for her country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured today to be able to pay tribute to a 

truly inspiring Canadian. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add my 

words of condolences to the Merchant family and especially 

Adrian and all her children and grandchildren and Tony and all 

of his children. 

 

Sally Merchant was one of those special people in 

Saskatchewan, who through her television show, which I recall 

seeing when I was quite young, went into people’s homes in a 

way that everybody understood who she was and how she could 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

affect them. And throughout her career subsequent to that, she 

took that ability to connect with people to many, many different 

careers, as has been stated here. 

 

But I want to just talk briefly about how I perceived Sally, and 

many conversations that I had with her and her relationship to 

her family. She was extremely proud of Adrian and Tony. She 

was proud of their spouses. She was proud of the children and 

grandchildren. 

 

And I can recall it — I guess it’s a few years ago now — going 

to one of her birthday celebrations where the important thing 

for her was that all of these people were gathered together. And 

they came from all parts of the earth to come to Regina to be 

part of this event. And the event was celebrating the importance 

of passing on what she had done and what she had learned. And 

I think that’s a good message that all of us can take in for 

people who live very busy lives, that to maintain the connection 

with all of those who are loved around you is the best way to 

provide a legacy to those that you love. 

 

So with that I wish condolences to the Merchant family. 

 

[16:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

honoured to be able to join in this motion of condolence for 

Sally Merchant. I didn’t know Sally Merchant very well, Mr. 

Speaker, but I do know her grandson, Evatt, quite well and 

through Evatt of course got to meet Sally a couple of times. 

 

But the last time I’d seen Sally Merchant, Mr. Speaker, was at 

an occasion; I think the exact same occasion that the member 

from Lakeview has described. And I was struck by just . . . 

There are people who have a certain energy when they’re in a 

room, Mr. Speaker, and a certain presence, and certainly Sally 

Merchant had that in spades. She had a dignity and a poise and 

just a flame about her, Mr. Speaker, that it made clear just what 

a special person she was and how these many, many people 

who had gathered at the Merchant home, how glad they were to 

be connected with her. 

 

She came from a political family, was political herself, Mr. 

Speaker, serving in this Chamber from ’64 to ’67. Certainly her 

son was political. I met her son, her grandson, not through 

politics, but very quickly came to learn of his fierce interest and 

belief in the Liberal Party. And you couldn’t help but be 

impressed by the vigour of it, Mr. Speaker, and the firm belief. 

And I have no doubt that Evatt as a fierce Liberal was being 

very much the grandson of Sally Merchant. 

 

At the close of her obituary, Mr. Speaker, it says that: 

 

It is ineffable to describe a person who hit a golf ball 275 

yards, sewed a man’s suit once to prove she could, when a 

full university load was 5 classes, took 7 in one year and 

got all A’s, was still door knocking in 1997, writing policy 

in 2004, and at 87 being elected a delegate to the 2006 

Liberal leadership convention. Sally knew what king 

followed Charles I, how many Progressives won in 1926, 

what each of the Beaver and Walrus covered last month, 

and what Gordon Gibson wrote yesterday. She lived in 

every region of Canada. She worked in five careers. She 

loved Canada, loved people, and was loved in return. Hers 

was an abiding interest in societal change through ideas and 

acts — unique in her time, extraordinary in any time. 

 

It says at the start that it’s ineffable, but I think those are some 

of the things that speak very well of the kind of person the 

second woman to be elected in the history of Saskatoon to the 

legislature, the kind of wide-ranging career in broadcasting and 

teaching and public service that was part of Sally Merchant’s 

life and certainly part of her legacy. 

 

So I join with the other members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of trying to extend that condolence to the family of 

Sally Merchant, the friends of Sally Merchant, and to the 

wonderful life that she lived and the legacy that she provides us 

withal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When I 

was a kid growing up in rural Saskatchewan, we had one 

television station. And this was in the ’60s when TV came to 

the Atkinson household. And in fact we rather complained that 

other kids were getting television and we weren’t, so finally my 

dad broke down. And for the kids, for the five of us, it was 

about Bonanza on Sunday night. For my mother, it was about 

Don Messer’s Jubilee and it was about Sally Time. And it was 

also, I think for my dad and others, it was the news and we also 

listened to Ed Sullivan. 

 

Sally Merchant, when I was a kid growing up, was one female 

face on television that was a rarity. There were very few people 

who did interviews, interviewed citizens all across Canada but 

also citizens in our province; and she was female. Most of the 

interviews were done by men. 

 

So when Sally Merchant ran on behalf of the Liberal Party in 

the late 1960s, or I believe ’64, it was a rarity to see women in 

politics. And she had told me in the past that it wasn’t 

something she particularly wanted to do but she wanted to 

defeat the CCF and the NDP. I can certainly understand that 

noble cause when it comes to defeating your political 

adversaries. 

 

Sally Merchant lived in the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana 

and I regularly, during election time but also between elections, 

would knock on Sally’s door. She lived on University Drive. 

And during election campaigns she was always gracious and 

she would say, now as you know, I’m a Liberal. And of course 

if you’re involved in politics in the province of Saskatchewan 

you can’t help knowing that anyone from the Merchant family 

is a Liberal. And I would say yes, I understand that you’re a 

Liberal. And she said, now, I’m a Liberal and I live in 

Saskatoon Nutana. And she said, I want to wish you well. And I 

think that’s about as close as Sally could come to saying, I hope 

you win. And I’m not sure if she ever hoped I won, but she was 

certainly very, very kind when I arrived on her doorstep. 

 

Other members of the legislature have talked about Sally 



250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

Merchant’s activities as an academic, as a journalist, as a public 

servant, and as a politician; but my remembrance is of a kid 

growing up in rural Saskatchewan, seeing a woman interviewer 

on CFQC television in the ’60s interviewing people from across 

the country but also in Saskatoon. And this is a program that my 

mother never missed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to the Merchant family, to Tony and to Adrian and to all of 

Sally’s 10 grandchildren and her numerous great-grandchildren, 

I want to pass on my condolences. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Maria Margharita Sally Merchant 

family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Robert Edward William Myers 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 

move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of the Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and his province. 

 

Robert Edward William Myers — or Bob — passed 

away on January 28, 2008. He was a member of the 

Legislative Assembly from 1982 to 1986. He represented 

the constituency of Saskatoon South for the Progressive 

Conservative Party. 

 

Mr. Myers was born on January 14, 1947 in Saskatoon. He 

spent his formative years in Saskatoon and attended local 

schools. Mr. Myers married Jo Anne McFadyen on 

November 12, 1971 and they had one son. He is survived 

by his wife, his son, and two grandsons. 

 

Mr. Myers was a trained mine designer. He was employed 

in the engineering departments with Inco in Thompson, 

Manitoba and with AMOK in Cluff Lake. Later, he joined 

the provincial civil service and worked as an inspector of 

mines. 

 

Mr. Myers had a passionate interest in political affairs. He 

first sought to represent his community at the municipal 

level and served on the Thompson City Council. Later, in 

1982, he was elected to this Assembly for one term. Mr. 

Myers was appointed the legislative secretary for Energy 

and Mines and served as the chairman of the natural 

resources committee. He also served as caucus Whip. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tribute here speaks of Bob’s passion for all 

matters political, and certainly members will remember this. 

Members can attest to this, that long after he was no longer a 

sitting member here, long after the mid-1980s, he maintained a 

strong interest in the political affairs, specifically of this 

province — not limited to Saskatchewan, but I think he had a 

particular interest in provincial politics and especially through 

the 1990s and in the early part of this . . . after 2000. He, I 

think, was particularly interested in the changes that were 

occurring in provincial politics here and what it might mean for 

the balance for competitive political interests going forward for 

many, many years in Saskatchewan. 

 

He made those interests known to me and certainly they were 

welcome. He was one to always happily tell you when he did 

not agree — when there was agreements to disagree with 

perhaps certain political tactics, especially on matters of policy. 

And really, that’s what makes this place work. No doubt he was 

the same when he was a working member here in this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

So there are a number of us who certainly knew Bob and we 

want to take this opportunity to wish all the best to his son and 

his wife and to his two grandsons, to his family as well, as they 

deal with Bob’s loss. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Robert Edward William Myers 

family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you again 

for the opportunity to second this motion in expressing the 

condolences of this House to the Myers family. 

 

In this case, I did not have the opportunity to know Bob Myers. 

He served in this Chamber before I was elected and didn’t have 

that opportunity. 

 

But one can tell from, even from the condolence motion itself, 

there was a passion in this man, a passion not only for public 

life and politics but obviously a passion for the mining industry 

in our province. And when I think of those who were involved 

in that mining industry back into the ’60s and ’70s, much of the 

prosperity that we enjoy today, Mr. Speaker, is based on work 

that they did. And so we recognize the contribution of Bob 

Myers to our province through his mining experience. 

 

Now I’ve listened to the Premier this afternoon describe a man 

of the passion, not just when he was elected but beyond his 

elected years and involvement with political pursuit and good 

advice to his party and good advice to his leader and Premier. 

And we all have those, and we appreciate them. So I can 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

understand the Premier’s comments today in appreciation of 

Bob Myers as a counsel, as a force within his political party. 

 

We recognize that, Mr. Speaker. But I think we recognize that 

in all of those whose passing we observe today, that, while they 

may have disagreements in terms of political philosophy, the 

constant thread is passion — passion for our province and 

passion for political affairs. And we respect that, Mr. Speaker, 

we all respect that. 

 

And so on behalf of the opposition, we express our respect and 

condolence to the Myers family on the passing of their husband 

and father and grandfather. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to speak for my seatmate, the member of Saskatoon 

Sutherland who could not be here. 

 

Robert Myers was elected during the 1982 election to represent 

the constituency of Saskatoon South. It was the constituency in 

which he was born and raised. In his maiden speech in 1982, 

Mr. Myers described his childhood in Saskatoon as: 

 

. . . a most enjoyable time in my life. The schools were 

excellent, the people most friendly. I will always carry 

those memories with me. It is my intention as their 

representative to ensure that they, the constituents of 

Saskatoon South, are able to maintain this quality of life. 

There is no better sentiment for an MLA to work from. I 

loved growing up in my constituency, and I want to make 

sure everyone in the future does as well. 

 

[16:30] 

 

During his time in the legislature, he served as a legislative 

secretary for Energy and Mines, caucus Whip, and chairman of 

Natural Resources Committee. After he left the office in 1986, 

Bob continued to contribute to the resource industry of the 

province as a mines inspector. 

 

Bob was diagnosed and treated for prostate cancer, after which 

he chose to retire and move to British Columbia. While he was 

completing his dream home for himself and his wife, Jo Anne, 

he was diagnosed with cancer for a second time. After a 

courageous battle, Bob passed away on January 28, 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bob Myers served this House, the people of 

Saskatoon South and the province of Saskatchewan profoundly 

for four years. For his service we pay tribute to him today. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask leave of the members to make a brief 

comment in memory of Mr. Myers. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — As a member who was elected in 1986 — and 

there’s a few of us still around here — I was elected following 

the sweep of ’82, and so I didn’t really get to know Bob that 

well, but I can say this. I believe Premier Devine in 1982, in his 

sweep of ’82, the number of members that were afforded to him 

were beyond his expectation. And as I’m sure Mr. Romanow 

said in 1991, they probably would have accepted a lesser 

majority. 

 

As you looked at . . . when I walked into that caucus room after 

being nominated as a Conservative candidate in 1985, I 

wondered how in the world members survived as there was a lot 

of jockeying. While we consider there’s a jockeying for 

position here in this Legislative Chamber, when you have a 

large caucus it’s certainly a challenge to just keep everyone 

happy and satisfied. 

 

And I know there were different members with different views, 

and some were very outspoken in their views. But one thing I 

appreciated about Bob Myers, while he had strong views and 

expressed his opinion very emphatically, Bob was also a team 

player. And I appreciated that and I learned from Bob that even 

when you can be a large group or body of individuals 

representing one party as it was at that time, there’s also an act 

of working together and recognizing everyone’s point and 

place, and Bob was one of those individuals. 

 

It certainly was a pleasure over the years to run into Bob every 

once in a while and renew acquaintances. I just regret that I 

didn’t get to know him even a lot more personally. 

 

And so I would like to extend my sympathies to his wife and his 

family as well. 

 

At this time I bring forward the motion by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the Robert Edward William Myers 

family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Thank you. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Edward Charles Whelan 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour, 

it’s an honour today to stand and move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

And certainly that is the case with Edward Charles 

Whelan, who passed away on December 11, 2007, was a 

member of the Legislative Assembly from 1960 until 1979. 

He represented the constituencies of Regina City and 

Regina North for the Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation and the constituency of Regina North West for 



252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

Mr. Whelan was born on August 6, 1919, in Amherstburg, 

Ontario. He attended local schools in Anderdon before 

completing further studies at the General Amherst High 

School and Toronto Technical School. His education was 

curtailed when his father died, and Mr. Whelan assumed 

the greater role on the family farm supporting his mother 

and his younger siblings. Mr. Whelan married Pemrose 

Henry on November 27, 1948. He is survived by his wife, 

three children, eight grandchildren, and three 

great-grandchildren. 

 

Mr. Whelan first trained as a machinist in the Windsor auto 

plants. He became a member of the United Automobile 

Workers Union and later represented the UAW within the 

Co-operative Commonwealth Federation organization. In 

1943 Mr. Whelan moved to Saskatchewan to return to 

farming. He continued his lifelong involvement with labour 

and with co-operative movements by assuming positions 

with a number of organizations. These included acting as 

the educational director of the Co-operative Union of 

Canada, as the secretary of the Regina Labour Council, and 

on the executives of the Sherwood Co-op and the 

Sherwood Savings and Credit Union. Mr. Whalen also 

served as chairman of the Provincial Mediation Board. 

 

Mr. Whelan was an active participant in the administration 

of first the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, and 

later the New Democratic Party after its formation. His 

interest extended to authoring with his wife a publication 

entitled, quote, Touched by Tommy on the life of T.C. 

Douglas. Mr. Whelan held numerous positions within the 

party prior to being elected in the Assembly in 1960. He 

retained his seat in the following five elections. Mr. 

Whelan entered cabinet in 1975 as a minister of Mineral 

Resources. The following year he was appointed to the 

Consumer Affairs portfolio where he remained until his 

retirement from public life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I read the tribute, the condolence motion, it 

strikes me that Mr. Whelan was very passionately involved in a 

number of endeavours and a member of a number of 

committees that I have never been involved in and neither 

would members in my family that I can think of been involved 

in, save perhaps for membership in a co-op or a credit union. 

But what is very, very clear when you read through this is that 

Mr. Whelan developed his very formidable views on public life, 

on politics, and I would argue probably on economics, by his 

experience both in terms of being a factory worker in Ontario, 

in Windsor, and then . . . well early on as growing up on a farm, 

then working in a factory and then returning to the, to life on 

the farm. 

 

And so it isn’t surprising at all that, that those experiential 

activities that we have just learned about on the part of Mr. 

Whelan and his volunteer activities that he pursued with 

different groups would develop into a career that found its way 

to this Legislative Assembly for some number of years and then 

found its way to the Executive Council of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And it’s pretty easy on review of this particular motion to just 

acknowledge his dedication to the province of Saskatchewan, 

his dedication to his obviously very strongly held views which 

many during his time in the legislature would have disagreed 

with. Had some members here been there at the time, they may 

have also disagreed with him, but no one ought to doubt 

obviously his sincerity or his passion, and neither should we. 

Neither should we fail to acknowledge those, that contribution, 

and thank him through this condolence motion and thank his 

family for sharing Mr. Whelan so that he indeed could make 

that commitment. 

 

Just before I stood to make these comments, I asked some 

members opposite if they could determine whether or not Ed, 

Mr. Whelan that we honour today, was related to Eugene. And 

the member for Lakeview is maintaining his record for research, 

has found confirmation that indeed he was the brother of 

Eugene Whelan who of course had his own very significant 

political career. I think he began as a CCF politician but later 

. . . and ended as a green cowboy-hat-wearing Liberal in the 

national government. So in addition to what I’m sure would 

have been pretty interesting debates within the CCF and then 

the NDP at the time, Ed Whelan would have gone home or at 

least joined with family celebrants, I’m sure, at Christmastime 

and had an equally animated debate with his brother, Eugene. 

 

It’s quite a life to have learned about even in the course of 

reading this, and we want to extend our condolences as the 

Government of Saskatchewan to the family and the friends of 

Mr. Whelan on his passing. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier that: 

 

This Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

the members of the Edward Charles Whelan family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 

join again with the Premier and the government in the 

condolence motion to the Whelan family. I think it’s fair to say, 

Mr. Speaker, that those of us who knew Ed Whelan would be 

very quick to say this was Mr. CCF, this was Mr. NDP. I mean 

he lived and breathed CCF-New Democrat policy, politic. 

 

And in addition to his five terms as an elected member, Ed 

Whelan in some ways became our party, our movement’s 

historian in the latter years. We’ve heard the Premier refer this 

afternoon to the book that he and Pemrose wrote called 

Touched by Tommy. They were close friends of the Douglases, 

close friends of Tommy Douglas. He also did a piece of work 

on Corman from Moose Jaw, in some ways became our resident 

elder and historian. And we deeply, deeply appreciated that. 

 

Ed Whelan had much to do with the establishment of a little 

organization here in the city of Regina that continues to this day 

called the Douglas Coffee Club where folks get together to 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

discuss policy and discuss the party and discuss politics in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ed fought five elections and won those elections, had a long 

career in this House, served in Executive Council, served as a 

private member. And, Mr. Speaker, those of us who knew Ed, I 

think would all agree that he came as close to anyone as I know 

to fitting that little old descriptive that’s sometimes used of 

politicians — Ed was a man who was sometimes wrong, but 

seldom in doubt. Seldom in doubt was Ed Whelan. 

 

And we could always count on knowing Ed’s opinion. How 

well I remember picking up the Regina Leader-Post one 

morning and reading Ed Whelan’s comments about the 

government, about how the government had “mud for brains,” 

he says. And he wasn’t referring to a Sask Party government; he 

was referring to our government, to a New Democratic Party 

government. On that particular issue, he was not afraid to 

express his opinion. 

 

I wonder what Ed would say today about the current 

government . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’d be happy. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I think the member from Cannington is not 

correct in what he just suggested, that Ed would be happy. 

 

A man of strong opinion, a man of deep roots in our political 

movement, in some ways patriarch of that Whelan family — I 

can assure members of the House that Ed Whelan never donned 

any Liberal-green cowboy hat, that’s for sure. 

 

We will miss him as New Democrats, as we miss him as 

legislators — a principled man; a man of deep, deep passion 

and conviction. And so we very, we very much want to join 

with the government today in expressing our condolences to the 

Whelan family in the passing of Ed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join the Premier and the Leader of the Official Opposition in 

extending my condolences to the family of Mr. Ed Whelan. 

 

In listening to the words that have been said about Ed Whelan, 

it is clear to me that he was a remarkable person. Ed served in 

this legislature during a time when much was accomplished to 

better the lives of ordinary Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Among the accomplishments while he served was the 

government’s creation of universal medicare. As such, I think 

Ed is among a group of people to whom much gratitude is owed 

by younger generations here in Saskatchewan. 

 

While I never had the privilege of meeting Ed Whelan, I do feel 

a bit of a connection to him since he served in this legislature 

during the same time period as my grandfather, Hans Broten. 

I’m told by family members that they were quite good friends. I 

know that when my grandfather passed away, Ed took the time 

to contact my family, and this was certainly appreciated by us. 

 

While many of Ed’s character strengths have already been 

mentioned, I would like to highlight what I am told was his very 

good sense of humour. This is illustrated through a brief story. 

 

For some time, my grandfather’s seat in the Chamber was 

directly behind Ed’s seat. My grandfather did not like the clutter 

of all the paper on his desk, so he would routinely crumple the 

paper up into balls and drop them on the floor around his desk. 

Now you can imagine that one or two balls of paper would not 

be that much of a problem. However I’m told that often a 

considerable mess would be created around his chair. This lack 

of consideration was beginning to get under the skin of his 

seatmate and most likely the Pages too. 

 

[16:45] 

 

It didn’t take long for Ed to see an opportunity to use some 

humour in addressing the situation. Ed called in a favour from 

the fire chief of the city of Regina who was his long-time 

friend. The fire chief agreed to write a letter on official 

letterhead describing to my grandfather how his actions were 

creating a fire hazard for the Assembly. Despite Ed playing a 

little dumb about the letter, I think my grandfather had a pretty 

good hunch of who was ultimately behind this creative 

approach to correct his behaviour. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Mr. Whelan for 

his significant contribution to this province and once again 

extend my condolences to his family. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to give my sincere 

condolences to the family of the late Ed Whelan. Ed Whelan 

passed on December 11, 2007. Ed was involved in 

Saskatchewan politics throughout the latter part of the 20th 

century. 

 

Mr. Whelan entered the Saskatchewan legislature in 1960 as a 

member for Regina North West. He was re-elected in 1964, 

’67,’71, ’75, and ’78. Mr. Whelan became a cabinet minister in 

1975, and was the minister responsible for Mineral Resources, 

Consumer Affairs, and Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 

Mr. Speaker, Ed Whelan was dedicated to the province of 

Saskatchewan and to serving his constituents. 

 

On behalf of my colleagues in this Assembly, I would like to 

send my sincere regards to the friends and family of Mr. Ed 

Whelan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to offer sincere condolences on behalf of the constituents 

of Regina Walsh Acres to Pemrose Whelan and family on the 

loss of Edward Charles Whelan, who passed December 11, 

2007. To live in a society where ordinary working people gain a 

voice in government and in the economy is a sentiment shared 

by all social democrats. As the late Tommy Douglas asserted, 

quote: 

 



254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

The real measure of a nation is the quality of its national 

life, what it does for the least fortunate of its citizens, and 

the opportunities it provides for its youth to live useful and 

meaningful lives . . . 

 

It is this sentiment that comprised the life and work of Ed 

Whelan. Ed Whelan was an ardent political and social activist, 

distinguished member of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly, and accomplished author. Above all, Mr. Speaker, 

Ed Whelan was a man who understood the human condition 

and worked tirelessly toward the collective interests of working 

people. 

 

In 1960, Ed was first elected to the Saskatchewan legislature for 

the CCF in Regina. He was then re-elected under the CCF-NDP 

in 1964 and again in 1967, 1971, 1975, and 1978. During his 

time as a member for the Legislative Assembly for north 

Regina, Ed worked vigorously towards the establishment of 

co-operative business institutions and towards the creation of 

progressive public institutions devoted to improving human life. 

 

Initiatives supported by Ed included the creation of the 

University of Regina, the construction of the SGI building, and 

the establishment of publicly funded separate high schools. 

Concurrent with his role as MLA in the late 1970s, Ed also 

served as the minister of Mineral Resources and Consumer 

Affairs in the second term of the active social democratic 

government of Allan Blakeney. 

 

In retirement, Ed’s deep desire to contribute to the social 

democratic movement continued with the authorship in 

co-operation with his wife, Pemrose, of two books. Arguably 

the more well-read of the two books, Touched By Tommy, is an 

invaluable collection of 250 stories and approximately 100 

photos documenting the life of Tommy Douglas, a man greatly 

admired, beloved, and supported by Ed himself. 

 

Also on meeting with both Pemrose and Ed, I had the great 

fortune of being presented with a book, Run It By Jack, which is 

a detailed account of Tommy Douglas’s first attorney general. 

 

Ed indeed had a larger than life persona. I cherished the visits I 

was able to have with both Pemrose and Ed, as the oral stories 

and deep passion from which they were told truly have touched 

and stayed with me. Despite Ed’s great presence, it should be 

noted that Pemrose is no shrinking violet herself. She is a 

respected and dedicated social activist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ed Whelan was committed to building a better 

world, a world that necessarily ensures economic equity and 

opportunity for all, and not only a limited few. He believed that 

Saskatchewan should be a place where working people are 

protected from economic hardship, where they prosper, and 

where their future is bright. 

 

Ultimately Ed embodied the love of humanity and a desire to 

improve the lives of all through collective, public, and 

democratic means. His life mission was most demonstrable 

through his participation in the establishment of Canada’s first 

publicly funded universal health care system. Because of the 

dedication and hard work of visionaries such as Ed, working 

people continue to receive the benefits of a health system that 

delivers quality care regardless of their ability to pay. 

Indeed it is Ed’s fundamental philosophy of ensuring real 

dignity and equity for the least fortunate that sustain social 

democrats at a time when the achievements made by early 

reformers like Ed Whelan are now at risk of being 

systematically dismantled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this House to recognize Ed 

Whelan’s real achievements towards amelioration of everyday 

working people in this province. May we continue to build on 

the life work of Ed Whelan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to enter into this condolence motion debate to say 

something about Ed Whelan. 

 

Ed was a friend of mine. And I guess I want to say a few things 

about the guy I knew from the early ’90s on in the NDP and say 

something a bit about the guy’s career as a legislator and as a 

lifelong credit union man, co-operator, and all round agitator. 

 

Ed grew up in a family, one of nine kids. His father was a Tory. 

I think he had a brother who’s a Social Credit supporter. As has 

been mentioned, Eugene, his brother — the man with a green 

hat — was a famous Liberal, of course. And certainly he came 

from a household where politics was an active and often a very 

forceful part of the dinnertime conversations. 

 

And I think Ed took from his upbringing, the farm out by 

Amherstburg out in that Windsor plain country of Ontario, in 

his time working as an auto worker, I think he took from that 

some lifelong lessons about what it means to be, the power of 

co-operation, the power of common people working together 

and achieving uncommon things. 

 

I think that Ed, as has been pointed out, won five campaigns, 

the first one in 1960. Before that, he had been an organizer for 

the CCF for 15 years as well as an active trade unionist, active 

co-operator. 

 

And I think that Ed’s . . . You know, he knew the people side of 

politics and he knew the theoretical side of politics, but the 

strength of Ed’s politics was in his belief and in his contact with 

people. As one of the party’s top organizers, he and Pemrose 

together . . . Pemrose, of course, his life’s partner, near 60 years 

in marriage and, you know, a real force to be reckoned with, the 

Whelans. 

 

Ed was always a huge supporter of Tommy Douglas, was his 

campaign manager in the fateful election of 1962 when Douglas 

had left the provincial scene to run federally. Of course it was 

right after the medicare dispute. And Ed talked about being in 

caucus at that time and just the hard fight that they had to go 

through internally, the hard fight they had to go through 

externally, and that story is well known to Saskatchewan people 

and indeed Canadians, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the kind of 

pressure that Lloyd and the CCF were under in terms of 

bringing in medicare — the death threats, the kids being beat up 

on the playgrounds. And you think about that as a legislator and 

the kind of pressure that they were under. I know for a fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve seen nothing like that in my lifetime, and I’m sure 



March 10, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 255 

there are few in this House that have. 

 

But Ed was there in the teeth of that, and he was the campaign 

manager for Douglas when Douglas had gone federal, became 

the leader of the federal NDP, ran his first election in Regina 

only to be defeated. It was Ed who was there as campaign 

manager. It was Ed who drove the car to the station, the TV 

station, where Tommy Douglas gave his famous I lay me down 

to bleed a while but I’ll rise and fight again speech and then to 

the armouries where they had to drink very bitterly from the 

dregs of defeat. But he was also there for some victories with 

Tommy Douglas and through the years was there for many of 

the highs and lows in Tommy Douglas’s career — certainly he 

and Pemrose. 

 

Pemrose, I want to say a few words about her and of course the 

condolence of this House goes out to Pemrose and to her 

children and to their grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 

And in politics as is often remarked upon in this House, it’s 

very much, it’s often very much about a partnership between 

spouses, and indeed that’s the only thing that can really make it 

go successfully. The first year Ed was elected, he went to . . . of 

his first 300 days as an MLA he says that he went to 450 events, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s a fair clip by any stretch of the 

imagination. And the thing that made that possible was his 

strong partnership with Pemrose who had a great mind, who 

was a voracious reader, and was a tremendous organizer in her 

own right. I just want to comment on that because certainly 

we’re here to talk about Ed, but certainly Ed was just one part 

of a tremendous political partnership, let alone marriage. 

 

To the children, to the grandchildren, to the 

great-grandchildren, I had the privilege of being at the mass, the 

memorial mass for Ed on December 15 at Holy Trinity. On the 

north side, in northwest Regina certainly there are a lot of 

people that know Ed, and they came out to pay their 

condolences that day. And it was fitting that it was at Holy 

Trinity because there was a church that Ed had played — an 

Irish Catholic by upbringing — he’d played an active role in the 

building of that church, of that congregation. And the people 

that came out for him that day, you know, former Premier 

Blakeney, former Premier Romanow, and various of Ed’s old 

comrades from over the years came out to show something of 

what this wonderful man . . . and a very challenging man too. 

 

And I’m sure many on this side that knew Ed, and certainly the 

Opposition Leader has alluded to that, Ed was no shrinking 

violet. And he could yell and holler with the best of them. But 

at the base of it all, I think was a desire to build that better 

world to make sure that the ordinary person got a fair shake in 

this life and that you didn’t get special treatment just because 

you’re born into wealth, or that you had, that everybody in this 

society had a shot at a good life. 

 

I met Ed as a young New Democrat. My hair was a little longer, 

and I was probably a little skinnier back then, Mr. Speaker. And 

it was interesting that I think the older Ed got the more widely 

he read and the more radical he got. And he was always 

challenging us in terms of trying to live up to that vision of 

those people that fought through the ’30s in terms of founding 

the CCF and constituted that ’44 government and the 

tremendous amount of social and legal change and economic 

change that they entered into. 

And he challenged us and he organized still the Tommy 

Douglas Coffee Club, things like the Canadian Centre for 

Policy Alternatives, the Saskatchewan section. Ed was 

instrumental in that. And he would also encourage young 

people in the party and women in the party in terms of trying to 

step forward and play a role in what he thought was their party 

too. 

 

And certainly as a young New Democrat, I developed a good 

friendship with Ed. And I’m sad, Mr. Speaker, that I didn’t get 

to spend more time with him over the years because he was 

really a fount of some great stories through the years, but also 

had some great teachings to impart. When I was first elected, he 

helped in terms of advice and in terms of support for my 

nomination. And I’ll be grateful to him for that down the line. 

 

I guess Ed would say that he was honoured to serve in this 

legislature. And I know that he was. He was a great lover of this 

place, had his differences with colleagues, but again at that 

Mass that was delivered for him, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people 

came out to show something of what this great man meant to 

them and to the kind of spirit that he embodied. And certainly I 

know he takes pleasure in his kids and his grandkids and his 

great-grandkids carrying that on. And as he and Pemrose were 

touched by Tommy, so he and Pemrose have touched many 

lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[17:00] 

 

And with that I want to say thanks for giving me this 

opportunity to participate in this debate on the motion of 

condolence for Ed Whelan. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with the members of the Edward Charles Whelan family. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly, I would like to move: 

 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Melfort, the Government House Leader, by leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

That the resolutions just passed, together with a transcript 



256 Saskatchewan Hansard March 10, 2008 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is the Assembly agreed with the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt that motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This House stands adjourned until 

1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:02.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 221 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 221 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 222 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Women’s Day 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 222 

 International Women’s Day Marked in Prince Albert 

  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 222 

 Regina & District Labour Council Awards 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 222 

 Social Work Week 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 223 

 Scott Blues Win Junior Boys’ Basketball Title 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 223 

 Rural Women’s Month 

  Eagles ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 224 

 Launch of Expanded Practical Nursing Program 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 224 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Labour Relations Board 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 224 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 224 

 Political Staff and Election Promises 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 227 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 227 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 The Midwifery Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 230 

  Junor .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 230 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 231 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 231 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 231 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 231 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 232 

 Bill No. 4 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council (Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 2007 

 Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif (élections à date fixe) 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 232 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 233 

CONDOLENCES 

 John Edward Neil Wiebe 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 233 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 234 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 235 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 236 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 236 

 David Boldt 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 237 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 237 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 238 

 



 

 George Reginald Anderson Bowerman 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 238 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 239 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................... 239 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 240 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 240 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 241 

 Michael Feschuk 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 241 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 242 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 242 

  Hickie ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 243 

 Calvin Henry [Cal] Glauser 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 243 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 244 

  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 244 

 Norman Lusney 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 245 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 245 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 245 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 246 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 246 

  Harper ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 247 

 Maria Margharita Sally Merchant 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 247 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 248 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 249 

  Atkinson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 249 

 Robert Edward William Myers 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 250 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 250 

  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 251 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 251 

 Edward Charles Whelan 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 251 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 252 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 253 

  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 253 

  Morin ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 253 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 254 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


