




















































Hansard: May 15, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 44A  THURSDAY, MAY 15, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1311 

 May 15, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

take this opportunity to introduce two guests in the west gallery. 

Elaine Courchene is the sister of my constituency assistant, Rita 

Flaman Jarrett. For the last three years, Elaine and her family 

have opened their home and hosted several international 

students. This year they are pleased to have a grade 11 student 

who is studying at Luther College here in Regina. 

 

With Elaine today is the student, Raphaela Nuscheler, or Raphi, 

a 17-year-old student from Krumbach in Bavaria, Germany. 

She arrived in Canada and stayed at the Courchenes’ since 

August 24 of last year and will stay there until July 15 of this 

year. 

 

In addition to her academic program at Luther College, Raphi is 

involved in badminton, outdoor education, yearbook, French 

club, and the senior choir. Her other interests include tennis, 

reading, singing, dancing, and travelling. She likes spending 

time with her family and friends and has enjoyed becoming a 

new member of the Courchene family during her stay in 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members welcome Raphi to 

the Saskatchewan legislature and hope that the remainder of her 

stay in Regina is memorable and enjoyable. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly a group of adult learners seated in the eastern 

gallery. They are from the Regina Public School Adult Campus. 

There are 18 or 20 students. We’re still counting it out. They’re 

a sharp looking bunch, Mr. Speaker. One guy’s even got a tie 

on up there. He’s looking good. They’re accompanied by 

teachers Erin Harlos and Ryan Wood — Woody, I’m told. 

 

My colleague, the member for Regina Rosemont, played an 

integral role in getting this campus up off the ground, has a lot 

of fond memories of his time there, and is actually going to join 

me later to give the students a pop quiz. So we’ll all be looking 

forward to that, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. So please join me in 

welcoming all these students and their teachers to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from — pardon me, 

shoot — Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 

a few people to you. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a good 

friend of mine, the former administrator for the RM [rural 

municipality] of Edenwold, Donna Strudwick. Next to Donna is 

my sister, Laura Reiter, and my brother . . . sorry, my sister, 

Laura, and my brother-in-law — she changed her name; it 

always confuses me — and my brother-in-law, Eldon Schwab 

of Wilkie. And seated down here with us is my mother and 

father, Ed and Elizabeth Reiter of Unity. They were here for an 

important function for me last night, and they’re joining us in 

the Assembly today, and I ask everybody to please give them a 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I just would like to join in 

with the member from Regina Elphinstone and certainly 

welcome many past friends and current friends up there — past 

colleagues, current friends — Erin Harlos and Ryan Wood. And 

so nice to see those students up there — many, many familiar 

faces. And it’s amazing what another year of good education 

does. You’re looking fantastic up there. 

 

And just a little plug for the institution itself, Regina Public 

Schools Adult Campus was formed to address the needs of 18- 

to 21-year olds who were looking to access education, to find 

new opportunities. So we’ve got students who are retaking 

courses and other students that have gone back to school to gain 

their grade 12. It certainly offers them all sorts of life 

opportunities by gaining that education. It certainly assists our 

economy in having those students well educated and ready to 

participate. So I welcome those students, pleasure to see you, 

and thank you for being here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your west 

gallery today, one of the few caucus members that regularly or 

caucus staff that regularly attend proceedings and hasn’t been 

introduced yet — I’d be remiss if I didn’t — is Steve Ellingson. 

We affectionately refer to Steve as new Steve as we have a 

former Steve as well or a current, former Steve. Steve 

Ellingson, new Steve, is a transplant from Alberta. He’s come 

back, come to Saskatchewan, and a very valuable part of our 

team, and I just invite him to invite some of his friends back to 

the province here as well because you know there’s more good 

things to come. So I’d ask all members in the Assembly to 

welcome new Steve to his Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 



1312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2008 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to reintroduce to you, through you, and to all members of the 

Assembly, seated in your gallery members of the Saskatchewan 

House of Prayer. Mr. Speaker, these people are dedicated 

members of Saskatchewan society. They come here every day 

to view the proceedings, to pray for us to make the right 

decisions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan, and their 

prayers go far beyond that, Mr. Speaker. Their prayers even 

extend to family members that they know of who are suffering 

from various sicknesses or challenges in their lives. And I want 

to personally thank them for the prayers that they’ve extended 

to my family and to all of us here in the Chamber. It’s been very 

reassuring to have them here every day praying for all of us in 

the Chamber and that we are making the best decisions on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — As well I have a few introductory comments. 

All members know that the Saskatchewan Legislative Building 

offers extended hours to the visiting public for the summer 

season. Extended hours 8 a.m. until 9 p.m. begin this Saturday, 

Victoria Day long weekend and carry on until after the Labour 

Day long weekend. 

 

The director of visitor services, Lorraine deMontigny, is seated 

in the Speaker’s gallery this morning with four new employees. 

All of them are bilingual officers, and so I would ask them to 

stand as I call their names — Aaron Froese, Jessica Hanna, 

Melanie Marchuk, and Alyssa Pittet. These young people are 

ambassadors not only for the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Building but for the province of Saskatchewan. The work they 

do is very important, and I know all members of the Legislative 

Assembly will join me in welcoming these employees to the 

Legislative Assembly Service. We wish you all the best for a 

great summer season. I’m sure you will meet visitors from all 

over the world. 

 

As well, seated in the front row is Irene Pisula. Irene has been 

working in the visitor services branch for the past few weeks as 

acting assistant director of visitor services in the absence of 

Marianne Morgan, who is currently away from the office while 

her son Conrad undergoes treatment for cancer. And our 

thoughts are with Marianne. I invite all members to join me in 

thanking Irene for her assistance in visitor services through this 

very busy time of the year and welcoming our new guides to the 

Chamber. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

pleasure that I rise to present a petition on behalf of businesses 

in my community and constituency and also people that live on 

the south side of Moose Jaw. And it has to do with the abrupt 

closure of the South Hill liquor store, and the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present this petition on behalf of 

Moose Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present petitions on behalf of citizens of the province 

who want the government to know that they have deep concerns 

about Bill No. 5, The Public Service Essential Services Act and 

Bill 6, An Act to amend The Trade Union Act, and consider 

these Bills as an aggressive assault on the rights of 

Saskatchewan working people. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw The 

Public Service Essential Services Act, Bill 5, and The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007, Bill 6, and hold 

broad public consultations about labour relations in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by nurses and other 

concerned citizens from many, many areas across the province, 

for instance Sturgis, Kyle, Bienfait, Estevan, Moosomin, 

Kipling, Indian Head, Regina, Kamsack, Wolseley, Stoughton, 

Broadview, Whitewood, Kennedy, Windthorst, Arcola, Canora, 

Endeavour, Gravelbourg, Coronach, Weyburn, Mankota, Val 

Marie, Rockglen, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Craven, Frontier, 

Shaunavon, Maple Creek, Swift Current, Gull Lake, Pelly, 

Danbury, Invermay, Rama, Balcarres, Fort Qu’Appelle, Regina 

Beach, Wilcox, Balgonie, Pilot Butte, Cupar, Southey, McLean, 

Strasbourg, Saskatoon, Clavet, Indian Head, and many more but 

I seem to be losing the interest of the members across the way, 

so I so present with pride, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan and the fact that many citizens would like to 

have some input into providing solutions for this major problem 

in Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability hold open public consultations for all 

citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 



May 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1313 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I rise today to present petitions of people of 

Saskatoon who oppose the cut to funding for Station 20 and the 

petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed from people right across the city of 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Remarkable Growth 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, since last November’s 

election we have seen remarkable growth in this province. 

Saskatchewan leads the country in retail sales, in construction 

activity. Wages are up and unemployment is down. There are 

17,000 new jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. Demands on our 

natural resources are at an all-time high. Saskatchewan is now 

Canada’s new it province. 

 

When things happen quickly, they can easily go out of control 

unless, of course, you have a plan, and our government has a 

plan to carefully manage Saskatchewan’s growth. The 

ready-for-growth plan addresses the infrastructure deficit left by 

that government when they were in power. We’re fixing roads. 

We’re upgrading and repairing hospitals and building new 

schools. Taxpayers are getting some long overdue tax relief, 

and we’re working on a long-term solution to education 

property tax. University graduates are receiving tuition rebates 

allowing them to build careers and families closer to home right 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government is . . . [inaudible] . . . a crop insurance system. 

Under the NDP [New Democratic Party] premiums went up and 

coverage went down. That, Mr. Speaker, was wrong and an 

insult to agricultural producers. We have increased the amount 

of revenue-sharing money municipalities are receiving allowing 

them to lower taxes and improve services. Mr. Speaker, our 

government has a plan for the future, unlike the members 

opposite who like to look in the rear-view mirror. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move on, I just want to remind 

members that the person on the floor is the recognized 

individual, and it certainly would be appropriate to allow 

members to make their statement without interference. I 

recognize there’s a lot of passion, and we’re winding down the 

session, but let’s at least show respect to the recognized 

member. Member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Saskatchewan Party’s Attitude to People 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have seen that not everyone in Saskatchewan is 

benefiting from the boom of the last two years. And we 

certainly know that this government is not committed to 

ensuring that everyone receives benefit from our buoyant 

economy. When they said times were harsh, Mr. Speaker, they 

didn’t mean the books of the province; they meant the 

Saskatchewan Party’s attitude to people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter if you live in Moose Jaw or 

Moosomin, this government has found ways to leave you out. 

The list is long. Station 20, dental sealant program, vulnerable 

workers’ benefits, de-funding the arts community, shutting 

down rural courthouses, cutting Aboriginal worker programs, 

and the list goes on, all with $2 billion and counting in the bank. 

 

Now Saskatchewan Party friends are doing quite well, while the 

average person deals with possibility of increased power rates, 

increased rental and housing costs, and increased fuel prices. 

But it’s not just dollars and cents that show the meanness of the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. No. Be it name calling in the 

House, attacks on career civil servants, attacks on people and 

children with disabilities, this government has shown that they 

don’t care who they have to trample over to get their own way. 

Mr. Speaker, this Saskatchewan Party government is 

mean-spirited. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Committed to Safety and Security 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is growing and 

good things are happening. The members opposite refer to our 

mountain of money. Well, Mr. Speaker, the reality is, that it is 

impossible to fund everything, so decisions must be made. 

 

Our government is committed to the safety and security of our 

citizens. With knowledge and compassion, we have moved to 

address the basic needs of vulnerable children and those less 

fortunate. Food, shelter, and safety are the platform from which 

we can build. 

 

Earlier this week our government announced a plan for the 

children and other residents of Saskatoon’s inner city. Working 

with all stakeholders, we will build a new St. Mary’s school and 

affordable housing in what once was a cesspool of drugs and 

violence. We have increased funding for food banks. We are 

helping 6,000 families by increasing funding to the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement. There is more money 

for addictions beds and to help victims of sexual assault. Mr. 

Speaker, we are hiring more police to crack down on crime and 

have funded a special unit that targets the sexual predators that 



1314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2008 

trap our kids on the Internet. We have passed essential services 

legislation to ensure public safety during strike or lockout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am so very, very proud to serve with this 

government. Our Premier, cabinet, and caucus are not only 

growing the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Stumbling Out of the Gate 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is rare 

to see a government that has stumbled this badly out of the gate. 

From the first day of session or at least the first day once they 

finally realized they should call the session, we have seen a 

disorganized and incompetent group of managers of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a minister responsible for forestry that 

has made so many misstatements the government is now 

refusing to comment, lest the situation get even worse. We have 

a Minister of Social Services who’s had to backtrack on a major 

decision and ask for a do-over on her budget. We have a 

Minister of Finance that let her change her budget when he 

wasn’t busy admitting that his own budget was subpar. We have 

a Minister of Agriculture that admits the Sask Party spent 12 

years in opposition saying anything, but now that they’re in 

government, they can’t actually follow through. 

 

We have a Minister of Labour who, well, just personifies 

incompetent. He hasn’t met a question yet that he can actually 

answer, Mr. Speaker. He has tabled a piece of legislation, Bill 

24, whose sole purpose was to fix his own bungling on the 

Labour Relations Board file. We have a Premier who either 

didn’t read his own legislation before tabling it or else just 

didn’t realize that it broke a campaign promise for 

accountability, Mr. Speaker. And well, we won’t even talk 

about the wheat sheaf fiasco. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government is simply incompetent 

and mean-spirited. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I’m continually finding it difficult to hear all 

of the comments made, whether it’s a government member or 

an opposition member in members’ statements. And I think you 

will agree with me as members that that is not really showing 

respect to the Chamber or the member. So I would ask, while 

everyone wants to add their own personal comments, let’s 

respect the right of members to address and bring forward their 

comments. The member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Promises Made, Promises Kept 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Six months ago the 

people of Saskatchewan voted for change. On November 8 the 

new Saskatchewan Party government started doing just that. 

During the campaign, Mr. Speaker, we made a lot of promises, 

and we didn’t waste any time starting to keep them. 

 

The first thing we did was announce fixed election dates. 

Promise made, promise kept. We promised to do something 

about the fact that property owners in Saskatchewan pay the 

most education property tax in Canada. Not only did we 

increase rebates on education property tax for both homeowners 

and farmers, we have launched a full review of the system. 

Promise made, promise kept. Now this may come as a shock to 

some of the members opposite, but there’s a nursing shortage in 

Saskatchewan. This government promised to do something 

about that. We signed a historic agreement on nursing 

recruitment and retention with the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses, and we recruited 300 Filipino nurses. Promise made, 

promise kept. 

 

Let’s run down a quick checklist. A tuition rebate program, 

check. Spending for the cancer drug Avastin, check. Five 

million for food banks, check. Elimination of the wiener roast 

tax, check. A review of the crop insurance program, check. 

More revenue-sharing money for municipalities, check. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Cronyism 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, one of the first and last things we 

heard about in this session was the cronyism that the new 

government brought to the table. They fired the Chair of the 

Labour Relations Board without cause and appointed a member 

of the Sask Party transition team to take his place, with a hefty 

pay increase of $60,000 I might add. The same old story at the 

Workers’ Compensation Board, and that’s just the arm’s length 

agencies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it comes to the civil service, the patronage continues — 

massive pay hikes for political staff, except maybe the women, 

and contracts for former buddies that roll on into tens of 

thousands of dollars. One wonders what they would have gotten 

away with if their reporting mechanism had been changed to 

$350,000, not 50. 

 

And what have we found out this week, Mr. Speaker? They 

passed a Bill that benefits the lending institution that not only 

lends the Sask Party campaigns money but makes donations as 

well. We find out the minister owns shares in a company that is 

benefiting from SaskTel privatization, and so does the CEO 

[chief executive officer] that he appointed. Mr. Speaker, this 

Sask Party government is self-serving and cares more about 

their friends than the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 

 

Promises Kept 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Eliminated the PST [provincial sales tax] on 



May 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1315 

used cars, promise kept. Helping families cap the cost of 

prescription drugs for children, promise kept. Tougher penalty 

for repeat drunk drivers, promise kept. A round table on the 

duty to consult and accommodate, promise kept. More doctors’ 

and nurses’ training seats, promise kept. Approved the 

prescription drug under the formulary, promise kept. Five 

million for community-based organizations to help families, 

promise kept. Five hundred thousand for school lunch programs 

and anti-hunger, promise kept. 

 

Three million dollars for new money for hiring police officers, 

promise kept. Eight million to fight organized crime and gangs, 

promise kept. One million dollars in new funding for transition 

houses, promise kept. We paid down the debt $250 million this 

and last year, promise kept. Cancelled the Domtar deal on the 

Prince Albert pulp mill, saving the taxpayers $100 million, 

promise kept. Put the safety of Saskatchewan people first by 

introducing essential services legislation, promise kept. Made 

the workplace more democratic by introducing a secret ballot 

and freedom of speech, promise kept. Encouraged drivers to go 

green by offering rebates, promise kept. Five million for 

Saskatchewan parks, promise kept. Balanced the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, promise kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite will tell you it is easy to 

make promises, and they will also tell you that keeping them is 

the deal breaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Government’s Performance 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I expect 

during the course of this question period both the Premier and I 

will want to have a review of the session, and I’ll have a 

number of questions. 

 

But before I move into that review of the session, I do have a 

very specific question for the Premier. Earlier this week his 

Deputy Premier stood in this House and indicated to the House 

and to the public that the “transition,” quote, the transition of 

this government was not yet over. What that does, Mr. Speaker, 

is signal that there are going to be further dismissals and firings 

in the public service. 

 

And so I have a very simple question to open with the Premier 

this morning. Will the Premier assure the public service of 

Saskatchewan that the firings are over? And if not, Mr. Speaker, 

will the Premier tell us how many more can we expect and who 

will lose their positions with the Government of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to 

the hon. member that in terms of the transition of government, 

not unlike what happened in 1991 when his party assumed 

government, the transition took a number of months. In fact I 

don’t think it was completely resolved, according to some 

reports I’ve seen, until about 1993. 

 

And so what we will continue to do, Mr. Speaker, is conduct 

our government with respect to transition professionally, 

respectful of those who continue to provide great service for the 

province. We will not, unlike members opposite in 1991 for 

example, be firing single mothers on Christmas Eve. We won’t 

be doing that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the Premier does 

remember 1991 when he left the employ in this building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that over the course of this 

session, the Saskatchewan Party has sure come a long way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — On the very first day of the session, Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier stood before the people of Saskatchewan 

and he described the finances of the province of Saskatchewan 

as stark. Now a few months later, he introduced a budget with a 

10 per cent spending increase and a $1.5 billion surplus. And 

last week, Mr. Speaker, we heard the Premier say that he’s 

going to send his caucus members out this summer to see if 

they can find ways to spend all the money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is as follows: 

when did he decide that he was wrong? When did he decide that 

he was wrong, that the finances of this province are not stark? 

When did he decide that, unlike any other premier in the history 

of this province, he has inherited a fiscal capacity like none 

other? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the hon. 

member’s question is, when did I decide that I was wrong. I 

want to say, I can remember sitting over on those benches not 

too long ago and listening day after day to speeches from NDP 

politicians and from that premier who downplayed the potential 

for this province to lead the country — who said we’d always 

be in and out of equalization, who called us the wee province, 

whose members said it was statistically impossible for our 

population to grow at the national average. 

 

And for a moment I and other members started to maybe 

believe it was true until we realized, along with the people of 

Saskatchewan, that that was wrong, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan could lead — that if they had a government that 

was prepared to bring in a ready-for-growth initiative to deal 



1316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2008 

with the infrastructure deficits, to continue the economic 

momentum, to see the employment levels that we’re seeing at 

record levels, and also to ensure, to also ensure that everyone 

shared in the prosperity through child care, through funding 

better cancer care, through health care, that we could achieve 

that as a province. To think that back then was wrong. We 

know what the truth is today and we’re looking forward to 

moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let’s keep a little running total 

this morning. Question one, no answer; question two, no 

answer. Now let’s try this one. 

 

After the Premier came out and the people of Saskatchewan and 

told us all that the financial circumstance in Saskatchewan was 

stark — even though he had $1 billion handed to him in the 

bank, he said the fiscal situation was stark — what’s the first 

thing they did? Well he sent out the Deputy Premier to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan the first thing this government’s going 

to do is rid the province of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So, Mr. Speaker, to repeat, the first thing the 

Premier does in this stark financial situation, as he described it, 

is to send the Deputy Premier out to tell the province, we’re 

going to rid this province of the wheat sheaf logo. That’s what 

he said. Now you know how the public reacted, Mr. Speaker. 

They reacted very quickly. Next thing we heard was the Deputy 

Premier — same Deputy Premier, a few days later — coming 

out and saying well no, that was a bad decision we made and 

we’re not going to do it. 

 

But my question today, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: is in fact 

the wheat sheaf logo continuing to be the official logo of the 

province of Saskatchewan? If not, how is it that on government 

publications, government websites, and all around we see that 

the wheat sheaf logo has disappeared? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

premise of the premier’s question, I think he highlighted . . . Or 

the Opposition Leader’s question, the Opposition Leader’s 

question. I think he highlighted what it is that we did first, and 

he was wrong. Here’s what we did first. We set the next 

election date. We kept the promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The next thing we did is we announced that 

we would be eliminating the NDP tax on used cars, the PST on 

used cars. We kept the promise. That was the second thing. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The third thing we did is we unveiled a 

smaller cabinet. That was a promise we made. We kept that 

promise. 

 

The fifth thing that we did, Mr. Speaker, was introduce tougher 

penalties for drunk drivers. That was also a promise kept. And 

the sixth thing we did was announce coverage of the colorectal 

cancer drug Avastin. And there’s a long list. 

 

These are the first things we did, keeping promises we made to 

Saskatchewan people. And we know there’s some work to do 

yet, but we’re off to a pretty good start, we think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Question three, no answer. Let’s try another 

one, Mr. Speaker. Now what has become very, very clear to 

Saskatchewan people and to this legislature that we have now a 

government who will say anything in opposition and then either 

get to government and do just the opposite or do nothing at all. 

 

Now remember, Mr. Speaker, after the Premier stood up and 

declared that the province’s finances were stark and after they 

announced they’re going to get rid of the wheat sheaf logo, then 

they introduce their very first piece of legislation. And what 

was it, Mr. Speaker, what was it? — No. 1, The Growth and 

Financial Security Act. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the biggest flip-flops I’ve seen 

in my political career. After railing from the opposition benches 

about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund of the New Democratic 

Party government, the Sask Party turns around and introduces 

the very same thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance said, and I quote, 

“fundamentally, there is very little difference” between the 

NDP’s fund and theirs. And so to the Premier: how could he in 

good conscience stand in opposition criticizing the NDP 

government for a Fiscal Stabilization Fund then assume 

government and do exactly the same thing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Premier, I realize 

we’re maybe on the home stretch and it’s quite easily to get into 

heated, animated debate. But if we could actually restrain 

ourselves a little bit, the Speaker will try to at least hold the 

reins. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know it’s interesting, the last day of the session and we’re 

answering questions, we’re hearing questions about the logo 

from the former premier, the Leader of the Opposition. A 

chance to talk about pretty big issues today, certainly on the last 

day of session. Not very long ago his pressing issue was 

explanatory notes on a piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of material for question period over there, it’s like the 



May 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1317 

writers for the second season of Three’s Company, they’ve got 

nothing left I don’t think, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With respect to the wheat sheaf logo, I want to tell the hon. 

member opposite that the last time I saw and used that wheat 

sheaf logo was just this week in his constituency when we 

brought a box of wheat sheaf logo lapel pins . . . Where? Mr. 

Speaker, we brought them to St. Mary’s School, right in the 

heart of his constituency. We’re going to build a brand new 

school and we’re going to build a brand new affordable housing 

project there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As for the Growth and Financial Security Fund, we thought it 

would be novel that if you’re going to have such a fund that you 

would actually fund it, and that’s what we’re doing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — . . . for a partial answer and he got it wrong. 

Mr. Speaker, let’s again go back to this party, then in 

opposition, now in government, what they were saying in 

opposition. In opposition they talked a lot about transparency in 

government and accountability in government. I could even 

quote from the platform of the Sask Party, which said, “A 

Saskatchewan Party Government will provide Saskatchewan 

people with more transparency and accountability than any 

previous government.” 

 

Well then what did this Premier and this government do during 

this session? Well they tried to slip in a piece of legislation 

which they should have called the unaccountability Act, a piece 

of legislation where they attempted to secure for themselves the 

ability to spend $350,000 without public reporting at least for a 

year and longer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how is it that the Premier can now claim that he is 

keeping campaign promises, that he is standing by what he said 

in opposition? And how can they deny the headline that we all 

saw on the front page of the Leader-Post, “Hypocrites?” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 

question. The hon. member is referring to the Bill for which he 

demanded in question period the explanatory notes even though 

there are no explanatory notes with a new Bill. But he also that 

day made a good point. And it happens on a rare occasion from 

members opposite that a rare point is made, and in this case, 

Mr. Speaker, we appropriately responded. The Bill is not being 

passed this session. 

 

We’re referring it to the auditor for his advice to balance 

efficiency and transparency. And should it occur again, and it 

may well — as the member for Kindersley has pointed out, it 

might just occur again that members opposite have another 

good idea — we’ll have a look at that too, Mr. Speaker. But as 

for saying what it is that we said in opposition versus what we 

have done in government, Mr. Speaker, we can run through a 

list of 60 election promises that we have already kept in only 

six months of forming a government. 

 

Now we know there’s still work to do, Mr. Speaker, but we’d 

say with respect that we are off to a pretty good start. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect, some think 

it’s a pretty shaky start. And it’s a pretty shaky answer to the 

question I just put to the Premier about saying one thing while 

in opposition and another thing in government. But even this is 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, because now what they’re saying in 

government is not even holding true in government because the 

Premier assured us that this Bill would be referred to the auditor 

for his consideration. 

 

Well I wonder when that’s going to happen, because the auditor 

came to this Chamber and said it has not been referred to him, 

at least yet. How long will it take for this Bill to find its way to 

the auditor? 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me ask again: does the Premier, does the 

Premier share the view of the Minister of Agriculture, who has 

been a little more upfront with the thinking over there, that you 

can say absolutely anything in opposition for 12 years but you 

don’t need to be held to account for what you said when you get 

to the government benches? Does the Premier share . . . Oh, he 

laughs. He thinks this is funny. 

 

Does he share the view of the Minister of Agriculture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of saying 

anything in opposition, I heard my hon. friend from Thunder 

Creek say that the hon. member opposite seems to be really 

getting the hang of it. We’ve seen that over the last number of 

weeks on the gas tax and on other issues. 

 

But it’s a fair debate to have today on the last day of the 

session. It’s a fair analysis. It’s a fair measure for a new 

government that the Opposition Leader proposes. And what I’m 

talking about, Mr. Speaker, is what did you say before and 

during the election campaign, and what have you done 

afterwards? 

 

Now I’ve indicated there are 60 promises kept, but let’s review 

a few more. We’ve heard some today. We promised a $15 cap 

on prescription drugs for kids. We’ve kept that promise. We 

promised to upgrade our provincial parks, our regional parks, 

and cancel the NDP wiener roast tax. We’ve kept that promise. 

We’ve promised a tuition freeze and a dynamic new program to 

keep graduates from post-secondary institutions in our 

province. We’ve kept that promise as well. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 



1318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2008 

got a lot more. 

 

The bottom line is this: what we said during the election 

campaign, we’re doing. We are doing what we said we would 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

issues which the government said they would do that we wish 

they hadn’t said they would do, and now they’re doing them 

and we wish that they weren’t doing them. There are a host of 

issues that this government addressed when they were in 

opposition that they are not now . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call the members to order. Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me go back again to what the 

Minister of Agriculture currently said. He said, “In opposition I 

could say just about anything I wanted and I did on a lot of 

occasions for 12 years.” Mr. Speaker, you know when he said 

that? In response to the issue, in response to the issue of farm 

families, particularly in the southwest of our province, who are 

living through a period of drought, Mr. Speaker. He said that in 

response to the commitment that the Sask Party had made to the 

farm families who are experiencing drought, that they would 

provide a per-acreage payment. That was the commitment. That 

is what they lobbied for in opposition. 

 

Now they’re in government. They try and escape responsibility 

to those farm families by saying, oh well, don’t worry because 

you can say anything in opposition, but when you’re minister, 

quote, “you’re responsible” and you have to do it right. 

 

So let me again say to the Premier, and let me ask to the 

Premier, does he share the Minister of Agriculture’s view that 

this excuse is good enough for not responding to an acreage 

payment for the farmers in the Southwest? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt 

about the challenges facing the farmers and the ranchers of 

southwest Saskatchewan. Certainly a large portion of the 

Southwest has been under drought conditions for about four 

years. It’s I think perhaps the first visit to the area by a minister 

of Agriculture — notwithstanding the four-year length of the 

drought — happened after the election and it was a visit by this 

minister. 

 

This minister, while Agriculture critic in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, promised a crop insurance review, promised a new 

system of crop insurance that would improve coverage and keep 

premiums affordable. He’s already taken a step to improve the 

coverage, Mr. Speaker, and he’s acted on keeping our promise 

with respect to reviewing the program. 

We promised property tax relief for producers, something they 

were prepared to ignore in the election campaign. That’s also 

been delivered. We have delivered on a $6 million water 

infrastructure for the Southwest, Mr. Speaker. That’s $6 million 

more than anything they got at all from the NDP when they 

were in office. 

 

There’s more work to be done. The minister’s monitoring it. He 

will return to the area after seeding. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the kind of response the likes of which agriculture producers 

never received from that former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that was question 

seven. Question seven, no answer to the question of acreage 

payments and the commitment they made before the election. 

Then let us turn to another situation. 

 

There are circumstances in this province now where we have 

farm families who are not benefiting from the economic boom 

that’s being felt by this province. And we have families across 

the province who are beginning to feel real pressures, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let’s think about utility rates. This government has now taken 

the position that they will not guarantee the provision of the 

lowest-cost bundle of utilities for the people of Saskatchewan, 

even though we are the owners of our utilities, the Crown 

corporations. But even worse, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

Responsible for the Crowns has already indicated that we can 

expect SaskPower rates to climb 5 per cent in the fall. 

 

How can this be, Mr. Speaker? My question then to the 

Premier: how can it be that we’re in this period of economic 

boom, record prosperity for government — the Crowns are 

reaping in record profits, providing the General Revenue Fund 

— and he’s got a minister and a government that is now 

proposing utility rate increases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the SaskPower 

reference that the hon. member makes, this process would have 

been under way prior to the election — the evaluation of the 

need for rate increases. That’s the fact of the matter. The fact of 

the matter is with utilities, we see rate increases as costs 

increase. So is it the position of the hon. member, is it the 

position of the opposition that with rising energy costs, that our 

utilities . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That those utilities wouldn’t be climbing as 

they were when he was the premier, when he was the premier to 



May 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1319 

make those adjustments? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a debate about SaskPower, 

about our future electrical needs. We’ve seen our government 

lead with respect to clean coal. The number one, I believe the 

number one clean coal project coming to the continent, Mr. 

Speaker, is going to happen here. We’re going to have a 

discussion in this province that we should have had a long time 

ago about the options and possibilities of nuclear power. 

 

Our question to those members opposite is: are they ready for 

that discussion? Are they prepared, are they prepared to have 

the kind of vision that people of this province are demanding of 

all of us to talk about cleaner energy for future generations — 

affordable energy and safe energy? We’re ready for that debate, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I think, Mr. Speaker, my question was about 

why will we be facing — the people of Saskatchewan — facing 

these extreme utility rates at a period of boom and record profit 

in the Crowns. And again no answer. Lots of chat, but no 

answer. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t long ago that the Minister of 

Social Services responsible for housing in our province 

described the housing circumstance as a crisis. Well I can tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, some of my neighbours do feel it has become 

a crisis. It is a crisis when you can see your rent going up $400 

a month. It is a crisis when you’re a student and you have to end 

up sleeping on somebody’s couch or sleeping in a car because 

there isn’t student housing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, how can we have a government that on one 

moment thinks it’s a crisis, a crisis, and yet a Premier who says 

that lower rents are a market obligation? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier today. He’s done 

nothing to date, nothing to date for the renters of Saskatchewan. 

My question today is: what does he intend to do to assist the 

renters of Saskatchewan, whether they be seniors, whether they 

be working people, whether they be students? What does he 

intend to do for the renters of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the 

work of the Minister of Social Services who, prior to the budget 

being tabled, launched, announced the task force on housing 

that has been going all over the province meeting with 

municipalities — very well received, by the way, this 

discussion that Ted Merriman and Mr. Pringle have been 

having with municipalities and groups across the province. 

 

The solution to the housing issue is a local government issue. 

It’s a provincial government issue. It’s a federal government 

issue. And we have backed up that task force — which will 

report very shortly with some very specific recommendations, I 

believe — we’ve backed it up with the largest increase in 

Saskatchewan’s history to the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement for those low-income families, about 70 per cent of 

whom are single-parent families, to be able to cope with some 

of the rising costs we’ve seen. We’ve backed it up with a 15 per 

cent increase in foster care rates. We’ve backed it up, Mr. 

Speaker, with the commitment that we made this week at St. 

Mary’s, right in his constituency — that he’s not 

acknowledging today — $8 million in affordable housing and a 

brand new school. We’re taking action, and there’ll be more to 

come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me say this. I have very 

publicly congratulated the government for the funding for St. 

Mary School — very, very publicly — but I tell you this, Mr. 

Speaker. This is clear to the people of Saskatoon and its inner 

city, that there’s a government in damage control mode, damage 

control mode; and 2,400 people on the street supporting Station 

20 forced this government to do something. And I want the 

Premier to understand something further. It’s not either-or; it’s 

not either-or. It is yes, a welcome to St. Mary School, but yes, 

return the funding to Station 20 and complete the project, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a situation of 

boom in this province. We’ve got a situation of economic 

prosperity, not as a result anything that this government has 

done. A period of boom and prosperity, but what do we see? 

Some of our lowest-income families hardly being able to meet 

their food budget. 

 

We had a commitment from this government that they would 

increase, increase the food allowance for social assistance 

recipients, not the employment supplement for those who are 

employed but the food allowance for the poorest of our poor. 

Mr. Speaker, I say this to the Premier. My question is to the 

Premier: why have they neglected this commitment? Why have 

they not raised the food allowance for people on social 

assistance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the last election 

very much was about the valid question, which party has the 

best team and the plan to sustain the growth of Saskatchewan? 

And I think we’ve seen that question being answered 

empirically. We see the Royal Bank of Canada saying this 

economy is going to lead the country this year and next year. 

Mr. Speaker, we see record employment — 17,000 full-time 

jobs created. We see international and national media 

highlighting this government. This growth-oriented government 



1320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2008 

has a reason to be bullish. 

 

And from this government we’ve seen a commitment to share 

this prosperity with Saskatchewan people. We see it in cancer 

care, increased funding in cancer care that never happened 

when they were the government. We see it in increased funding 

for better health care facilities, for better school facilities. We 

see it in increased funding for child hunger programs, for 

money for sexual assault centres, something they neglected for 

16 years, Mr. Speaker. And in addition to that we see a 

government that’s prepared to keep its promises, to do what it 

said it would do. Mr. Speaker, 60 promises kept. We’re off to a 

good start, but there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Members will come to order. Order. The 

member from Moose Jaw North, please come to order, and I ask 

members of the opposition to come to order. Before orders of 

the day, I have a few comments to make regarding the point of 

order raised yesterday. 

 

Yesterday the Government House Leader raised the point of 

order concerning the appropriateness of a series of questions 

posed by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow during 

Tuesday’s question period. It was the contention of the House 

Leader that the questions impugned the character of the 

Minister Responsible for SaskTel by suggesting that he is in a 

conflict of interest. The House Leader further contended that the 

questions amounted to a serious allegation of financial 

impropriety against the minister and the Chair of the SaskTel 

board of directors. 

 

Members will be aware that their interventions in the Assembly, 

whether in debate or during in other proceedings such as 

question period, may not make a personal charge or accusation 

against another member. Such a charge or accusation may only 

be made by way of a substantive motion moved by notice. This 

long-held parliamentary practice is codified in rule 50(f). 

 

In reviewing the Hansard, I find that the interventions of the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow were phrased to include a 

preamble followed by a concise, direct question. The preambles 

consisted of statements outlining the relationships and 

connections between SaskTel and Jump.ca, the minister and the 

SaskTel board Chair, the Golden Opportunities Fund and the 

minister’s private investments. Based upon these statements, the 

questions then posed by the member sought the minister’s 

opinion on the possible conflicts of interest that he or the board 

Chair might be in, and what actions the minister might take to 

address these conflicts. 

 

I remind members that it is not the role of the Speaker to 

determine the veracity of what members say in debate or 

question period. It is the assumption indeed expectation of this 

Assembly that members will be truthful and forthright in their 

interventions. However, in those instances where there is a 

difference of opinion, members are free to debate, disagree, or 

offer alternative versions of the facts in dispute. 

From the record, it is clear that the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow phrased her questions in such a manner that did not 

make a personal charge or accusation. For this reason, I find the 

point of order not well taken. 

 

Before closing this matter, I want to point out what a former 

Speaker said in this Assembly about question period on May 

27, 1998, and I quote “. . . it is never, ever appropriate that, 

engaging in political cut and thrust of debate in this Assembly, 

that members would draw into question the character of another 

member . . .” I think it is appropriate that members are 

reminded about this point. 

 

I also want to point out that there are alternate and formal 

means to pursue questions of conflict of interest, means which 

this Assembly itself put into law. I refer members to The 

Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, section 29(1), which 

provides a mechanism for a member who has “. . . reasonable 

and probable grounds to believe that another member is in 

contravention of this Act . . .” to ask the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner for an opinion. 

 

Although I find the point of order not well taken, I do want 

members to be mindful that they should be respectful of one 

another’s character when putting comments on the record and 

that there are formal means available to members when they 

have questions about the conflict of interest. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave of the Assembly to move a motion regarding the 

adjournment of the session and to make some closing remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today marks 

the conclusion of the first legislative session of the new 

Saskatchewan Party government. And I would like to take this 

opportunity to thank both you and the Clerks at the Table who 

have guided us through the various procedures and assisted us 

in learning our new role as government. I would also like to 

thank the Legislative Assembly staff who’ve endured the 

extended hours of this legislative session along with the elected 

members and the Chairs and Vice-Chairs of the committees. 

 

I would particularly like to thank the staff who worked in 

Hansard, Journals, the broadcast services staff, the 

Sergeant-at-Arms, and the commissaries and building 

maintenance staff, library services, cafeteria staff, and the 

interns who have experienced a condensed and fairly intense 

session. I wish to especially acknowledge the Pages and thank 

them for their efforts to sweeten us up with some chocolate this 



May 15, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1321 

last two days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I would like to thank the staff in the 

respective caucus offices and the staff in Executive Council and 

the staff in the ministers’ offices. 

 

I would like to also thank my colleagues on both sides of the 

House and the Opposition House Leader for guiding his 

members in their new roles. It’s clearly been a learning 

experience on both sides of the House. And I would like to 

thank the media for reporting on the day-to-day activities of the 

session and keeping the public in touch with what goes on in 

this session. 

 

But perhaps most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

thank our families for their support and co-operation and the 

many sacrifices they make throughout the year to allow each of 

us to do our jobs. Many of our members are away from home 

for extended periods of time, and I know this is difficult for 

spouses and children, and so I offer a special thank you to them 

on behalf of all of us for their understanding and patience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would move by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 22, 2008, unless 

earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of the 

government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each 

member seven clear days notice, if possible, of such date 

and time. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Government House Leader: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of the sitting 

day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 22, 2008, unless 

earlier recalled by the Speaker upon the request of the 

government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each 

member seven days clear notice, if possible, of such date 

and time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the House 

Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll 

begin my remarks with an apology, Mr. Speaker, to the Pages. I 

didn’t know, before the Government House Leader indicated, 

that the chocolates on our tables came from the Pages. I was 

convinced they came from the member from Canora-Pelly, and 

I sent mine out to the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

lab for testing, Mr. Speaker. But it came back okay, and I’ve 

now consumed it. And my thanks as well to the Pages, Mr. 

Speaker, my thanks very much to the Pages, not only for the 

chocolates but of course for all that they’ve done for us. And I 

wish them extremely well, Mr. Speaker, in their endeavours as 

they leave this place as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I join with the Government House Leader in 

thanking those who have served us throughout this session, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly those special staff, the staff that was 

invited here to deal with the extended hours, the extra hours that 

we had earlier in the session, Mr. Speaker. We had to bring 

people in to assist with that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, current staff, your staff included, the 

individuals serving at the Table, the Clerks at the Table, Mr. 

Speaker, their efforts to assist us to get through this difficult 

time, Mr. Speaker, is most appreciated. And, Mr. Speaker, also 

to the committee staff and to the departmental staff, Mr. 

Speaker, who engaged with us in evening sittings, sometimes 

till 10:30, 11:30, midnight, 1 o’clock in the morning, Mr. 

Speaker — it was very, very, very good of the committee staff. 

And I should mention Hansard staff as well, Mr. Speaker, for 

helping to manage these long hours in the Chamber. And I 

thank them for what they did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues as 

well, this time for us as we are all adjusting to our new 

responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. I believe that my colleagues were 

enthusiastic. They were committed to their role here in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, at times feisty and prepared to accept 

the challenges that the people of Saskatchewan have offered. 

And I thank my colleagues for the work that they did. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I thank you and your staff. This was a 

difficult session as we are all finding our way. Mr. Speaker, you 

managed this session with grace and asking for respect. And, 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I thank you 

and your staff for what you did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I also want to thank our families, our 

spouses, significant others. Mr. Speaker, this was a different 

session than we have been used to, and our families dealt with it 

as best that they could. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank my wife, Cheryl, in particular for allowing 

me to be away as much as I have, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very 

grateful for the way in which Cheryl has freed me up to do the 

things that my caucus and the people of Saskatchewan have 

asked me to do. And lastly, lastly, Mr. Speaker, my thanks to 

my mother, who watches the House on a regular basis. Her only 

advice to me has been, Mr. Speaker, keep asking those 

questions; sooner or later you’ll get an answer. Mr. Speaker, I 

thank my mother for the advice that she has given me 

throughout this session. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wish, on behalf of the official opposition, I 

wish all members of the Chamber a very productive time away 

from here, and I look forward to when we come back to a new 

session in the fall. I look forward to the opportunities to see the 

government’s new package of legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’ll look forward to the opportunity to helping my caucus pull 

together questions that continue to hold the government to 

account. 



1322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2008 

I hope all have a pleasant time away from this place, and thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we adjourn today, I would appreciate 

leave to make a brief statement of thanks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. I first of all want to thank the 

Government and Opposition House Leaders for their remarks 

and concur with the thank yous they have expressed. I want to 

thank all MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for 

giving me the honour to serve as your Speaker in this first 

session of the twenty-sixth legislature. I also thank all MLAs 

for their commitment to this institution, for their passion, and 

the work they do for the people of this province. 

 

As well, thank you to the staff for their support work — the 

constituency assistants as well as their staff in the legislature. 

Thank you to the Clerks at the Table for their advice, 

dedication, and expertise — Gregory Putz, Kenneth Ring, 

Margaret Woods, Iris Lang, and the staff in their offices. I also 

want to acknowledge and thank Viktor Kaczkowski, committee 

Clerk, and Kathy Burianyk, committee researcher. 

 

Thank you to the officials who have appeared before our 

committees for their contribution to the legislative process. And 

I want to acknowledge and extent sincere thanks to the 

following: Dome Cafeteria staff, government services, Journals, 

Hansard, security, Legislative Library, human resource and 

payroll services, communication and technology services, 

financial and administrative services, visitor services, office of 

the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel, Office of the Clerk, 

and the Office of the Speaker. 

 

And I want to let the staff that I’ve just named know that 

members of this Assembly do care about them. And I indicated 

earlier and we’re aware of the fact that we have some staff 

members who have family members who are facing some grave 

health challenges. We want you to know that our thoughts 

continue to be with you. 

 

I want to make special recognition of a group of young people 

that I want to recognize and thank for their help, our Pages: 

Teagan Bossenberry, Kristy Fyfe, Milayna Goruick, Alex 

Hamilton, and Amy Stamm. We’ve really appreciated your 

smiles and certainly, as has been acknowledged, little tokens of 

appreciation. Thank you so much. We desperately need a little 

bit of sweetening up at times. That’s greatly appreciated. 

 

And finally I want to acknowledge and thank the families of all 

MLAs for their support. As the Government House Leader and 

Opposition House Leader have indicated, without the support of 

our families, the job would be much more difficult. And may I 

also extend a special thank you to Mr. and Mrs. Lepp and the 

group from the House of Prayer, who have taken the time to 

come and attend our Legislative Building. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I close by extending to each and every one the 

thoughts for a very pleasant and enjoyable summer, time with 

family and friends, and getting to renew acquaintances even 

with constituents. 

 

The motion before the Assembly is a motion by the 

Government House Leader that this Assembly stands adjourned 

until 10 a.m. on October 22 or at the call of the Chair. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

October 22. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:07.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1311 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1311 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1311 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1311 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1311 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1312 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1312 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1313 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Remarkable Growth 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1313 

 Saskatchewan Party’s Attitude to People 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1313 

 Committed to Safety and Security 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1313 

 Stumbling Out of the Gate 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1314 

 Promises Made, Promises Kept 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1314 

 Cronyism 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1314 

 Promises Kept 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1314 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 The Government’s Performance 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1315 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1315 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1320 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1320 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1321 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1322 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


