




















































Hansard: March 20, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 16A  THURSDAY, MARCH 20, 2008, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 387 

 March 20, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to present 

several pages of petitions to the Legislative Assembly today on 

behalf of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan concerning 

the withdrawal of the proposed essential services legislation and 

the withdrawal of the proposed amendments to The Trade 

Union Act. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in this province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Saskatoon, Battleford, 

Prince Albert, and Regina. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I present a 

petition on behalf of Moose Jaw residents and for the 

improvement of health care in our region. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hereby present a 

petition for private Bill on behalf of the Caronport schools: 

 

Wherefore your petition humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to amend the Act to incorporate 

Caronport schools being chapter 101 of the statutes of 

Saskatchewan 1939 accordingly. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is a name change for the Caronport schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, if I could ask for leave and your 

attention to move back to introduction of guests. First of all let 

me say it would be appreciated if members would remain in 

their places. There was a lot of movement; it was difficult to see 

who was on their feet for introduction of guests. 

 

And I would like to recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 

to you to all the members of this Assembly today, I’d like to 

recognize and acknowledge a person in your gallery today, 

someone that’s no stranger to this gallery, a woman that wears 

very many hats — among mother, wife, fundraiser, to name a 

few. It just goes on and on. The woman that in no small part is 

responsible for why I’m here today as well, Mr. Speaker, my 

wife, Leone. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Easter Celebrations 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend 

Christians around the world will be gathering together to 

celebrate the Easter season. This Easter long weekend also 

allows family and friends to gather together to enjoy a holiday 

in the company of friends and family. No doubt, Mr. Speaker, 

people look forward to the Easter season as an opportunity for 

families to reunite at home. 

 

This weekend is more than just a time of relaxation and good 

company though. Christians around the world celebrate the love 

and sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Tonight we remember the Last 

Supper, and tomorrow Christians will gather on Good Friday to 

solemnly remember his sacrifice on the Cross. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the coming spring brings the renewal of nature, 

Easter Sunday allows us to gather in joy and celebration as we 

remember his resurrection and all that it stands for. As many 

know my background and my own resurrection through my 

faith, this is indeed a special time of celebration for myself, my 

family, and all those touched by his grace. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to extend best wishes on behalf of myself 

and my colleagues to all the residents of Saskatchewan on this 

joyous and blessed occasion. As it is written in John 3:16, “For 

God so loved the world that He gave his one and only begotten 

Son that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have 

eternal life.” 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Caswell Community Association’s 

Adopt-a-Grandparent Program 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout 2007 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

Caswell Community Association in Saskatoon, in conjunction 

with the 33rd Street Safeway, has raised funds towards the 

adopt-a-grandparent program. The Caswell Community 

Association envisions adopt-a-grandparent as a 

cross-generational program in which young and old alike can 

benefit from increased community participation. The first 

priority on the adopt-a-grandparent agenda was the creation of a 

volunteer-run snow removal program for seniors and persons 

with disabilities in the Caswell Hill area. 

 

The Caswell Community Association extends its thanks to all 

community members for their donated time, money, and 

household items to make the fundraising a success particularly 

the employees of the 33rd Street Safeway. 

 

The Caswell Community Association is one of the most vital 

and active in Saskatoon. The 33 Street Safeway and its 

employees are a keystone of the Caswell and Mayfair 

neighbourhoods. The 33rd Street Safeway is one of the few 

grocery stores of its size serving a core neighbourhood in 

Saskatoon. Its ongoing commitment to that community is 

invaluable to those who live there. The adopt-a-grandparent 

program is one example of the valuable partnerships between 

the Caswell Community Association and the 33rd Street 

Safeway. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Maidstone Pee Wee Jets 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With discussion in 

the media about youth and violence, I want to draw attention to 

a group of young men who have played their hearts out this 

season to the support and admiration of the people of 

Maidstone. The Maidstone Pee Wee Jets represent all our 

provincial youth who are working hard as a team to build 

something of value. 

 

For the team this valuable effort has materialized as a 49-game 

season played with 215 goals for and 114 goals against. It 

should be noted that at one point this team travelled 

approximately 1,900 kilometres over just eight days to play five 

games. As a result of their effort and enthusiasm, the Jets have 

earned a spot in the provincial finals. 

 

This is the type of dedication and spirit that not only makes 

great hockey players in the province and our country, but most 

importantly these are the same skills that develop confidence 

and leadership in our youth. You have inspired our community 

with your enthusiasm and have made us very proud to call your 

team our own. Special recognition to coach Kurt Freyman, 

assistant coach Wendall Weston, and trainer Leland Hanson — 

you have grown great leadership and team building. 

 

I now ask all members — perhaps excluding the member from 

Arm River-Watrous because it’s Wynyard that we will be in the 

finals against — to wish the Maidstone Pee Wee Jets the best of 

luck. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

The Battlefords Welcome New Immigrants 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring to 

the attention of the Legislative Assembly the good work of The 

Battleford’s immigrant support committee and the people of 

The Battlefords who are welcoming a very large number of new 

citizens and working as best they can on the challenges facing 

our community in general. 

 

During the last two years, the people of The Battlefords have 

welcomed more than 300 immigrants, and based on information 

available today, in the next two years we will welcome in 

addition 40 Serbian families and 20 Chinese individuals. 

 

The Battlefords have benefited greatly from the support and 

encouragement of the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee 

program and will continue to do the work necessary to attract 

new residents to help the region deal with its growing labour 

shortage. At the same time, the support committee has been 

helping get our new residents settled, including language 

support, appliance and furniture support, banking, 

transportation, and of course housing. 

 

Housing is a significant challenge for the community, and 

additional provincial support would be most welcomed. 

Immigrants need affordable and accessible housing options. So 

too do our First Nations people moving into the community, 

students attending enhanced programming at North West 

Regional College, and young people also moving into the 

community for job and educational opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the hard work of the volunteers and contributors 

to the immigrant support committee in The Battlefords in 

welcoming the new residents to the community and committing 

ourselves to ensure that there are adequate, accessible, and 

affordable housing opportunities for everyone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Best Wishes for Mayor’s Speedy Recovery 

 

Mr. Michelson: — I would ask the Assembly to join me in 

extending best wishes to the Mayor of Moose Jaw, Dale 

McBain. Mayor McBain went into surgery early this week to 

replace a valve in his heart. I’m happy to report the surgery 

went well, and Mayor McBain is resting comfortably, 

recovering in the Regina General Hospital. I understand he’s 

already sitting up and will be returning to Moose Jaw in his 

home in a few days. 

 

As you’re aware, Mr. Speaker, although the procedure is not 

uncommon, there’s always an element of risk, and we’re 

thankful that the procedure went well. Mayor McBain plans to 

be back in council by the end of April. In the meantime, we 

know that his optimistic leadership will be missed. However he 

assures us that the city is in good hands with the existing 

council and staff. 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

Please join me, with all the citizens of Moose Jaw, in extending 

the best wishes for a comfortable stay and a speedy recovery to 

Mayor McBain. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

International Women’s Day Banquet 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, this month I had the pleasure of 

attending of an event hosted by the Prince Albert Grand 

Council Women’s Commission. The event, Mr. Speaker, was 

the International Women’s Day Banquet. 

 

The women’s commission believes that International Women’s 

Day is an important time to recognize the achievements of 

women and the leadership that women provide. In a statement 

by the women’s commission they proclaim, “By honouring the 

outstanding achievements of women, we not only provide role 

models but also recognition for the countless contributions they 

make to their families and communities.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, one woman from each PAGC [Prince Albert 

Grand Council] First Nation — 12 women in all — were 

honoured at the banquet in honour of outstanding women 

everywhere. 

 

Welcoming remarks were given by Shirley Henderson, Chair of 

the women’s commission. Mr. Speaker, that evening she was 

also presented the PAGC Women of the Year by Grand Chief 

Ron Michel, Vice-Chief Ed Henderson, Vice-Chief Don 

Deranger, Chief Tammy Cook-Searson, and Chief Rosalie 

Tsannie-Burseth. Entertainment was provided by a tremendous 

young upcoming artist, a Juno-nominated writer from the Dene 

Nation of Yellowknife, Leela Gilday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

acknowledging the contributions made by the women of the 

Prince Albert Grand Council First Nations and in congratulating 

the PAGC Women’s Commission on a tremendously successful 

evening. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Provincial Budget 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. People across the 

province woke up smiling this morning. For the first time in 

years they got a budget that has its eyes firmly on the road 

ahead, not on the rear-view mirror. 

 

While there have been many positive things said about this 

government’s first budget, perhaps our biggest compliment 

came from the members opposite — yes, Mr. Speaker, from 

none other than that backwards-looking NDP [New Democratic 

Party]. The former Finance minister described our Ready for 

Growth budget as almost NDP. He couldn’t be more right. It 

was nothing like an NDP budget. 

 

Take their record on property tax. In the 2003 election 

campaign, they promised to cut property tax. But in the first 

budget after the election, they broke that promise and raised the 

PST [provincial sales tax]. 

 

In this past election, Mr. Speaker, our government promised to 

cut property taxes. And, Mr. Speaker, this government did cut 

property taxes — a promise kept, Mr. Speaker, a promise kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only did the members opposite fail to plan, but 

when they were in power, they planned to fail. This government 

is planning to succeed, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, with leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While we were 

underway in proceedings, a very special guest joined us here in 

the Legislative Assembly. Seated in your gallery with Elaine 

Kivisto from my office is Pamela Wallin who has joined us here 

today. 

 

And if I may, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to have Pamela join 

us today in the Legislative Assembly. I don’t know if there are 

many more famous exports from the province of Saskatchewan 

than Pamela, educated at the University of Regina here and, but 

for a fill-in stint on an open-line show, may have been lost to 

Canadian journalism and then to the world of diplomacy as well 

as entrepreneurship. 

 

Currently Pamela continues to promote the province of 

Saskatchewan, has served her country with respect to the task 

force on Afghanistan, is on the board of Oilsands Quest, and 

therefore promoting Saskatchewan wherever she goes. We had 

the good fortune, for the Minister of Energy and myself, in 

meeting with Pamela and others about energy opportunities in 

the province while we were there. And she again helped 

certainly promote the province and put us in touch with the 

right people that can increase investment. 

 

So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Ms. 

Wallin to this Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — With leave to also welcome Ms. Wallin. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the opposition, I would want to also welcome Pamela Wallin 

to our Chamber today — no stranger to this legislature, 

certainly no stranger to the province of Saskatchewan, one of 

the few citizens in our province who has a street named after 

her in her hometown and one who has done an exceptional 

amount of work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, no 

matter what her career path — whether it was her time in 

journalism or representing our nation in New York City. 

 

And so we welcome Ms. Wallin again to this legislature, to her 

home province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Property Taxes 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday we saw more flip-flops than we could see 

from two trapeze artists flipping pancakes on top of a cement 

mixer, Mr. Speaker. We saw the Saskatchewan Party flip-flop 

on deficit. When we were in government, the budgets had 

deficits. Now that they’re there, no, they weren’t deficits; they 

were in fact balanced budgets. We saw them flip-flop on the 

Fiscal Stabilization Fund. No, a year ago it was a slush fund. 

No, today it’s sound management. 

 

They flip-flop on spending. When it was our budget, it was 

unsustainable; and today they’re spending even more, Mr. 

Speaker. But the biggest flip-flop of all was on property taxes. 

They campaigned in the election on property tax relief and 

yesterday they failed to deliver anything substantial. 

 

To the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker: isn’t his back just a 

little bit sore from all the flip-flopping he’s been doing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise today, the first day after an 

historic budget in the province of Saskatchewan, and reply in 

answer to the questions posed by the member opposite. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, it’s rare in this Assembly where you have 

an opportunity, after having worked on a budget for four solid 

months — it was the shortest time that we’ve had possibly to do 

this — and to be able to realize on virtually all of our campaign 

commitments. Mr. Speaker, we’ve kept our promises and that 

was very important to us. 

 

We are going to make sure that this province is ready for 

growth. What we saw in the past is the province was ready for 

growth but the opposition had so badly neglected the 

infrastructure that the infrastructure was not ready for growth. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to make sure that the 

economic momentum continues into the future so that all of our 

citizens can benefit from this economic growth. Mr. Speaker, it 

was very, very prideful for me to stand in this House and 

deliver on these promises, and I look forward to further 

questions from the member opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from an 

article from The StarPhoenix, and it says, quote: 

 

While the Sask. Party took office warning of “stark” 

finances given the previous government’s spending 

patterns, this budget sees a 10 per cent hike [in spending] 

over the previous budget and about five per cent more 

than was actually spent last year. 

 

At the same time, sitting in the bank untouched will be 

$1.3 billion in the government’s new growth and financial 

. . . [stability] fund . . . 

 

Money for everything, Mr. Speaker, and $1.3 billion in the 

bank. Why can’t they take $120 million to spend to fulfill their 

property tax commitment? To the Minister of Finance: why 

won’t he keep this promise? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

was a pleasure realizing on our commitments to provide 

meaningful property tax relief — $165 million is meaningful in 

our calculations — as well as the commitment to further look at 

a permanent plan in order to bring closure to this issue over the 

years. 

 

You know it’s very interesting because the NDP have been 

looking and promising and alluding to property tax relief 

virtually since August 31, 1944 when then premier, Tommy 

Douglas, said, and I quote: “We are pledged to do away with 

the education tax as soon as we get new sources of revenue to 

take the place of the revenue now realized from that tax.” 

 

Tommy Douglas in 1944 started the promises of the NDP 

government that haven’t been realized from then until today. 

The Sask Party has delivered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he said that they 

delivered, that they’d kept their promise. Let me quote from 

their platform, Mr. Speaker, in big, bold letters: “Doubling 

education property tax rebates, saving the average homeowner 

$450 a year.” But what did they deliver, Mr. Speaker? Let me 

just quote from the National Post. The rebate, quote, “The 

rebate homeowners get on education property tax bills was 

increased to 12 per cent from 10 per cent, saving the average 

homeowner an extra $27 a year.” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I realize that members on both 

sides have a lot of opinions in regards to the budget, but right 

now we have one member trying to place a question. I’d ask 

members to give that member the respect. Member from Regina 

Douglas Park, please place your question. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Let me just restate that, Mr. Speaker, 

that on the education portion of property tax increasing it from 

12 to 10 per cent, saving the average homeowner an extra $27 a 

year. What did they promise? — $450 a year. What did they 

deliver? — $27 a year. Meaningful? Seven and a half cents a 

day. When will he stand up and keep his promise, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

really interesting that on this first day after the budget to have 

the member from Regina Douglas Park on his feet asking 

questions of myself. It really is interesting because I’d like to 

refer back to the 2003 election when right after the election the 

member opposite said this, and I quote from the Regina 

Leader-Post January 14, 2004: 

 

“Why don’t parties like to talk about tax hikes during 

elections? Well I don’t know. I suspect that anyone who 

talks about tax hikes is not likely to be very popular during 

the course of an election campaign.” 

 

I recall that, Mr. Speaker. That member stood on his feet and 

then announced a 1 per cent increase in the provincial sales tax 

and said nothing about it — in fact gave this quote and this 

reason why they weren’t saying anything about it. And you of 

all people should not be lecturing me about credibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d just like to ask the members 

if they could just — I know there’s a lot of excitement and 

anticipation — but just cool it a little bit would be greatly 

appreciated. The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, over 18 months of work has been done already by 

municipalities to come up with a long-term solution to the issue 

of revenue sharing. Now all that hard work has just been tossed 

out the window by the Sask Party, their policy, and this budget. 

 

Allan Earle, president of SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], made comments on the budget 

yesterday and I quote, “Property owners are going to see a mill 

rate increase across the board in most communities.” In other 

words, taxes are going up in most communities around this 

province. The minister has said that he’s anxious to start 

discussions, but he’s not that anxious because he isn’t starting 

till October, for crying out loud. 

 

To the minister: why is this budget only giving $27 of property 

tax relief on one hand, and forcing municipalities to raise taxes 

with the other? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister for municipal 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m shocked and 

appalled that the member opposite would even have the 

temerity to raise the issue of revenue sharing with members of 

the House. Revenue sharing, after all, is an issue that 

municipalities north and south, rural and urban, large and small 

in this great province have been waiting for a solution for 16 

years. They had 16 years to get the job done, Mr. Speaker, and 

they didn’t get it done. They’re expecting a solution in 16 

weeks. I don’t understand that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that 

the people of Saskatchewan don’t either. 

 

We made a commitment in the campaign to raise revenue 

sharing by 7 per cent and we have kept that promise in 

yesterday’s budget. Promise made; promise kept. Another 

campaign promise that we made, Mr. Speaker, was to revive the 

negotiations . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we also had comments yesterday from Regina’s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday we also had comments from the mayor of 

Regina, Pat Fiacco. And what did he have to say about the 

budget? Well when asked, his comments were, and I quote: 

“[And] I can tell the citizens of Regina there will definitely be a 

property tax increase this year.” The mayor of Saskatoon 

echoed similar comments. 

 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: where does it say in the 

Sask Party platform or in the policies that they are going to 

force municipalities to raise taxes for the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why in this budget are they only 

giving $27 to homeowners on property tax relief and forcing 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

municipalities to raise their taxes to fund their communities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, before we were 

interrupted, we were in the process of reminding members of 

the House that the second campaign promise we made was to 

revive discussions about a new revenue-sharing agreement — a 

long-term solution — something that municipalities have been 

waiting for 16 years. 

 

We don’t have to turn the clock back to find out what happened 

with revenue sharing and property taxes. I have a document 

here which I’ll be delighted to table. What happened when the 

former government was in power in the 1990s? They clawed 

back $300 million from revenue sharing — $100 million from 

the city of Regina alone, $100 million from the city of 

Saskatoon alone, and a third . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I call members to order. The minister 

may finish his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, $300 

million were clawed back from the revenue-sharing grant pool 

by that former government, crippling the ability of cities, towns, 

and villages and RMs [rural municipality] to address their 

infrastructure and other pressing needs. 

 

What did they do after 2000? There were ad hoc increases 

varied all the way from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Housing Crisis 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

yesterday modestly referred to yesterday’s budget as historic. 

Although not quite as historic as the medicare budget or our 

own first balanced NDP budget after Grant Devine, yesterday’s 

budget was historic in that, within hours of the Finance minister 

tabling it, he was already admitting that it failed to meet the 

needs of Saskatchewan people. Now that must be a record, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Finance minister couldn’t deny his government had ignored 

affordable housing and, according to the Leader-Post, admitted 

his budget didn’t go as far as he would have liked on social 

issues. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as the old saying goes, he who holds the 

purse strings holds the power, and that minister failed to use the 

billion extra dollars at his disposal to help families suffering 

from the housing crisis. 

 

To the Minister of Finance: how does he explain his first 

budget’s failure to address affordable housing when his own 

Social Services minister admits that Saskatchewan is in a 

housing crisis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly 

exciting times in Saskatchewan, and we had an exciting budget 

on how we’re preparing for growth. And it’s surprising to me 

when we have that member stand up and say, what are we doing 

about affordable housing? I will say what I said yesterday. That 

government was unaware that we were in a crisis, quite frankly, 

until the eve of the election. For 16 years they had to address 

the housing crisis. 

 

Mr. Bob Pringle, a very credible man who has a passion for 

social issues who I’m very honoured to have on the task force 

that I have announced, said yesterday when he was being 

interviewed on the John Gormley show, he said this, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Well if I look back to three years ago when we had an 

independent study done at the Saskatoon Food Bank, I 

was saying clearly to government that the clients at the 

food bank were spending 70 per cent of their income on 

shelter. There’s nothing left. And the issue wasn’t 

addressed. 

 

They were the government at that time, Mr. Speaker. What did 

they do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, housing was shockingly 

absent from the government’s budget yesterday, leaving many 

feeling that this government has forgotten the very people it’s 

tasked to protect. Peter Gilmer of, the Regina anti-poverty 

minister, accurately pointed out that while the the government 

invested substantially in economic infrastructure, they failed to 

address social infrastructure in this budget. 

 

Students also felt this budget missed the mark. Despite holding 

protests and repeatingly drawing the attention of government to 

the need to address student housing, they went home 

empty-handed yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social Services: how does this 

government look students and families in the eye after this 

budget which sees $1.3 billion just sitting in the bank and no 

dollars for affordable housing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

would like to say that the NDP, when they were in government 

just prior to the election, did a study and introduced a number of 

programs. The students had already started their classes at that 

time. They knew there was a shortage. Was there anything in 

their proposal for students? No, Mr. Speaker, there was not. 

 

Now the member opposite maybe doesn’t know, but in the 

Estimates book the Sask Housing Corporation does not list their 

numbers in that document. However, there is $71.5 million 

being spent on an existing 856 units that are in development as 

we speak. There’s an additional $47.5 million that’s being 

dedicated. Going forward, we have 84 submissions on different 

groups that want to partner with government on different 

housing units. We’re putting out an expression of interest to 

spend an additional $18.4 million on Métis housing and First 

Nations housing. Mr. Speaker, that’s $137.4 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Training Opportunities 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, did the labour shortage get solved 

while I wasn’t looking or is Ready for Growth just more empty 

rhetoric from the Sask Party? About a year ago, the members 

opposite stood in their places and voted against an NDP budget 

that provided over 2,000 new training spaces — spaces so 

critical to the training needs of Saskatchewan people and the 

health of this province’s booming economy. 

 

Curious, Mr. Speaker, that at a time when our economy is 

booming like it is, they decided to slash this number in half — 

in half, Mr. Speaker. A half NDP budget that goes halfway 

towards addressing the issues. That doesn’t sound like readiness 

to me. 

 

To the minister: does he honestly believe that this budget — a 

budget which cuts the expansion of new training seats in half as 

compared to last year — is actually adequate to meet the needs 

of Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question. Mr. Speaker, what I can begin by saying is that in the 

last 30 days, because of the new co-operative arrangement and 

environment on fed-prov relations, we’ve seen over $100 

million invested by Ottawa in Saskatchewan on education and 

training seats. That’s during the last 30 days. 

 

What I can then turn and say, Mr. Speaker, is obviously the 

member opposite should do a little better job going through the 

budget documents because if we look at training opportunities 

when combined with new service opportunities relating to 

immigrant settlement and other initiatives, there are close to 

4,000 initiatives that would come under training. Furthermore, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the issue actually is about reconceiving the 

notion of training and education so it becomes a continuum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are over 67,000 training and educational 

seats in Saskatchewan and that’s how we’re going to sustain the 

growth of our province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I thought the non-LRB [Labour 

Relations Board] questions might be kinder to the minister, but 

I’m afraid his problems run deeper than the nature of the 

questions. I’m also curious, Mr. Speaker, if those government 

backbenchers on that side — the ones like the member from 

Wood River who have made a career of fighting the evil 

communists — whether they will support this almost-NDP 

budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two years ago, the member from Swift Current 

issued a little report entitled, Getting Saskatchewan Back on . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. A few too many debates taking place 

on the floor, which makes it difficult to hear the questioner. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — A little report entitled, Getting Saskatchewan 

Back on Track. The report dealt with, quote, “The Immediate 

Labour Shortage Crisis.” Back when the Sask Party was in 

opposition, they said this labour shortage was an immediate 

crisis. But now that they have a chance to act, all we see is less 

of the same. If the Sask Party did have any sense of urgency, it 

seems to have vanished quicker than the dainties at a 

post-budget tea. To the Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour: if he truly believes that the labour 

shortage is such a crisis, why doesn’t he do something about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In anticipating 

questions like this, I thought what we’d do is, within my 

ministry, we’d produce our own document, Mr. Speaker, and 

that way what we can do is just point to one initiative. This is 

through the Aboriginal skills employment partnership, which 

was just announced in the last 10 days. Fifteen hundred First 

Nation and Métis people will have the opportunity to participate 

at higher skill levels in the resource industries in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s just one example of the type of initiative 

that comes with the new era of co-operation between Ottawa 

and Regina as we’re focusing on sustaining our growth. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s time that we can just look at some empirical 

evidence and see that we are investing in the people of 

Saskatchewan. 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Budget Implications for First Nations and Métis People 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

the Finance minister cited a First Nations proverb about how we 

borrow the land from our children. I’d like to remind this 

government of another saying that is sometimes used in Métis 

and First Nations circles, and it goes like this: talk is cheap. 

 

And with this budget we find out just how cheap Sask Party talk 

really is when it comes to First Nations and Métis people. Most 

major new money in the budget came from the gaming 

agreement that was signed by the NDP, and when it comes to 

Sask Party initiatives, they did things like cut the First Nations 

and Métis business development fund right in half while sitting 

on $1.3 billion. 

 

For this budget, FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] Chief Lawrence Joseph said, and I quote, “It amounts 

to zero for First Nations.” President Robert Doucette of the 

Métis Nation of Saskatchewan said, “There wasn’t near enough 

in the budget to help Métis people share in the benefits of the 

booming economy.” 

 

To the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations: how can 

she and that government be so out of touch with the challenges 

facing the Métis and First Nations people in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for First 

Nations affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite: I 

am very pleased with the way the government is dealing with 

the First Nations and Métis people in the province. We have an 

opportunity in this government to social housing. The minister 

talked about the opportunities for Aboriginal housing. We have 

Métis having 13.3 million . . . homes; First Nations, 13.1 

million; for a total of $26.4 million. 

 

And the roads: we have spent $11.3 million on Witchekan Lake 

road. We spent $6.1 million on northern road strategy, and 26.2 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask members to come to 

order please. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing that they don’t 

want to hear the good news of the First Nations and Métis 

people in this province. We’re also spending money for forest 

fighting and ensuring that the people will be able to be involved 

in that industry and that work. SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian 

Institute of Technologies] actually received more money so we 

can have additional training seats as well. The Minister of 

Advanced Education talked about the 1,500 Aboriginal 

self-employment seats that will be in the budget as well. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I guess I’ll say it again, Mr. Speaker. Talk is 

cheap, and no amount of glossy brochures will make that up. 

 

Less than a month ago the federal government brought down 

their budget as well. As usual, the members across the way 

tripped all over themselves to congratulate the Stephen Harper 

Conservatives on their big budget. In fact the Leader of the 

Sask Party said, and I quote, “This demonstrates . . . there is an 

understanding of Saskatchewan priorities by the prime minister 

. . .” 

 

What did First Nations have to say? National Chief Phil 

Fontaine called the budget, quote, a “bitter disappointment and 

a lost opportunity . . .” FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] Chief Lawrence Joseph said, quote, “This 

budget is a tool of oppression . . .” 

 

Now we know that the Sask Party talked from one end of this 

province to another about building a new relationship in 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Without naming members — but 

we’re getting close — I’m going to call on the member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre to place his question. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Now we know that the Sask Party has placed a 

lot of talk about building a new relationship in Saskatchewan 

with First Nations and Métis people. My question is to the 

Premier: when he talked to First Nations and Métis people 

about a new relationship, why didn’t he tell them it would be 

one based on the failed approach of the Stephen Harper 

Conservatives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for the 

First Nations and Métis affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Why don’t we just talk about the failed 

approach of the previous government in Saskatchewan? Why 

don’t we talk about what the previous government actually says 

about First Nations when it talked of consultation and allowing 

them to be part of the government and be part of the economy? 

Why don’t we talk about the fact that there was a guidelines 

book produced by the NDP government to talk about First 

Nations and allow them to be part of the economy, and they 

didn’t even consult with them? And our government has put $3 

million into consultation this year so that First Nations people 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The minister can 

complete her comments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

government is proud to say we’ve put $3 million into 

consultation funds for this year so that First Nations people and 

Métis people have the opportunity to be involved in the 

economy. We did not write something without their approval, 

without their consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I ask members to come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 17 — The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 17, The Highways and Transportation 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — Will the members please come to order. The 

member from Moose Jaw North, the member from Athabasca, 

please come to order. 

 

The Minister of Highways has moved first reading of Bill No. 

17, The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read a first time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[10:45] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

government, it’s my pleasure to table answers to questions 380 

to 408. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 380 to 408 tabled. I recognize the 

member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

convert question 409 to a notice of motion for return. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 409 converted to a motion for 

return. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

table answers to question 410 to 415. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 410 to 415 tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, without repeating myself, I would like to simply 

review some of the areas, shortcomings in this budget that I 

identified yesterday. 

 

We zeroed in on the issue of property tax relief, that this budget 

could have been more substantial. We zeroed in on the question 

of skills training to put skilled people to work in the workforce 

— a criticism of a budget that in our view simply didn’t do 

enough in that area. We talked about the fact that there is no 

marker in this budget to deal with the report that is forthcoming 

with respect to affordable housing. So even if there’s a report 

that may suggest recommendations for improvement to the 

government, there’s nothing in the budget to address the 

housing crisis that is very real in our major cities, and we’re 

also getting an indication from other cities, towns, and villages 

that they too are seeing a shortage of affordable housing. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we raised the question of the 

environment and climate change, the fact that the previous 

government had set aside a fund of 300-plus millions of dollars 

for environmental sustainability fund that could be tapped into 

to support worthwhile initiatives to deal with climate change. 

And that this particular budget had in fact taken that money, put 

it into infrastructure which is necessary to, you know, have the 

money for infrastructure but really doing very little in terms of 

the whole issue of climate change which is very important to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to just expound a little bit on some of those areas if I 

might, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all with respect to taxes . . . and this is something that 

people who watch the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, 

who follow politics, they kind of know if there’s a philosophical 

distinction between the right in society and the left in society, 

that is that the right takes the point of view that there should 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

always be less government, that government should be doing 

less, that people should rely on their own devices to pay for the 

services that they need. 

 

So for example, the right takes the point of view people should 

pay for their own health care. They should buy their own health 

care insurance, that the right takes the point of view that if you 

need schooling, well you pay the tuition for the school that your 

child has to attend. And the right says that when you do that, 

you’re able to cut taxes substantially because it’s those taxes 

that support health care and education and other worthwhile 

government programs. 

 

So the right takes the point of view that government should 

always be about cutting taxes. And that’s certainly something 

that the members over the years, I think, have consistently 

articulated. I think it’s fair to say that there isn’t a tax cut that, 

over the years, that hasn’t been embraced by the members 

opposite. 

 

The members opposite argued for of course lowering the 

income tax. They had a favourite income tax change to benefit 

low-income people that they’ve talked a lot about. In fact they 

came out one day with a list of 100 ideas and, you know, the 

top of the list, the top of the list — and it shouldn’t surprise us 

coming from a right-of-centre party — top of the list is reduce 

provincial income tax, in this case for low-income residents. 

 

So, you know, they embrace the notion of tax cuts. They 

embrace the notion of cuts in the sales tax. In fact I do 

remember the member for Kindersley on one occasion voting 

for a budget put forward by the NDP because that budget 

lowered the sales tax. And so again they support tax cuts. This 

is a party, the Saskatchewan Party, that over the years has 

argued for cuts in corporation taxes. This is a party that also 

argued for cuts in property taxes. In fact, you know, I think it’s 

fair to say again there’s not a tax cut they didn’t like. 

 

In this last election, the Sask Party campaigned on extending 

the property tax credit, the credit that appears on people’s 

property tax bills for the education portion of property tax, that 

it should be extended, should be increased — doubled if you 

like — from what was there previously, and I’m really . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would like to call members to 

order and allow members to hear the member from Regina 

Douglas Park in his response to the budget speech. Member 

from Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So 

this is a party that campaigned on doubling the amount of 

property tax relief that was inherent in previous NDP budgets. 

That’s what they campaigned on. And, you know, it must come 

as a huge disappointment, a huge disappointment for those that 

support that right-of-centre party, the Saskatchewan Party, it 

must come as a huge disappointment for those who shared, you 

know, or had this philosophical belief about less government 

and less taxes to see nothing really being delivered that they can 

see. 

 

Yes, there are selective tax cuts. We support those. We think 

those are good. But, you know, in terms of broad-based tax 

relief, I think all their supporters who had this philosophical 

belief about less government and less taxes, they will be very, 

very disappointed in the budget that’s arrived today. 

 

To have a government say, you know, the best that we can do, 

the best that we can do on the one hand is to provide for on 

average a $27-a-year decrease in the education portion of the 

property tax which works to about seven and a half cents a day 

. . . Is that what it works out to? Somebody at home will have a 

calculator and work this out. Twenty-seven dollars divided by 

365, 366 in a leap year. Oh no we’ve finished that year. But, 

you know, the amount of tax relief is simply insignificant. 

 

And the question arises as well, will there in fact be property 

tax relief for the people of Saskatchewan? Will there be 

property tax relief? We have a government on the one hand that 

is proposing to provide, as I indicated, an average relief of $27 

for the coming year — $27. On the other hand, on the other 

hand they have decreased the increases that we had received 

from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask members to allow 

the member to place his response. And I know how difficult 

that it is to keep a train of thought if members are always 

interfering, so I’d invite the member from Regina Douglas Park 

to continue his response. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So, 

Mr. Speaker, the question here is there in fact any broad-base 

tax relief for the people of Saskatchewan? We don’t have the 

complete answer to that yet. But we got an inkling of what 

might take place when we look at the comments of some of the 

mayors and municipal leaders in Saskatchewan, who say that 

the amount of money that’s been provided in this budget to 

assist municipalities to deal with the pressing needs that they 

have in their society for operating costs — to pay for policing 

service, pay for fire services, pay for all the services that 

property tax payers need in this province — when they look at 

the budget, they are convinced . . . Mayor of Regina is very 

convinced, and I think my colleagues referred to this in question 

period, that the people of Regina will see a property tax increase 

on account of this budget. Those were comments that were 

echoed, I believe, by the mayor of Saskatoon. 

 

Those were comments that were also echoed by the leader of all 

urban municipalities in Saskatchewan — Allan Earle, the mayor 

of Dalmeny and the president of Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association — where he too warns of property 

tax increases. 

 

So those who support the Sask Party — those of the right wing 

— may well be asking, what is it that my government is doing 

for me? What is it that my government is doing to act on my 

beliefs? What is it that the Government of Saskatchewan is 

doing to ensure that there is broad-based tax relief for all the 

people of Saskatchewan? Well I think the answer to that is 

going to be coming clear when property tax bills comes out, and 

I think the answer will be a big fat zero, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So and I just might say that, you know, more than appealing to 

their philosophical base, the Saskatchewan Party is simply not 

being sensitive to what is taking place in Saskatchewan where 

we see housing prices rising; more and more people, because of 

housing acquisition, having to put more and more money in to 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

their mortgages. If there was ever a time for a government to be 

sensitive to the question of affordable housing, people of 

Saskatchewan, the time is now. And again they should’ve acted 

I think far more substantially than they did in this budget to be 

sensitive to the needs of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to deal with the question of skills training. 

What we know, and Saskatchewan businesses know, is that if 

your economy is expanding, if there is growth and development 

taking place, if there is an increasing need for workers to do the 

skilled jobs that are required to support this economic 

development, then we need more people with skilled trades to 

in fact do that. That is one of the reasons why, in a previous 

budget, the NDP government moved aggressively, substantially, 

to increase the number of spaces for skilled trades in our 

budget; to have these skilled trades graduate from our technical 

schools — from SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] and the like. 

 

Well, you know, I’ve got to say, and I think many business 

leaders will say that this budget is a huge disappointment and 

raises some real questions about how we can sustain the 

economic momentum that we have in our province. How can 

we sustain that momentum if we risk choking off the economic 

gains we are making because we’re not keeping pace with the 

demand for skilled trades in Saskatchewan? That is a real 

source of concern. 

 

Now many people say, well we’ll be able to attract skilled 

trades from other jurisdictions. And yes, to some extent we will 

be able to attract skilled trades from other jurisdictions, 

although we’ve got to just put a little marker, a little asterisk on 

that, is that because of rising housing prices, Saskatchewan may 

not be quite as attractive for people from out of province as it 

once might have been. And we risk, Mr. Speaker, we risk taking 

place something that American philosopher Yogi Berra once 

talked about when he was asked about a popular restaurant. He 

said, well that place is so popular no one goes there any more. 

 

And so we have to be very careful of what Mr. Berra had to say, 

and we need to be very careful in Saskatchewan that we don’t 

rely — that we do not rely — on skilled trades coming from 

other parts of Canada to pick up the need that is here in our 

province. We need to ensure that we are putting the investment 

in to ensure that Saskatchewan young people — Saskatchewan 

young people — don’t have to stand in line at our technical 

institutes to get the training they need, to get the skills they need 

so that they can be gainfully employed in this economy. That’s 

what we need to do, and this budget falls far short of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’m not the only person that’s indicating that in fact the 

emphasis should in fact be on skills training. I had a meeting 

with the Institute of Chartered Accountants prior to this budget. 

That’s what they indicated was a priority item for government 

expenditure, was to focus on skills training. And simply put, 

we’re not seeing that in this budget to the extent that is 

necessary and will be seen to be necessary in the coming 

months and years in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So I think 

from that particular point this budget is a huge disappointment. 

 

[11:00] 

 

They’re disappointing Saskatchewan young people who had 

hopes of more opportunities. They’re going to be disappointing 

those people that are involved in the economy, and those people 

especially involved in construction, that they’re going to be 

disappointing those people when they see their ability to carry 

through on projects is going to be impaired because of a lack of 

skilled trades. So we had hoped that this government too might 

be, you know, just a little bit smarter about the whole issue of 

economic growth and what’s really required to support 

economic growth in Saskatchewan. But we again are very 

disappointed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that I raised yesterday was the 

question of housing affordability. Again, there’s questions 

raised in this Assembly. I think we need to concern ourselves 

with this question. This is one of the areas that frankly got away 

on the Government of Alberta where they’ve seen rapid growth 

over the years. This is one of the areas that the Alberta 

government has been struggling over the years to keep up with. 

And we need to not just talk about learning from the experience 

in Alberta, Mr. Speaker; we actually need to make 

commitments in our budgets to ensure we don’t repeat the 

mistakes that have been made in Alberta. 

 

One of the things that happens when housing prices increase, 

when the demand for housing increase, one of the things we 

know happens is that those who live on the margins of society, 

those people with disabilities, including people with mental 

health issues, Mr. Speaker . . . When we talk about low-income 

people on the margins of society, when we talk about students 

who live on the margins of society and we talk about some 

low-income seniors who live on the margins of society, those 

are the people that are most directly affected when we see this 

intense competition for housing in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know that the party opposite says well you know, the 

private sector will take care of that; more housing will be built 

and so on. But I’m not too sure that that trickle-down theory is 

going to work fast enough for the many hundreds, thousands of 

people of Saskatchewan who fit into, who live if you like on the 

margins of society. 

 

And I think that this budget has failed those people. This budget 

has failed to put into place a marker so that funding will be 

there when they finally receive their report about what should 

be done — although I think they have the answers already — 

about what should be done that in fact there’s a concrete 

commitment to ensure something will be done, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s simply not there in the budget. 

 

And again as I indicated earlier, we need to also concern 

ourselves about the question of housing affordability so that 

young families who are starting out, young families of limited 

means, have the opportunity in Saskatchewan to invest in their 

own home in this province as opposed to, like many other 

jurisdictions, having to live in substandard housing, having to 

double up on housing, having to forego choices for many years 

in terms of housing. We want to ensure that the advantage that 

young families have had in Saskatchewan over the years, that 

that is an advantage that is continued. And again there’s nothing 

in that budget that really addresses that issue, Mr. Speaker. So 

from my point of view, the budget is a failure on those grounds 

as well. 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

And you know, one of the tests that we have as members of the 

Legislative Assembly, as elected people, is to ensure that 

whatever else takes place, that we reach out and we do the kind 

of things that need to be done to support the people on margins 

in society, to support the people who are least able to look after 

themselves, that we do something to support them. And this 

budget fails that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally, the budget reflects a rather interesting set of events that 

the Premier earlier on signalled after their election, and that 

concerns the question of the environment, sustainable 

environment, the question of CO2 emissions and climate 

change, greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

And that is the fact that the previous government sold its share 

in an upgrader in Regina. And the net gain from the sale of that 

upgrader was put into a special fund within the Crown sector to 

support worthwhile environmental initiatives as we go forward, 

so that the government has the flexibility to invest in those 

ideas, invest in those proposals that have a chance of ensuring 

that Saskatchewan people — Saskatchewan people, like other 

people in Canada and people throughout the world — are doing 

their bit to slow down the greenhouse gas emission that we’re 

seeing, slow down the carbon dioxide emission that we’re 

seeing. 

 

Well the first thing that this government did was to take that 

money that had been set aside for that fund, transfer that money 

to the General Revenue Fund so it could be used to bump up 

infrastructure in Saskatchewan — more schools and so on. 

 

And we appreciate the additional funds for schools and other 

infrastructure. But you know what? It leaves a huge hole. It 

leaves a huge hole — a huge hole — for Saskatchewan people 

in terms of how we support environmental sustainability, how 

we go forward, how it is that we as a government, as a people 

make the kind of investments that are needed to deal adequately 

with the challenges that the environment puts before us. And I 

think there’s broad agreement, broad agreement even from the 

members opposite who derided and hooted and hollered about 

things like our greenhouse gas emissions and that it was just 

some plot by scientists that scientists talked about. 

 

Finally, I think they too have come to the realization that the 

question of greenhouse gas emission, the impact on the 

environment, climate change, is in fact a number one priority 

for governments — whether it’s local here in Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s national and international — and the time for 

action is now. 

 

We are very disappointed that even though they reluctantly 

have agreed with the emission targets that we identified for 

Saskatchewan, when it comes time for funding the initiative 

that might actually help us deal with that, they cut that, Mr. 

Speaker. And that remains as an unsolved, that remains as an 

unattended to major challenge for the people of Saskatchewan 

and this government. And again, I think they’ve failed us 

miserably on that particular score. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve dealt with the four points that I covered very 

briefly in my budget yesterday — the question of property tax 

relief, the question of skills training, the question of affordable 

housing, the question of environmental sustainability. 

I’d like to just deal with one other item before I take my place, 

and that’s the question of transfers from the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker. The forecast for the ’07-08 fiscal 

year — which we are completing now and will be completed in 

a matter of days — the forecast is that the Saskatchewan 

government will have received $1.6 billion from the federal 

government. $1.6 billion for support for programs such as 

health and in education, support in other programs that we have 

where they’ve committed to funding, also some support last 

year for a program called equalization. 

 

So the forecast for this current fiscal year that we’re in, which 

will expire in a few days, is that we will receive from the 

federal government, the people of Canada, the total sum of $1.6 

billion — 1.6 billion. What do we see in this budget as the 

government’s estimate as to revenues from the federal 

government for the coming year? $1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we are seeing here is less money forthcoming from the 

federal government than we did during the current fiscal year. 

And I tell you, this has to be a source of concern for the people 

of Saskatchewan. It certainly is a concern for members of both 

sides of the House because we know that one of the reasons that 

we have an infrastructure deficit in Saskatchewan, relative to 

many other jurisdictions, is not only because of the debt legacy 

left governments after the profligate spending in the 1980s by 

Mr. Devine and company — some of which those members are 

associated with — but also because, consistently over the years, 

Saskatchewan has not been able to get the kind of equalization 

treatment that other provinces had been receiving, where our 

resource, non-renewable resource revenues have continued to 

be clawed back to determine equalization entitlements, even 

though, even though the federal government has entered into 

agreement with other provinces to ensure that doesn’t take 

place. 

 

Even though there are peculiar aspects of the equalization 

program that benefit provinces like Manitoba with their 

hydroelectric revenues, Saskatchewan has not seen any of that 

benefit. And so this is a huge source of concern, Mr. Speaker, 

and one of the reasons that we have things like an infrastructure 

deficit. 

 

Well what we had take place here in Saskatchewan is a federal 

government, a federal party that finally recognized, finally 

recognized that the people of Saskatchewan have been getting 

the shaft — finally recognized it; said, look we’re going to do 

something about it. We commit, we commit when we’re elected 

as a federal party to form the federal government, we commit to 

ensure that non-renewable resource revenues will be excluded 

from equalization entitlement for Saskatchewan. 

 

What does that mean? Well in dollar terms, it means roughly 

$800 million a year. I think this year it might’ve meant $850 

million a year, a not inconsiderable sum of money. And I know 

that politicians, all they talk about billions and millions and all 

those zeros and so on. But in relative terms it means about 10 

per cent of the revenues in the budget. And that is a huge 

amount of money, a huge amount of money. 

 

When you think about $800 million, for sure the government 

could act on their promise. And we could all act on what we 

want to do and that is to reduce the property tax load for 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

Saskatchewan people and to reduce it significantly so that 

property taxes here are more or less on a par with what they are 

in many other jurisdictions. 

 

We could act in that way. We would add the money to make 

over time the kind of investment that are needed in 

infrastructure, whether it’s economic infrastructure such as 

roads or whether it’s social infrastructure, to do that and to do 

that in a meaningful and sustained way. That’s what the $800 

million means to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But you know what that government did when they got elected? 

They turned their backs on the people of Saskatchewan. They 

said, oh no, we just, we just made that up. We mislead you. We 

mislead you, the people of Saskatchewan, about giving you this 

$800 million a year. No way are we going to act on that. First 

they said the reason we’re not going to act on that because we 

don’t like the NDP government and we don’t like some of the 

other things they’ve had to say. So therefore that’s a good 

reason for us to turn our backs on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now they have a government that — well let me put it this way 

— a government that has more or less a similar philosophical 

link and well I think for sure has a personality link because 

there are many members of that party opposite that are also 

active members of the federal Conservative Party, and there are 

many members of the present Conservative government in 

Ottawa that come from the Sask Party. In fact one of the MPs 

[Member of Parliament] here in Regina, Tom Lukiwski, is a 

former executive director for the Saskatchewan Party, so I think 

people of Saskatchewan get the idea that there is a very close 

link, a very close association — cousins if you like, brothers 

and sisters — there’s a very close link between the federal 

Conservative Party and the Saskatchewan Party in government. 

 

Now you might have thought, you might have thought that once 

there was a change in government . . . if that was their reason, 

that they didn’t like the NDP, and therefore we’re not going to 

make good on our promise because we don’t like the NDP. We 

don’t like their way of thinking. We don’t like their criticisms 

on some aspects, so therefore we’re not going to come across 

on equalization. We have yet to see it. We have yet to see it 

from them that, having had a change in government, they said 

no, we’re prepared to come good on equalization. We still 

haven’t seen it. So this has to go down as one of the most 

shameful betrayals of a province and a group of people that we 

have ever seen in the history of this country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only is it a shameful betrayal by the federal government, 

but now we have a provincial government that’s saying well 

maybe it’s not such a big deal. Maybe we should let them off 

the hook. Maybe we shouldn’t be arguing for an improvement 

in equalization. Maybe we can take a bit of money here, take a 

bit of money there — monies that all the other provinces are 

also receiving, investments that other provinces are also 

receiving — and say well we’ve got that money, and we’ll 

count it as a big win. We got more than the previous 

government did so it’s a big win. 

 

Well all I can say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a load of horse 

feathers, that this is a shameful, shameful betrayal of the people 

of Saskatchewan not just by the federal Conservative Party but 

also by the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. And 

you know, what the Premier seems to be saying now to the 

people of Saskatchewan, what he seems to be saying is just roll 

us over and tickle our tummies, Stephen Harper. That’s what he 

is saying to the people of Saskatchewan, and I think it’s a 

shameful, shameful betrayal of the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those are good reasons in my view to not 

support the budget. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

move an amendment to the budget, and I want to move, 

seconded by my colleague, the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and 

the following be added: 

 

condemn the government for stockpiling a $1.3 billion 

surplus without addressing the most pressing needs of 

Saskatchewan people, in particular property tax relief, 

skills training, the environment, and the ongoing housing 

crisis. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member from 

Douglas Park has moved the amendment, seconded by the 

member from Meewasin. It reads: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and 

the following be added: 

 

condemn the government for stockpiling a $1.3 billion 

surplus without addressing the most pressing needs of the 

Saskatchewan people, in particular property tax relief, 

skills training, the environment, and the ongoing housing 

crisis. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a short aside 

just before I enter into the budget debate, although the Speaker 

has always looked youthful, the Speaker looks particularly 

youthful at the moment. And that said, it’s my pleasure to enter 

into the debate on this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if backtracking was an Olympic event, we would 

have, on the government benches, led by the Minister of 

Finance, the gold medal team. And just to go briefly over some 

of the backtracking . . . First of all, on the Fiscal Stabilization 

Fund, those members of the House who were here last four 

years, last eight years, last 12 years, last 16 years will remember 

the members opposite when they were in opposition 

commenting on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund alternatively as a 

slush fund and as smoke and mirrors and voodoo economics, 

and it shouldn’t be called a fund because it’s not really a fund. 

Upon achieving government, Mr. Speaker, the flip-flop, the 

backtracking is immediate. And now all the Fiscal Stabilization 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

Fund needs to be recognized as good, sound, sensible financial 

management is a new name. Somewhat like the Conservative 

Party of Saskatchewan itself, all it needed was a new name and 

then it’s okay. 

 

Secondly and related, Mr. Speaker, on deficit budgets, I don’t 

know if in the four years that I sat on the government benches 

the opposition ever recognized that any, any of those budgets 

were in fact balanced budgets — insisted that those were deficit 

budgets, Mr. Speaker. Well imagine my surprise, the surprise of 

many when we learned that the Finance minister and the 

government recognizes that each of those budgets was indeed a 

balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. I mean, just a reversal. The gears 

must have just been stripped in their brains. 

 

The last NDP government was called every day by every 

speaker by the Saskatchewan Party that rose to its feet to speak 

to that budget as an unsustainable budget. It was an 

unsustainable budget. The budget was unsustainable, and the 

senior’s drug plan contained within that budget was 

unsustainable. 

 

Well now that’s a sustainable budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

sustainable budget. Ten per cent more is sustainable, Mr. 

Speaker, and the unsustainable drug plan can be added too. We 

can add a whole group of citizens to the drug plan if we means 

test senior citizens. Now means testing senior citizens isn’t 

going to save any money. The drug plan is going to more 

expensive so a drug plan that was unsustainable is now 

sustainable. A budget that was unsustainable is now sustainable 

to 10 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And more recently than any of those reversals, a much shorter 

one in time was the position taken by the Saskatchewan Party 

after the election, because all these positions preceded the 

election and were reversed after the election. But after the 

election, very recently, the Finance Minister in particular but 

the Premier as well said well here we come into government —

you know after all these years of NDP financial management — 

and the cupboard is bare, Mr. Speaker. The situation is stark. 

Well they backtracked from that pretty quickly and said well 

okay we might be all ready this year, Mr. Speaker, but going 

forward, going forward we’re going to have to cut back on 

spending. 

 

Well they had to backtrack from that too. And now we have a 

budget that has new spending, and we have a budget that plans 

for future spending. So what happened to the evil Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund? Well it’s okay now. What happened to 

those deficit budgets? Well they weren’t deficit budgets. What 

happened to the unsustainable NDP budget? Well it wasn’t 

unsustainable. It was just there wasn’t enough money. It needed 

to be more spent. And what happened to the stark financial 

situation? Well we still can’t add, Mr. Speaker, I guess is the 

answer on the part of the government. 

 

One has to wonder when you look at this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

whether all the true fiscal conservatives are in the NDP, if there 

is a true fiscal conservative in the province of Saskatchewan 

outside of the New Democratic Party and its supporters. We 

have heard people, we have heard people since the budget was 

brought down, Mr. Speaker, defend the 10 per cent increase in 

government spending. And we know, we know these people 

would have vilified an NDP government for an 8 per cent or a 9 

per cent increase in spending. Fiscal conservatism on that side 

of the aisle, Mr. Speaker, is entirely partisan. It is not a matter 

of principle. 

 

We have an increase in government spending that I think is 

actually sustainable. I think it’s affordable. I think the 

government could have spent a little bit more on some things — 

maybe a little bit less on some, but certainly a little bit more on 

some — and could have given real tax relief to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. So I’m not one of those who would 

have attacked a 10 per cent increase, but I guess I’m one of 

those who would have been consistent upon defending it no 

matter who brought it in. 

 

To complete the sort of Alice-in-the-looking-glass view of 

financial history that we have seen, we have the Minister of 

Finance looking for inspiration on budget day, not to Milton 

Friedman, not to Ayn Rand, not to Thomas Jefferson’s quote 

that the government that governs best governs least. No, the 

Minister of Finance looked to inspiration from Anatole France, 

a French writer with definite socialist sympathies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if the member from Wood River ever gets his house on 

un-American activities committee inquiries up and running, one 

of the first people he may want to look at is the Minister of 

Finance because those leftists are sneaky and subversive. And 

they seem to have snuck into the Minister of Finance’s speech. I 

personally have no criticism of the Minister of Finance quoting 

Anatole France. I am perhaps overfond of quoting Churchill 

myself. But I know the member from Wood River has concerns 

about who is sleeping under what beds, and he may want to take 

a look at why the Minister of Finance would look to a socialist 

for inspiration on presenting his budget. 

 

No reasonable person, Mr. Speaker, could possibly deny that 

this budget is built on two sturdy pillars. The fiscal 

responsibility, the financial responsibility of 16 NDP budgets 

that pulled the province of Saskatchewan back from the brink of 

bankruptcy — that is one of the pillars on which this budget is 

built. 

 

Members opposite are very reluctant, members of government 

very reluctant to admit that that pillar’s there. A little bit more 

generous . . . The Minister of Finance was, I think, a little bit 

more generous on admitting the other pillar, and that is the 

economic stewardship of the NDP government over 16 years. 

Its economic policies, particularly pragmatic policies on 

mineral royalties, prepared this province for the boom that over 

the last year or so we have now begun to experience. 

 

I think if there’s not an explicit recognition of that, Mr. 

Speaker, from the government, there’s an implicit recognition 

of that. Those policies on royalties and taxation are being 

continued unaltered by the Government of Saskatchewan. They 

recognize how this boom was built, how this prosperity was 

built, what pillars it rests on. It rests on those two pillars — 

financial responsibility of NDP governments; the economic 

stewardship of NDP governments. And they don’t want to 

undermine those pillars, and I hope they do not. 

 

And yet we have a budget that is built upon a history now, 

going back to the early ’90s, of fiscal responsibility. Pragmatic 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

economic policies left the Government of Saskatchewan with 

over $1 billion in the bank. And in that circumstance 

remarkably, remarkably the government in its budget sorely 

misses the mark. And misses the mark, I think, Mr. Speaker — 

and I kind of understand this because I’ve been on treasury 

boards and I’ve been in government — misses the mark, I think, 

because they weren’t able to focus. 

 

And they want to throw a little bit of money here and a little bit 

of money there and a little bit of money there, something for 

everybody. And when you do a lot of something, you end up 

not doing much of anything. And the failure of the budget is a 

failure to meet priorities or set priorities even, Mr. Speaker, 

even to set priorities. 

 

I think what the Minister of Finance wanted as a headline 

coming out of this budget debate, the budget presentation, the 

following debate, what he wants people talking about over the 

next week or so is an investment in infrastructure. I think that 

was kind of the highlight of what he had to say. 

 

Now the $600 million that the NDP had in the last budget on 

infrastructure has now become 1 billion, according to the 

Minister of Finance. We know what the inflation rate is in 

construction, in the trades, in materials, and in labour. I think 

the government is going to find that they have to run faster. And 

this is not a criticism; this is a fact of economic life, particularly 

economic life in the west part of Canada. They are going to 

have to run faster to stay in the same place. 

 

But in other key areas where the government had an 

opportunity to do something real for people, and do something 

real for the economy, which is there to serve the people, Mr. 

Speaker, they failed. 

 

Now the government will say yes, technically if you look at the 

fine print of our program, we kept our commitment on property 

tax. We didn’t say we would double the rebate immediately. 

Now I think people I talked to on the doorstep in Saskatoon 

Meewasin in the election did not read that fine print, Mr. 

Speaker. And they’re going to be disappointed because the 

rebate, the NDP rebate on property taxes was 10 per cent; the 

Sask Party rebate on property taxes is 2 per cent on top of that 

10 per cent. 

 

As speakers have said, well as one speaker has said, Mr. 

Speaker, $27 for the average homeowner. That $27 they’ll 

never see, because now — not when the province was at the 

brink of bankruptcy as it was in the early ’90s and revenue 

sharing had to take a back seat — now when the government 

has a billion and a half dollars in the bank, now there is no 

revenue sharing increases. 

 

Now the mayors are saying — I’m not saying, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

not saying; the mayor of my city is saying — we’re going to 

have to increase property taxes because of this budget. And 

we’re going to increase them in Saskatoon by more than $27, 

Mr. Speaker. People are going to be going backwards on this 

because the members opposite, the government, chose to rely 

on the technicalities of their program, not deliver . . . 120, $150 

million, Mr. Speaker, they could have delivered the whole 

promise now. They had the money to do it. They don’t want to 

do it because this is not an election year. That’s the only reason 

people are going to see a property tax increase this year as a 

result of this budget. 

 

[11:30] 

 

They will not forget. They will not forget that they expected 

relief, particularly the many people . . . Almost as many people 

voted for the Sask Party in my constituency as voted for me, 

Mr. Speaker. I commented about that when I was responding to 

the Throne Speech. I won’t pretend otherwise. Those people 

expected real relief on their property taxes as a result of what 

was said yesterday, and they’re not getting it. They’re getting 

an increased bill. 

 

Yes there is a boom. There is a boom that has been built by 

sound management of this province over more than a decade. 

The boom creates issues which the government is not prepared 

to address. The major issue this government is not prepared to 

address is housing. And a major symptom of their failure is 

their inability on their issue, Mr. Speaker — I think people 

might agree politically, this was their issue — on their issue to 

come to people with a real benefit, a real benefit that would be 

felt by families. There is no such benefit in this budget. A real 

benefit that would have been felt by families by fully fulfilling 

their commitment on property tax. 

 

Now I think that maybe the only amusing columnist in The 

StarPhoenix is Cam Fuller. Mr. Fuller in a column not directly 

about the cost of housing made this comment, that if you own a 

home in Saskatchewan, you are now rich on paper; you are so 

rich, he says, you can’t afford to move. Because it’s paper 

wealth, Mr. Speaker, but we’re being taxed on it. And the 

property taxes, if the members opposite thought were onerous 

and unfair, well what do they think as the value of people’s 

homes rise and the cost of property taxes rise and they make no, 

no passing wave. We’ve technically fulfilled a promise; we’re 

done for the year and you can just pay the higher taxes. I think 

it’s a betrayal of people who gave them their confidence, Mr. 

Speaker. I believe that it is. 

 

Doug Elliott says that Saskatchewan will overtake Alberta in 

the inflation rate this year or next year. And why? Because of 

housing. 

 

We have people who are in homes, and maybe they’re the lucky 

ones, Mr. Speaker. They already own their homes. They’ve 

already gone into the market. They’re going to see their 

property taxes going up. And it would be going up as a result of 

this budget, Mr. Speaker. And the relief, the net relief, is just 

not there. Twenty-seven dollars a year is not going to cover the 

increases that the mayors are talking about having to make 

because of the betrayal of this government on revenue sharing. 

 

The people who aren’t in the market, who don’t own their first 

homes yet, are watching as homes recede into the distance. 

Their first home disappearing, Mr. Speaker, into the distance of 

time, maybe hoping that they might inherit a home some day. 

You don’t want young people hoping that they’re going to 

inherit their parents’ home as their first home. A member says, 

especially if you’re the parent. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are people who really don’t dream of 

owning a home and did not before the boom, Mr. Speaker, who 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2008 

are required to rent. And in a market where rental supply, in my 

city, Mr. Speaker, is I believe at zero or so close to zero that it 

might as well be zero. And if it’s not zero yet, it will be soon. 

 

And the crisis in housing was recognized by many last summer. 

And to give him credit, there was one person, not in the NDP 

caucus, there was one person in the Saskatchewan caucus who 

joined the NDP caucus in recognizing that housing was a crisis. 

And that was Mr. Ted Merriman, who said at the end of July, 

there’s a crisis in housing and we can’t wait. And the 

government agreed with him. 

 

The government had already made a multi-million dollar 

investment in social housing and proceeded to take other steps. 

But what met Mr. Merriman’s warning from members of his 

party and members of his caucus? Silence. And in a notable 

display of party discipline, Mr. Merriman fell silent too. 

 

And in this budget, where now the Saskatchewan Party 

recognizes that there’s a problem with affordability . . . And the 

Minister of Social Services says and availability, but it’s the 

same thing, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Finance can quote 

Anatole France all he wants. I know he knows the law of supply 

and demand that when you cut supply and you increase 

demand, the price goes up, and that is what is happening with 

rental housing throughout this province. In Saskatoon it is the 

prime example of that perhaps, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while this crisis has been happening, the only response 

from that government, which as a party refused to speak to it in 

their platform, was a suggestion from the leader of the 

opposition at the time, the now Premier, that he would remove 

the power from the cities to control the disappearing rental 

accommodations into condo conversions. That was their only 

position taken during the election was that they would remove 

the power of the cities to put brakes on the disappearing rental 

supply. 

 

Now the Minister of Social Services this week finally 

recognizes — long after last July, long after last August when 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview and the member from 

Regina Dewdney and I were speaking to this matter — long 

after that, this week the Minister of Social Services recognizes 

that this requires some study and appoints Mr. Merriman and 

Mr. Pringle to the study. 

 

But to return to the budget, Mr. Speaker — and I know you are 

waiting for me to come back, to return to the budget specifically 

— what is put in this budget to fund the recommendations of 

this study? The people of Saskatchewan, people living 

particularly in rental accommodations where the rent keeps 

going up or they’re being evicted so that the rental 

accommodation can become something else, the people who are 

at risk of losing their homes are waiting for a study. And this 

budget has no funds set aside for whatever recommendations 

Mr. Merriman and Mr. Pringle might make. 

 

They might make very good recommendations. They might 

even make them soon. I don’t know, but a sceptic might 

wonder, maybe a more sceptical person than me might think 

that the government wants to pretend to be concerned about this 

issue while they’re hoping it goes away. A sceptic might think 

that, but this issue is not going to go away, Mr. Speaker, 

whatever the motivation of the government to have hid their 

head in the sand as a party until this week and then responded 

with a study. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to both people and the 

economy that is there to serve them — not on the issue of 

housing, but again on the issue of the problems with the boom. 

We have prosperity in the province of Saskatchewan which this 

government had an opportunity to share with families. And in a 

very direct way, they had the means — they had the resources; 

they just didn’t have the will — to bring in a further 10 per cent 

Sask Party rebate on property taxes to match the NDP 10 per 

cent rebate on property taxes. They could have done that. They 

didn’t do that. 

 

They could have actually done something real about housing for 

those facing homelessness, Mr. Speaker, but they didn’t do that. 

 

The other issue that they have been slow, slow to come to, Mr. 

Speaker, is appreciation of the issues around the labour 

shortage. Now I was in here during the previous session of the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, and it was remarkable how long the 

Saskatchewan Party talked . . . it was remarkably how long into 

that session the Saskatchewan Party talked about 

unemployment in the province. Long after, I think, everybody 

else had realized that there wasn’t a problem with 

unemployment in the province, long after everybody realized it 

wasn’t a problem with having more people than jobs, long after 

everybody realized that the problem was we had more jobs than 

people, finally the Saskatchewan Party figured it out, and they 

changed their rhetoric. But that’s all they’ve done, Mr. Speaker, 

is changed their rhetoric. 

 

In the last year of the NDP government, 2,000 new training 

spaces was created. Was that enough? Maybe not, Mr. Speaker. 

We did the best we could. I’m sure the Sask Party when they 

were in opposition said that’s not enough. 

 

So what’s their response? Now when they’re in government, 

when they have a chance to set priorities, when training people 

is relatively inexpensive compared to some of the projects 

they’ve taken on and should take on, Mr. Speaker, what is their 

response now when it’s their turn? Well to halve the target; to 

drop from 2,000 to 1,100 training spaces. This is what the 

Saskatchewan Party in their budget calls preparing for growth. 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we have a budget that could have 

provided real relief to people, that could have done something 

about the twin crises — if I may call them that — of a booming 

economy, to make sure that that booming economy benefits 

every citizen in Saskatchewan, that is housing and skills 

training. 

 

Here’s a budget that fails to do those fundamental things. 

Here’s a budget that misses the mark. It’s a budget that I cannot 

support. I will want to speak to this matter more, Mr. Speaker, 

but for the time being for today, I adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of the debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



March 20, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I 

make a motion to adjourn the House, I would just like to wish 

everyone a very restful long weekend. Hopefully you have time 

to spend . . . Mr. Speaker, may I have leave to make a 

statement? 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy House Leader has asked for leave 

to make a statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, I just want to wish everyone a very restful Easter 

weekend and holiday. May you all enjoy time with your 

families. And with that I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved that this House 

adjourn. Before I place the question, I would also like to extend 

Easter greetings and wishes to all of the members, trust that this 

will be a restful, meaningful time with family and friends. 

 

The member has moved adjournment of the House. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until Monday, March 31 at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:44.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 387 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 389 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 389 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Easter Celebrations 

  LeClerc ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

 Caswell Community Association’s Adopt-a-Grandparent Program 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 387 

 Maidstone Pee Wee Jets 
  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................... 388 

 The Battlefords Welcome New Immigrants 

  Taylor ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 388 

 Best Wishes for Mayor’s Speedy Recovery 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 388 

 International Women’s Day Banquet 

  Furber ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 389 

 Provincial Budget 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................... 389 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Property Taxes 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 390 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 390 

 Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 391 

  Hutchinson ................................................................................................................................................................................ 391 

 Housing Crisis 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 392 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 392 

 Training Opportunities 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 393 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 393 

 Budget Implications for First Nations and Métis People 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 394 

  Draude ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 394 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 17 — The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Elhard ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 395 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 395 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Van Mulligen ............................................................................................................................................................................. 395 

  Quennell ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 399 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


