




















































Hansard: May 05, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 37A  MONDAY, MAY 5, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1183 

 May 5, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the members of this House, I would like to 

introduce some special guests in your gallery today. I’d like to 

introduce my wife, Dr. Martha Smith-Norris, who’s joining us 

today. Jacqueline Smith-Norris is sitting beside her, one of the 

key reasons I’m involved here trying to help make sure that the 

children of this province — as all of us do — work to make 

sure that our children have a brighter future. Next to her is Katie 

Konkin; we’re delighted to have her join us in the gallery today. 

My grandmother is Sheila Norris. Then Anne Smith is joining 

us from Gananoque, Ontario. And the distinguished gentleman, 

my grandfather, Bill Norris, after a distinguished career in the 

air force, managed to keep an eye on his grandson standing here 

before you. If you would all join me in welcoming to our 

Assembly and yours. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you it 

is my honour today to introduce a class of grade 4 and 5’s from 

within my constituency, Regina Rosemont Community School, 

Rosemont Community School that is. They’re seated in the east 

gallery here today, and they’re joined by some parents, their 

teachers: Mrs. Turner, Mrs. Langford, and their vice-principal, 

Mrs. Frei. 

 

It’s certainly my pleasure to have constituent students and 

parents join us in the Assembly here today. I look forward to 

meeting with them a little bit later here today. I hope you enjoy 

your proceedings, and I ask all members of this Assembly to 

join in extending a welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Yes. Good afternoon. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you, sitting in the west gallery, two grade 4 

classes, I understand, from Jack MacKenzie School, with 

teachers Joanne Patron and Karen Marchuk. The chaperones are 

Cheri Wilkins and Nicole Krasiun and Raelynn Popadynec. I’d 

like to welcome you all to our Assembly here this afternoon. I 

ask all members to join me in welcoming them. And we will be 

having drinks and a little chat afterwards. Thanks for coming 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly 50 students from the school at Gull Lake. We’ve got 

a number of grade 4 and grade 10 students together, and they’re 

in the west gallery. They’re accompanied today by Theresa 

Eppich, who’s the lead teacher here; Neal Boutin and Norrine 

Torwalt-Downey. And chaperones accompanying the students 

today are Shaun Couch, Chris Hall, Amber McPhee, Marjie 

Kirwan, Kim Holizki, and Arlene Clendening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this visit may become a regular feature 

over the years, but I know that Ms. Eppich was a member of the 

Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute just a few weeks ago. I think 

she really enjoyed her time here and I think she wanted to share 

that experience with some of the students in the Gull Lake 

School. So I ask all members to make this group of 50 welcome 

to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the Assembly I would like 

to introduce our youngest son, the baby of the family, Kelly, 

sitting in the west gallery in the centre. Give a wave. Kelly is 

back for the summer. Yes, he should stand up. He’s 6 foot 7. 

Everybody would notice him. And he’s back for the summer 

from attending Medicine Hat College, where he plays on the 

volleyball team there. So I’d like everyone in the Assembly to 

welcome him to his Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as you’re aware, May 4 to 10 is Women Entrepreneurs Week in 

Saskatchewan, a time when we recognize the significant 

contributions of business and professional women to the 

province’s economy. And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I wish to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 

Assembly, four distinguished guests in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Karen Van Duyvendyk, who with her husband Tim owns Dutch 

Growers Garden Centre, recent recipient of the Regina 

Chamber of Commerce Paragon Award for Business of the 

Year. Linda Langelier, owner of Employment Network Canada 

Inc., recent recipient of the Regina chamber Paragon Award for 

diversity. Donna Bially, owner of The Next Stage, finalist in the 

entrepreneurship category at the Regina YWCA [Young 

Women’s Christian Association] Women of Distinction 

Awards. And finally, Debra Needham, representing Women 

Entrepreneurs Inc. 

 

I hope that all members will give these women a warm 

welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2008 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very pleased to present a petition on behalf of my 

constituents in Moose Jaw, and it has to do with improving 

health care in the Five Hills Region and within Moose Jaw 

itself. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions in support of Station 20 project in Saskatoon. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to Station 20 

project. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are from people in Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present petitions in support of affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan. People are concerned. They want to make sure 

their voice is heard on this issue. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability holds open, public consultations for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of good folks in 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the government’s 

proposed Bills 5 and 6. And the prayer goes: 

 

We respectfully request the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to hold broad 

public hearings on the proposed Bills before proceeding 

any further with these sweeping legislative changes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the petition’s signed by good folks from 

Meadow Lake, Rapid View, and North Battleford. I so submit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and the city of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners call upon the Assembly to: 

 

. . . cause the provincial government to commit to the 

continuance of maintaining the lowest-cost utility bundle 

in Canada for citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

March of the Living 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The March of the 

Living is an international educational program that brings 

Jewish teens from all over the world to Poland on Yom 

Hashoah, Holocaust Memorial Day. They march from 

Auschwitz to Birkenau, then to Israel to observe Yom 

HaZikaron, Israel Memorial Day, and Yom Ha’Atzmaut, Israel 

Independence Day. The March of the Living is for young 

people to learn the lessons of the Holocaust and to lead us into 

the future, vowing never again. 

 

Nearly 8,000 people gathered in Auschwitz May 1 to remember 

the victims of the Holocaust. Most of them were teens. Among 

them was my niece, Andrea Scharfstein. She is on the March of 

the Living and will be the living voice of the victims of the 

Holocaust. Next year on Yom Hashoah, the teens will tell their 

stories at the synagogue. Their moving stories from this journey 

leave not a dry eye in the house. 

 

They see the Dome of Ashes, a huge mound of ashes from the 

victims. They walk in the gas chambers and see the desperate 

fingernail scratches on the walls and see the hair braids taken 

from women — mothers, daughters, and grandmothers — as 

well as rooms full of suitcases and shoes. 

 

One young man said on viewing these moving sights that 

something shifted inside of him. Many teens sit and simply 

weep on the floor of the gas chambers. The pledge of all teens 



May 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

on the journey is on their return to extend to all mankind the 

lessons that they learned so we can all vow, keep the vow of 

never again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

pleasure today to rise and speak about the 2008 Regina Women 

of Distinction Awards Banquet which I attended last Thursday. 

This was the 27th year of the awards, and it serves as one of the 

largest fundraisers by the YWCA to raise money for their 

programs for women and children such as Big Sisters and the 

shelters for families fleeing domestic violence. 

 

It is crucial that we recognize exceptional women for their 

contributions, not only for them but also for the young women 

who can see what amazing things are being done by women in 

their own community. 

 

I had the honour of presenting the 2008 Science, Technology & 

Environment Award which was sponsored by SaskPower, and 

this award was given to Kim Dohms who is also a student of 

my husband’s at the U of R [University of Regina]. It was my 

pleasure to present this award to such a hard-working young 

woman who has such a bright future ahead of her. While we 

have made incredible strides, it is important that we work 

together to encourage more young women to consider careers in 

science and technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 

thanking the YWCA for their continual commitment to our 

community and congratulations to all the incredible women 

who were nominated for this year’s Women of Distinction 

Awards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Female Vocalist of the Year from Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert was host to the 

19th annual Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards 

on April 11 and 12. Jessica Robinson was nominated in five 

categories, Mr. Speaker. She won the award for Album of the 

Year for her album Whirl, Swirl, Twirl and also won Female 

Vocalist of the Year. Both the female and male vocalist of the 

year were from Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jessica grew up in P.A. [Prince Albert]. She began 

playing violin at age six and as a teenager won a talent search 

and has never looked back. She continues to tour and begins 

work on her third album. Her music will be featured on a 

soundtrack to Lifetime Television movie, Between Truth and 

Lies, which stars the Academy Award nominee, Mariel 

Hemingway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if her music career doesn’t keep her busy enough, 

Jessica goes into Canadian schools and shares her music and 

life story with students. She inspires children of all ages to 

pursue their dreams, also devotes some of her time to the 

Kinsmen Foundation and the United Way. She’s involved in a 

fundraising CD [compact disc] for the Saskatoon Food Bank. 

Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that Jessica believes in giving to her 

community as she does so at every opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

acknowledging Jessica’s generosity and accomplishments and 

in congratulating her on winning two awards at the SCMA 

[Saskatchewan Country Music Association] Awards. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday the 

Leader-Post released a new poll showing there is overwhelming 

support for our government’s new labour legislation. Seventy 

per cent of Saskatchewan people support essential services 

legislation, compared to just 13 opposed. Seventy-four per cent 

support secret ballots on union votes, compared to just 15 

opposed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is something even more significant. These 

measures also had strong support in union households. So while 

union leaders may oppose essential services legislation, union 

members support it. Union members want to know that cancer 

care will be provided in the event of a strike. Union members 

want to know that their families will be safe on the highways 

during a strike. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is fair, it’s balanced, and it’s 

reasonable — just like the people of Saskatchewan. So it really 

comes as no surprise that a huge majority of Saskatchewan 

people support our government’s common sense changes to the 

labour legislation in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

made this fight their focus in the last six months? Mr. Speaker, 

are they that out of touch? This is just one more example of the 

NDP looking in the rear-view mirror. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next speaker, I would 

ask members to give the member on their feet the opportunity to 

make their statement without a lot of undue interruption. I 

recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

International Day of Midwives 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

around the world people are recognizing the valuable 

contributions of midwives on this International Day of 

Midwives. Midwives play an important role in providing a 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2008 

positive environment for women who are expecting and 

delivering babies. They work collaboratively with other health 

professionals to ensure effective, comprehensive services for 

women and their newborns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former NDP government recognized the 

benefits, significant benefits midwives offer to the province 

through the formation of a transitional council made to guide 

midwifery and the funding of a bursary to enable midwives to 

access training or prior learning assessment. Also the Western 

Academy of Midwifery, with its home in Regina, was 

established in the fall of 2006 and began accepting students in 

January of last year. The academy offers a four-year distance 

education program in academic and clinical requirements for 

Canadian midwifery practice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, midwives offer valuable knowledge and 

alternatives for meeting the needs of women. I ask all members 

of the Assembly and all Saskatchewan residents to join with me 

in recognizing the contributions of midwives on this very 

special day. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Labour Policy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, shortly after the last election the editor of the NDP’s 

newsletter The Commonwealth wrote a scathing article 

outlining the NDP government’s numerous failures that led to 

its defeat in the 2007 election. 

 

Here’s what he said about NDP labour policy, and I quote . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Wood River. Other members will have opportunity in the near 

future to offer a statement. Member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Here’s what he said about NDP labour 

policy and I quote: “Rather than create a new labour policy of 

its own . . . The government instead chose to reach back into the 

1990s.” He also called this approach an unmitigated disaster. 

 

So what has the NDP learned from all this? Absolutely nothing. 

They’re still out of step with Saskatchewan people on labour 

policy. A huge majority of Saskatchewan people, including 

union members, support essential services legislation. The NDP 

oppose it. A huge majority of Saskatchewan people, including 

union members, support secret ballots in the workplace. The 

NDP oppose it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Labour minister has called on the NDP to 

support this legislation, but I hope they don’t. I hope they cling 

to that same old lack of vision and failed ideology that lost them 

the last election. I hope they continue to oppose this balanced, 

progressive legislation and continue to demonstrate that they 

are completely out of touch with Saskatchewan people. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Contributions to Political Parties 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

paraphrase the member from Lloydminster from a few weeks 

ago in this House. Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to talk 

about 3 million reasons why the Sask Party is a bunch of 

hypocrites. 

 

I think it’s time the members opposite did a reality check. In the 

last election campaign, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party candidates 

received campaign contributions from big business to the tune 

of $3 million. It’s time to expose the members opposite for 

exactly what they are — puppets doing the bidding for the 

big-business masters. After all, Mr. Speaker, that is Sask Party 

logic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mean, after all, the member from Lloydminster 

made the exact argument in this very House about union 

donations and the NDP. Just one small problem, Mr. Speaker — 

the facts. It turns out that not only did the NDP receive more 

donations from businesses in the last election than they did 

from unions, it was much more. 

 

I guess we will see if my member’s statement gets as much 

media attention as the member from Lloydminster’s did, but I 

doubt it. You see, Mr. Speaker, some of the biggest corporate 

donors to the Sask Party are some of the media outlets here in 

the province. The Rawlinson group of companies gave 

$102,000 to the Sask Party alone. My guess is that Rawlco 

Radio will treat this new fact in the same way their friends 

across the way did. They will ignore it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Strategy for Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 2007 was a good year 

for the Crowns, but thanks to the Sask Party’s questionable 

priorities, 2008 may be a very bad year for affordability of 

utility rates in our province. The Crowns sector generated a 

profit of nearly $600 million last year, and 200 million of that 

has just been dumped into the General Revenue Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province are left to wonder why, 

with such huge profits from the Crowns — including 

SaskPower’s $138 million profit — the Sask Party is setting up 

a SaskPower utility rate increase. My question is to the 

minister: why is the government allowing a mountain of money 

to separate the needs of Saskatchewan people for affordable 

utility rates from Sask Party government greed for even more 

money? 



May 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is 

partially correct. The first few months of the Sask Party 

government shows a sound operating budget for the Crown 

corporations . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — And that will continue on 

throughout the term of this Saskatchewan Party government, 

Mr. Speaker. It is a well-known fact that the NDP and the 

previous government opposite left an infrastructure deficit for 

this province. They left it for highways. They left it for health 

care. They left it for education. But maybe, Mr. Speaker, it was 

not as well known, they also left it in the Crown corporations. 

 

SaskPower for example, they went ahead and they set some 

targets, the few targets that they did set, but they set some 

targets with absolutely no plan on how to reach them, no plan 

whatsoever. They came up with a plan. Then they dropped the 

ball. That’s what that government did; that’s not what this 

government will do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Energy and 

Resources said on Friday, April 11, that he will not raise royalty 

rates for the next 16 years for oil companies. To the Minister of 

CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]: with 

all-time record high oil prices and demand in the stratosphere, 

why is the Sask Party government promising corporations a 

royalty tax freeze while at the same time promising the people 

of Saskatchewan a power rate increase with more to come? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, to provide clarity to 

the member opposite, on November 7, this government said to 

the people of Saskatchewan that we will run the Crown 

corporations like a business. We will provide the service at the 

lowest possible cost, and we are doing that, Mr. Speaker. And 

the only people, the only people in the province that don’t like it 

are the members opposite. Well get used to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government 

has more money than it knows what to do with. But instead of 

giving it back to the people of Saskatchewan, they’re too busy 

committing to a political deal with their federal cousins in 

Ottawa to a prototype clean coal plant. Instead of addressing the 

rising cost of living for the Saskatchewan people, the 

government has saddled them with a debt starting at $1 billion 

for untested technology. 

 

To the minister: people of our province are already facing 

property tax and housing cost increases. Why does the Sask 

Party government continue to encourage utility rate increases in 

Saskatchewan? When does the shake down of Saskatchewan 

people end? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the real question out 

here is, where does that NDP opposition stand? I understand 

now they’re in favour of increasing royalty rates. Well that will 

be an interesting message coming from that opposition to go 

across the country when we’re experiencing record economic 

growth. That’s a shameful position, and I’ll be interested to hear 

the member expound on that policy a little bit later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, where do they stand on clean 

coal technology? We saw them talk about it in government, and 

then all of a sudden they’re not in favour of it any more. Mr. 

Speaker, make no mistake. This government will be leading 

edge. We will take money from the federal government. We 

will put it towards projects like the clean coal initiative. And we 

will assure that we work in partnership with other corporations 

across the province. We will do it in a responsible manner — 

make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park, I would just ask members as well that even in 

question period, allow the member to place the question, the 

minister to respond in a manner so that other people can hear. 

The member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Where does the NDP 

stand? We stand with the people of Saskatchewan; that’s where 

we stand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the cost of living is going up fast 

for the people of Saskatchewan. One of the Sask Party promises 

was, quote, to “Mandate Saskatchewan’s major crown 

corporations to provide high quality utility and insurance 

services at the lowest possible cost.” That was before the 

election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government, the lowest 

possible utility and insurance costs meant the guaranteed lowest 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2008 

cost utility bundle in all of Canada. That’s what we meant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the Sask Party 

government commit today to maintaining for the people of 

Saskatchewan the commitment to the lowest cost utility bundle 

in all of Canada? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, here is the plan of 

what the NDP government had when they were in power. As far 

as SaskPower goes, they estimated that by 2010 three million 

tonnes of CO2 credits would have to be bought at $15 a tonne, a 

rough estimate of the potential impact on SaskPower. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s very clear, the NDP and their government 

opposite, they had no plan. They had no long-term plan. They 

set a few targets. They didn’t commit to addressing those 

targets whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as political gimmicks go and how they 

relate to the Crown corporations, we made a commitment to 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister may complete his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We made 

a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan that we would 

take the politics out of the Crown corporations, we’d operate 

them like a business, and that’s what we’re intending to do, Mr. 

Speaker. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Funding for the Arts 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we recently found out that $3.45 

million, almost all of the funding dedicated to the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board, will be diverted to the minister’s office. Apparently 

she believes it’s more valuable to establish a $3.5 million slush 

fund than to allow these funds to be properly adjudicated. Why 

does the minister believe she’s in a better position to distribute 

these funds than is the Saskatchewan Arts Board? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Money has been allocated to the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board to look after the five provincial 

cultural organizations in the province. The remaining funds will 

be left with the ministry to determine and work with this sector, 

Mr. Speaker, to finally, Mr. Speaker, develop a strategy and a 

framework for the cultural creative industries in this province. 

For some time, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has lacked a 

framework to support a thriving arts and cultural sector. This 

government, this government, Mr. Speaker, is going to get it 

done because this government believes in a long-term 

sustainable arts and culture community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well I guess we have the answer then. She’s 

going to use it for what she sees fit. And she’s not the only one, 

Mr. Speaker. I was at the arts congress this weekend and the 

deputy minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport said that 

the money’s going to be redirected for needs as they arise — 

different story than we hear today. 

 

Apparently the artists in our province don’t have the same level 

of need as does the minister. The deputy gave another reason 

why the funds have been confiscated, and he said, your job as 

government is to, I quote, “if you make mistakes, to correct 

them” — if you make mistakes, to correct them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question: is that her view? Was providing 

additional funding to the Arts Board a mistake that she has to 

correct? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, let’s take a step and look back 

a little bit here. Just prior to the election in 2007 the Arts Board 

was allotted unbudgeted funds of over $4 million that was 

technically assigned to the Arts Board — unbudgeted funds, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government made a commitment to maintain funding to 

the arts and cultural community and that’s exactly what we’ve 

done, Mr. Speaker. We’ve allotted funds to go to the Arts Board 

to support the five cultural organizations in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And we will continue to support this community by 

helping and assisting, providing and developing a framework 

for this industry to continue on in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

Promise made, promise kept. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Rightly enough, Mr. Speaker, today is Music 

Monday, and in the words of the Minister for TPCS [Tourism, 



May 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

Parks, Culture and Sport] Music Monday, quote “. . . is a day to 

celebrate the power of music in Canada and demonstrate how 

that power is rooted in our culture and part of who we are.” Mr. 

Speaker, some of the new funds that have now been poured into 

a slush fund for the minister were promised to SaskMusic to 

support a range of initiatives. This funding was awarded after a 

review of the entire music industry. Now, like many other 

groups in Saskatchewan, SaskMusic is left to wonder why their 

money is being diverted to the minister’s office. 

 

Does the minister intend personally to pick and choose which 

artists receive grants in our province? If so, what qualifies her 

to do it? If music is as important to her as she claims it is in her 

news release, will SaskMusic be one of the organizations that 

she returns funding to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the funding that was thrown at 

the Arts Board just prior to the election of 2007 by that 

government is money that belongs to the taxpayers of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. This is unbudgeted money this 

government has committed to finding a framework which 

involves SaskMusic, SaskCulture, Sask Arts Board, etc., to help 

develop this sector to become sustainable over the long term, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

These funds that have been allotted to developing a framework 

and to the Saskatchewan Arts Board again, Mr. Speaker, belong 

to the taxpayers of this province, and we’re going to ensure that 

their money is well spent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, first the Sask Party sabotaged 

status of the artist legislation. Now they’re removing funding 

from the Saskatchewan Arts Board — a board, a group of 

professionals that has served Saskatchewan well for over 60 

years, a model of adjudication in this country. And they’re 

holding this funding in the minister’s office. No one knows how 

it will be distributed or when or if Saskatchewan artists will 

even be in receipt of this money. The government hasn’t been 

forthcoming with any details, as they seldom are. 

 

Will the minister finally admit to the people of our province that 

she’s more interested in establishing this slush fund than seeing 

additional funding go to the artists in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the member 

opposite is not hearing what we’re saying on this side. This 

money has been allotted to and budgeted for, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure the sustainability of the arts and culture sector. We have, 

we have agreed to work with the stakeholders in these 

industries to develop a framework to ensure long-term 

sustainability and empower the cultural organizations in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. For too long this province has been left 

under that government for not having a framework and one of 

predictability and transparency. Mr. Speaker, again promise 

made, promise kept. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Consultation Regarding The Education Amendment Act 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Education’s approach to 178 of Bill 29 is nothing short of 

incompetent. Despite claims in committee that the minister had 

consulted with the Provincial Interagency Network on 

Disabilities and the Saskatchewan Association for Community 

Living, we know that was false. That minister has a 

responsibility to meet with and listen to the people he is 

supposed to represent. 

 

So I have a simple question for the minister. Will he meet with 

the members of the Saskatchewan Association for Community 

Living, or will he be sending ministry staff to do his job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re working in this province as a new government to develop 

a strategy that is going to ensure that there is inclusiveness, that 

there are greater opportunities for pupils with intensive needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former minister under the NDP had her 

officials meet with the people involved on August 16. Mr. 

Speaker, last week we contacted the very people that he speaks 

about, Mr. Speaker, and we asked them for a meeting last week. 

They were unable to meet on Thursday. They were unable to 

meet on Friday. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they were unable to 

meet today. They are going to meet with my ministry officials 

tomorrow in Biggar, Saskatchewan, and my ministry officials 

will be travelling there to meet with them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the minister has 

tried to book something in the last three weeks, but how about 

the last five months? I’m glad his ministry officials are going 

there tomorrow, but where is the minister? The minister was 

apparently too busy to meet with the largest disabilities 

advocacy groups in Saskatchewan, despite claiming otherwise. 

Now he is simply refusing to do the right thing. He is standing 

by his legislation instead of following through with the 

collaborative process embraced and expected by the education 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2008 

community. 

 

All these parents and advocates want is for that minister to 

listen to their concerns and to do his best for the needs of their 

children. But instead he’s digging in his heels. To the minister: 

why is he refusing to meet with the Saskatchewan Association 

for Community Living? Is this a case of ministerial 

incompetence, mean spirit, or both? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated in this Assembly and to the media last week, a letter 

was sent to the Saskatchewan Association for Community 

Living dated January 28, 2008, asking specifically for a 

meeting, Mr. Speaker. Not one response was received from 

SACL [Saskatchewan Association for Community Living] 

between January 28 and, interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, the 

press release that was introduced by that member in the House. 

I find that very ironic, Mr. Speaker. Not one piece of paper was 

sent to that minister while he was asking questions during 

committee about that Bill. Mr. Speaker, the information that 

we’re putting into the Bill has been developed by the former 

minister to a meeting on August 16, 2007. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — For that minister to suggest that a 

non-partisan and professional group that has long served our 

province is somehow in cahoots with the opposition is a joke. 

The only thing they work for, Mr. Speaker, is the people with 

disabilities within our province. It’s clear the minister’s 

legislation, despite the minister’s claim to the contrary, does not 

have the support of the disabilities community. This minister 

has failed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s a joke, Mr. Speaker. The buck stops 

with that minister. The minister has failed to collaborate with 

parents in a meaningful way. Maybe if the minister was 

engaged in the collaboration, he would no longer refer to those 

people with disabilities as deficient — a term that takes us back 

to the dark ages of disabilities. Parents and children deserve 

more respect from that minister, and there is still time to plan. 

There is still time to get their input. To the minister: will he 

hold off on proclamation of section 178 of the Act until the 

views of the disabilities community can be addressed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

there is a very simple answer to the response of that member. 

We are changing terminology. There are legal and there are 

human rights decisions that insist that words that need to be 

changed, and we are referring to people now as pupils with 

intensive needs. That is the phrase that I used. That is the phrase 

that is going to be incorporated into the Act. Mr. Speaker, that 

is what was requested in meetings with all stakeholders. 

 

There was discussion that has been going on since 2004 on the 

guidelines and what needs need to be incorporated into the Act. 

All the changes that were requested by stakeholders are not 

being incorporated, but, Mr. Speaker, the information provided 

to the stakeholder on August 16, reflects what is in the Act 

today. So there is no fear. There is no need for people to fear 

that somehow we are going to create a position where students 

are going to be excluded. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

ensure that there is more inclusivity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the Minister of 

Labour is once again at odds with the rest of his cabinet. In 

response to a question about whether or not any analysis had 

been done in government ministries regarding the impact of 

essential services legislation, the minister said, quote, “Not that 

I’m aware of.” But only a few short weeks ago in committee, 

the Minister of Energy and Resources said, quote “. . . all areas 

of government are looking through to determine whether or not 

the essential services legislation would have any impact upon 

that particular ministry.” 

 

To the minister: who’s right? And if there have been analysis 

done by each ministry, will the government table them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I think the 

question was, who’s right, and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Earlier today we heard a member opposite 

said that the opposition was going to stand with the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s time to find out if they are. 

Seventy per cent of the people of this province want to make 

sure employers and unions negotiate essential service 

agreement. We’d said that all the way along, Mr. Speaker, that 

those were some of the best practices from other parts of 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, the key question is . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 



May 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — The key question, Mr. Speaker, is will the 

opposition have a free vote so that each one of them can stand 

in their spots and say whether they will be supporting essential 

services or not, Mr. Speaker? That’s the question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we listened and we listened to 

this minister in committee and, Mr. Speaker, all I can say is he’s 

provided a lot of material for the Rick Mercer show. That’s 

what he’s done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan know to be 

skeptical whenever the minister opens his mouth. He likes to 

talk about dualities and synergies and essences of questions 

instead of actually offering tangible information. And on the 

rare occasion when he does give a straight answer, the answer, 

as we all know, usually turns out to be incorrect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’d think that by now the minister would have 

some idea on how his own legislation would affect government 

employees. After all, the Minister of Tourism knows the exact 

number of employees who would be affected, and the Minister 

of Energy thinks that all ministries are doing an analysis. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to state his question. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To the minister: how is it that the Minister 

of Energy and the Minister of Tourism both know more about 

Bill 5 than he does? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s somewhat 

flattering to say that we might make the Rick Mercer show 

because the member opposite wouldn’t even make the outtakes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously in this, what we’ve said again and again 

is that this is about negotiation, Mr. Speaker. That is, an 

employer comes forward with a list. From that list, Mr. 

Speaker, we would then make sure that list is entitled, and it 

would be shared with the bargaining unit, Mr. Speaker. Those 

two entities would come together. They would negotiate that. 

The recourse, Mr. Speaker, is the bargaining unit could then 

take it to the Labour Relations Board, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s quite a straightforward dynamic. I thought maybe last week 

we’d gone through this enough, but I’m happy to spend more 

time here to ensure that the members opposite actually get the 

essence of this. That is, it’s about the public safety of this 

province. And will the members opposite be voting for essential 

services or not? Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I could talk about more series. 

How about The Invisible Man, maybe. There’s another one he 

can maybe try and reply to. 

 

But anyways, Mr. Speaker, last Thursday as many as 1,000 

people gathered outside the building to protest Bills 5 and 6 — 

lots of people, Mr. Speaker, but with one notable exception, the 

Minister of Labour. 

 

The Speaker: — Just a few too many private conversations, 

that the Speaker is having a difficult time hearing the member 

placing the question. The member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it before and I’ll 

say it again: when you’re a minister of the Crown, you don’t get 

to pick and choose. You just can’t decide to meet with people 

who like you and ignore everyone else. The member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow understood that when, as Learning 

minister, she addressed parents concerned with rural closures on 

the steps of the legislature. And the former minister of 

Agriculture did the same things when farmers would rally here. 

So to the minister: is he really so thin-skinned that he can’t even 

meet with people who might disagree with him? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question. As we’ve said previously, what we did is we held 

consultations on both Bills. Between the deputy minister and 

myself, we met with nearly 100 individuals. We sent out 84 

letters of invitation. We advertised in nearly 100 newspapers 

across Saskatchewan. We heard from right across the policy 

community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a result of that, what we did is we actually came forward 

with some amendments — some who were informed by, 

inspired by organized labour, and others from other parts from 

our society. What this really represents, Mr. Speaker, is an 

opportunity to reflect on the significance of the Bill coming 

forward. That is, as we weigh public safety and the right to 

strike, we’ve met that nice balance, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

there are some other elements, Mr. Speaker, like 75 per cent of 

the people of this province seeking to make sure that there’s — 

what would you say, Mr. Speaker? — something as radical 

about a secret ballot, Mr. Speaker. A secret ballot. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well we can sit down and say . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, maybe a review would be in 

order. And number one, first, I guess, we notice that the 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2008 

minister really does have thin skin. That would be number one. 

The minister refuses to hold public hearings on the Bills despite 

in fact that the public still doesn’t have all the answers. 

 

We heard last week that the minister and other MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly] won’t meet with people who they 

don’t agree with. And we even heard about a violation of 

privacy of those who oppose Bill 5. And now the minister 

didn’t even have the nerve to show his face at a demonstration 

held by one of his major stakeholders regarding his first pieces 

of legislation. What a start, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

like the minister was busy reading or reviewing his own 

legislation. After all he seems to be the only member in . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member will place his 

question immediately. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To the minister: will he finally do the right 

thing and send these Bills to public hearings? Or is he still 

determined to ram these Bills through this House despite the 

fact that regulations are at least a year away? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Talk about a meandering question, Mr. 

Speaker. The easy answer is we are doing the right thing. We’re 

moving forward on these Bills, Mr. Speaker. They protect 

public safety. They balance the right to strike, and they make 

sure there’s something as radical as a secret ballot, Mr. Speaker. 

We are doing the right things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 24 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I spent some time the other day going 

through the history of this Bill and how we arrived here. But in 

summation — and I know I have colleagues who also want to 

address this Bill — so briefly in summation, Mr. Speaker, how 

we arrived at two trade union amendment Acts in one sitting of 

the legislature is something as follows. 

 

As I understand it somebody — obviously not the Minister of 

Labour — was busy drafting Bill No. 6, The Trade Union 

Amendment Act for some period of time before the election. 

The government suggests that the Department of Justice and the 

drafters there, the expert drafters there, were somehow 

involved, but there doesn’t seem to be much evidence of that, 

Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think any has been presented that they 

were. 

 

But after all this work and a wholesale rewriting of labour law 

within the province of Saskatchewan, we have some changes at 

the Labour Relations Board. And the significant change, first of 

all, is a complete purge of the board — in mid hearings. As a 

matter of fact the firing I think was read in the middle of a 

hearing during the day. And all three of these members, all 

chosen by open competition, all who had a sterling record of 

unbiased judgments . . . I think for the time period that I gave 

out, about six years when I last rose on this matter, there were 

1, 300 cases. Six, six out of 1,300 overturned by the Court of 

Queen’s Bench on appeal from the Labour Relations Board. 

 

So we replace, as a government, as the people of Saskatchewan, 

an objective board chosen by open competition which had this 

type of record, with a political appointment. And that political 

appointment is given a 50 per cent salary increase, Mr. Speaker 

— from 120,000 to $180,000. Well concern is expressed about 

that by the public that you would replace someone chosen in 

such an objective, disinterested way, who was doing such an 

objective disinterested job, with a political appointment and 

give them a 50 per cent wage increase, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we weren’t to be concerned said the government because 

they were going to shrink the size of the board. Now this is, this 

is a government that introduced in the fall all this legislation 

amending The Trade Union Act, a large Bill amending The 

Trade Union Act, making a number of changes; more changes 

than the Minister of Labour referred to in question period — 

quite a few more than that, Mr. Speaker. And then they realized 

they could not just change the size of the board by fiat, Mr. 

Speaker, that it was actually set out in legislation. And that 

seems to have first occurred to them when they needed an 

answer to the question of the raise for the political appointment. 

It does not seem to have occurred to them before, that there 

might actually be law even though they had made a priority 

changing that very Act. Not very, not very many pieces of the 

legislation, the six specified Bills, have to do with amending 

another Bill. Bill 6 does. So although they look at that Act very 

carefully, they didn’t realize that what the minister was going to 

propose in a press conference was actually set down on law. 

 

And when they had to respond to that, Mr. Speaker, that is what 

gave rise to this Bill, one of at least, if not the prime example of 

the oops Bill — the flying-by-your-seat-of-your-pants, 

making-it-up, press-conference-by-press-conference Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s what brought us to this. And now the no 

more than two Vice-Chairs, and which could be zero because 

that’s not more than two, they’re still not committed to actually 

having a Vice-Chair for the board, even though they’re going to 

do it quicker with their more highly paid Chair, supposedly. 

 

These Vice-Chairs, if there’s one or two, will now be chosen by 



May 5, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

open competition, the Chair was not. Why this change of 

policy? Not set out in the Bill by the way, Mr. Speaker, not 

entrenched by legislation, but why this supposed change in 

policy? Because they also had to question not only, not only 

about the increased cost to the Chair, not only about speeding 

up hearings as they allegedly were going to do, but the way in 

which the Chair was chosen. 

 

And again policy made on the run. The minister refused to 

answer the question as to whether they’re in an open 

competition for any Vice-Chair, refused to answer the question, 

the next day said, yes. He couldn’t answer the question the day 

before because he was at home tweaking the ad. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you believe that, I have a deal on the 

Broadway Bridge in Saskatoon and it’s available. It’s cheap, 

and it could yours. It could be yours, Mr. Speaker, if you 

believe this, if you believe this rendition of policy-making on 

the fly has resulted in two, two amendment Acts to The Trade 

Union Amendment Act. 

 

Now I know that more than one of my colleagues wants to 

speak on this matter, so I had a chance to make these points and 

make them again in summation. And having done so, I will take 

my seat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I too would like to rise and add a few comments to 

what’s been affectionately called the oops Bill, trade union Act 

2. So, Mr. Speaker, if when we look back at the labour 

legislation proposals that have been put forward by this 

Saskatchewan Party government, we can see they were put 

forward early in the fall, much to the surprise of many in the 

province because these had not been committed to in election 

commitments. In fact various ministers and the Premier had 

said parts of this legislation was not needed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we went through the fall. We went through a 

break in the session where committees could have been 

working, where there could have been public consultations 

travelling across the province, meeting with the public instead 

of the minister sitting in his office waiting for written 

submissions to be sent to the Ministry of Labour. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Watching a teleprompter. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — So here he was, yes, practising his videos and 

getting those down right on his website so he looked good, but 

didn’t bother listening to the people of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we are. We come into the spring session, 

and all of a sudden we have an amendment, The Trade Union 

Act amendment to put forward, because the minister found out 

in this House during various debates that the changes he was 

proposing to the Labour Relations Board weren’t allowed under 

the Act. So, Mr. Speaker, oops — that’s the big thing, oops. 

This was purely to fix an oversight. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we can go back a number of months 

on either of these pieces of legislation but especially The Trade 

Union Act, and there has always been discussion and concern 

that it was written by an outside, biased, third party. There are 

other conversations that it was delivered to the Department of 

Labour in its second or third draft which just solidified the feel 

that this was not a piece of legislation that had been properly 

vetted, looked at how it affected and was affected by other 

pieces of labour legislation, not only within Saskatchewan but 

across Canada. There are always comparisons done, 

jurisdictional comparisons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about being competitive. He 

talked about national norms, and he talked about putting in 

similar legislation that’s across Canada into Saskatchewan. But 

he has never yet had the nerve to table in this House or provide 

for the committee that has gone through many, many hours of 

questioning, a jurisdictional comparison on any of this 

legislation. Where does this put Saskatchewan in context of the 

rest of the country? He can’t do it or he won’t do it, which is 

even more frightening. That’s even worse. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So here we have . . . he’s going ahead. He’s making changes to 

legislation but hasn’t thought it through, hasn’t done any public 

consultations where he would have got comments back about 

the shortfalls of his initial piece of legislation. So here we go. 

We need another piece of legislation to fix what he didn’t do 

right with the first piece of legislation. Now there’s no point 

arguing about who wrote it because we know it was not written 

by the Department of Justice or the Department of Labour 

because they would have known. They have the process that 

they can go through. They would have done the comparisons to 

make sure that other Bills . . . how they were affected by other 

Bills and if the changes were complete in the context of the first 

amendments that were put forward. They weren’t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill raises a number of questions. It’s been an 

absolute fiasco right from day one when any of the labour 

legislation was first proposed and spoken of to the media, not in 

any official format, not in the election campaign, not in 

platform documents but just offhand comments to the media 

that these changes were coming forward. And it’s been a fiasco 

ever since. It would almost be called a comedy of errors. It 

would almost be a comedy of errors — do you know what? — 

if it wasn’t so devastating in the balance of the labour relations 

market here in the province of Saskatchewan and if it wasn’t so 

devastating for working people across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many comments that need to be made 

still on this piece of legislation. I know that we are set to move 

into committees this afternoon. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 

adjourn debate on this legislation so we can continue having 

feedback with stakeholders. Even if the government won’t have 

public consultation, this opposition feels that it’s important that 

we speak to stakeholders. So I adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2008 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the work of the standing committees, I would move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — In order to facilitate the workings of 

Assembly committees, the Government House Leader has 

moved this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:31.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1183 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1184 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1184 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1184 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1184 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1184 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 March of the Living 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1184 

 Women of Distinction Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1185 

 Female Vocalist of the Year from Prince Albert 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1185 

 Labour Legislation 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1185 

 International Day of Midwives 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1185 

 Labour Policy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1186 

 Contributions to Political Parties 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1186 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Strategy for Crown Corporations 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1186 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1187 

 Funding for the Arts 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1188 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1188 

 Consultation Regarding The Education Amendment Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1189 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1189 

 Labour Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1190 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1190 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1192 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1193 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


