




















































Hansard: April 30, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 35A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 30, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1139 

 April 30, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Luciano de Crescenzo, an Italian writer, a film actor, 

director, and engineer once said, “We are all like one-winged 

angels. It is only when we help each other that we can fly.” 

 

Today, to you and through you to all members of this 

Assembly, and indeed through the Assembly to the province of 

Saskatchewan, it’s a pleasure to recognize still more volunteers 

in our province, Mr. Speaker, who have joined us today, who 

have helped Saskatchewan fly; who represent every corner of 

the province; who have been involved in every conceivable 

facet of life in Saskatchewan; who have given of themselves, 

given of their time and of their talent without expecting 

anything in return. 

 

They are from rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; they are from 

urban Saskatchewan. And as is the case every year since 1995 

when the Volunteer Medal was established, we this morning — 

together with yourself and the Leader of the Opposition and the 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] that represent 

these fine individuals — we had the chance to celebrate their 

contributions and their achievement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those members who have been here for some 

time will know that there are certain things that characterize the 

ceremony. There is the citations that are read. There’s the 

formality of the event. His Honour did a great job in his work in 

presenting the medals and giving some address. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, there is one other thing that was the 

same as well as every other Volunteer Medal ceremony that I 

have witnessed, and that is the fact that all the recipients are far 

too modest — are far too willing to defer to their family, to 

friends, to others, to other recipients, as the ones that are 

actually deserving of recognition — and that’s what makes 

them so special. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a grateful Government of 

Saskatchewan, on behalf of the people of the province, it’s a 

pleasure today to welcome all of them to their Legislative 

Assembly. And I know each MLA will have a chance to make 

introductions. And the Leader of the Opposition, I believe, also 

has some words of welcome. Welcome to all of you to your 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, of all of 

the many and varied activities which happen within the walls of 

this Chamber and happen within the corridors of Government 

House, it seems to me that the recognition of the volunteers and 

the presentation of the Volunteer Medals perhaps more than any 

other event typifies and represents the very soul of our 

province. 

 

We are, Mr. Speaker, a distinct people. We are a people who 

volunteer more than any other Canadians. We are a people who 

care, who care about our families and our neighbours and care 

about our communities. And the quality of life in our province 

is much, much enhanced by our volunteers. 

 

And so in welcoming those who have received the Volunteer 

Medal today, I want to say those of you who have received the 

medal in many ways represent the very soul of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And hearing as we did this morning your record 

of service and accomplishment, it strikes me that you each must 

have adopted the philosophy of Edward Everett Hale, who said 

of himself: 

 

I am only one, but I’m one. I cannot do everything, but I 

can do something. And I will not let what I cannot do 

interfere with what I can do. 

 

Because of what you have done, our communities are safer 

places, immigrants and newcomers have been welcomed, and 

human rights defended. The history of our community has been 

told. The fabric of arts and education in our province has been 

enhanced. What you have done is to strengthen your 

community, preserve our heritage, and stand for a future for 

those who are disabled among us. And so we thank you and we 

honour you. 

 

Now I just want to say this, Mr. Speaker. In 1995 when the 

Volunteer Medal was created, it was not created to recognize 

retirement. As Dianne Wilson said in her response to your toast, 

Mr. Speaker, this is an event to note a milestone on your 

journey of service. So continued happiness in your service. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 

Mr. Eric Antonini from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Joining 

him is Norma Antonini, his life’s partner, who is a volunteer 

extraordinaire herself, having been recognized by the city of 

Saskatoon during our city’s centenary. Please join me in 

welcoming Mr. Antonini along with his life’s partner, Norma 

Antonini. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce Mrs. Anita Bella from 

the constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. I would ask everyone to show 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

our appreciation today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — Members, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mrs. Margaret Debenham from the constituency of Moosomin, 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

Welcome, Margaret. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Ms. 

Barbara Dedi from the constituency of Regina Walsh Acres, 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

Congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Mr. 

Lyle Karasiuk from the constituency of Prince Albert 

Northcote, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. Congratulations, Lyle. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to introduce to you Mr. Kenneth Miller from the 

constituency of Cannington and the town of Redvers, who 

today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Joining him 

today on the floor is his wife and friends in the west gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 

Mr. Rocky Rochelle from the constituency of Saskatoon 

Meewasin, who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer 

Medal. Mr. Rochelle is never home when I knock on his door 

and now I know why. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce 

Ms. Dianne Wilson from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

Congratulations, Dianne. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to you and 

through you, of course, to all members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I too want to recognize Mr. Lyle Karasiuk who in 

fact is a constituent of Mr. Furber’s from P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Northcote. 

 

But he works in my constituency as an advanced care 

paramedic and he’s taking on a profession that I started after 

high school as well. I worked for Parkland Ambulance for three 

years. And Mr. Karasiuk does numerous things in my 

community, volunteering especially to the Victoria Hospital 

Foundation. I want to recognize Mr. Karasiuk as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy I would like 

to introduce to you and through to all members of this honoured 

Assembly three students from the Piapot urban adult education 

class in Weyburn. They are seated in the west gallery — if you 

would just give us a wave — and they are accompanied by their 

teachers, Bev Kulach and Carole Olson. I ask all members to 

join me in welcoming them to this Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to join with the member from Estevan in welcoming our 

guests from the Piapot urban education program. 

 

It’s an interesting partnership, Mr. Speaker, that sees its 

physical location placed just down the block from where my 

constituency office is, so I’ve had the opportunity to visit a bit 

with Bev Kulach, Carole Olson, Heather Wesaquate, Michelle 

Thomson, Olivia Netowayasin. And they’ve got good 

representation throughout Treaty 4 — I know that for sure, Mr. 

Speaker — with ties to Carry The Kettle and Yellow Quill and 

certainly Piapot. 

 

I too would like to join with the member in welcoming them to 

their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, seated in the far corner of 

your gallery is Phil Strenger, who is a friend of mine and was a 

candidate for the Saskatchewan Party in the 2003 election and a 

very hard-working volunteer in the 2007 election. Mr. Speaker, 

I advise you that he had a 1928 Essex automobile that had just 

the right sized roof for a large campaign sign and he put it to 

very good use. And I want to welcome him to the legislature 

and say there are many more elections that we need to win yet. 

 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 

someone seated in your gallery that is known to many members 

in this Assembly, Mr. Fred Heron and his wife Joan. Fred is 

certainly known for his long work with the Saskatchewan 

Teachers’ Federation. 

 

I didn’t know him at the time. We hadn’t met when he was 

involved with that organization but I since that time have met 

both Fred and Joan. They are good friends of my brother-in-law 

and sister-in-law. I see them sitting in the gallery this afternoon 

and I would like to welcome them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with the member in welcoming Fred and Joan Heron to 

the Legislative Assembly. They are no strangers to this 

Assembly, given that Fred at one time was the general secretary 

for the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. I know that he is 

usually involved now with superannuated teachers and they are 

most appreciative of his ability to figure out pensions and to 

advocate for pensions for not only teachers, but all citizens. 

 

So I join the member and would ask all members of the 

Assembly to please welcome Joan Heron and Fred Heron. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — And members, it’s my privilege as well to 

introduce guests who have joined us. They’re seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery. We have Mr. Lepp, Sharon Barbour and her 

daughter Sarah, and Marla Toth and her children, Samuel and 

Julia. They’re from the People’s Church in Kipling, the 

beginner class, and they’ve come to observe how their 

Assembly operates. And I want members to extend a warm 

welcome to our guests. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure I stand and present a 

petition on behalf of the residents of Moose Jaw and 

surrounding area, that their hope to improve health care delivery 

and reduce wait times for surgery in Five Hills. And the petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of my constituents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

of those people who are opposed to the government’s Bill 5 and 

Bill 6, the essential services Act and The Trade Union Act 

respectively, and the petition reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Meadow Lake, 

Rapid View, Makwa, Jansen, Watson, and Englefeld. Thank 

you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan, which is a major concern about the barriers that 

many people face in this province. I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to ensure that the task force on housing 

affordability hold open public consultations for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

number of petitions regarding support for Station 20. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And once again the majority of the signators are from the core 

neighbourhood of Saskatoon in Riversdale. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a petition 

against means testing for the seniors’ drug plan. Starting July 1, 

the Saskatchewan Party will take away prescription drug 

benefits from thousands of Saskatchewan seniors, moving to an 

income testing method which in general means dollars are spent 

on administration and bureaucracy instead of helping people. 

The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to means test seniors 

and ensure that all seniors continue to have access to 

affordable prescription drugs. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These signatures are mostly from Eastview, but some from right 

outside the area as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to present a petition in support of a plan to 

address school closures. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners, all of 

whom come from the constituency of The Battlefords, call 

upon: 

 

. . . the Hon. Legislative Assembly to cause the 

government to develop, announce, and implement a plan 

to address school closures. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Members, if I could ask your indulgence for 

leave for further introduction of guests. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — I neglected earlier — and my apologies — 

but Mrs. Debenham also had family here. Her son Larry and his 

wife Jill and her daughter Laurie and her husband Colin are 

sitting in the west gallery. And I’d like members to welcome 

them as well. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

National Volunteer Week 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is most 

fitting that I rise today to recognize National Volunteer Week. 

This week provides a fitting moment to acknowledge the 

countless efforts of dedicated, citizen-minded people who make 

Saskatchewan a better place. This is also a week when 

numerous charities and not-for-profit organizations across the 

province and Canada pause to recognize the central role of 

volunteers. 

 

The National Volunteer Week campaign theme for this year is, 

Volunteers. From Compassion to Action. The theme is familiar 

to those of us whose family, friends, and neighbours benefit 

from the many volunteers in our communities that demonstrate 

the compassion for the well-being of others, the environment, 

and communities by taking on an active role as an individual or 

part of an informal group, organized charity, or non-profit 

organization. 

 

Volunteers respond to genuine needs of our communities. 

Through the efforts of individuals such as Barb Dedi, Volunteer 

Medal recipient and a constituent of Regina Walsh Acres, 

who’s dedicated herself to fostering a respectful community, we 

are mindful that volunteer efforts are vital to ensuring all people 

live in dignity and get the help they need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in celebrating 

National Volunteer Week, celebrating the compassionate spirit 

that volunteers bring to our province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Documents for Provincial Archives 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A historical archive is 

one of the greatest gifts we can give our future generations of 

Saskatchewan. On my own kitchen wall I have painted, Touch 

the Past and Embrace the Future. Knowing where we have been 

helps us build for the future, which is why when I worked in the 

provincial archives as a university student, I found it to be a 

very rewarding experience. 

 

But I have great concerns today, Mr. Speaker, about the privacy 

of Saskatchewan citizens. Private, personal correspondence they 

sent to the former NDP [New Democratic Party] cabinet 

ministers and that should now be in the provincial archives, but, 

Mr. Speaker, we have learned in recent days that this is not the 

case. Some former NDP cabinet ministers have not only had 

those letters — written in confidence — in their possession; at 

least one has used it for political gain. So much for 

confidentiality. 

 

These former NDP cabinet ministers are also breaking the law. 

They do not know whose letters those are, Mr. Speaker. They 

act as custodians of the material they receive while in office. 

Ministerial correspondence belongs to the Crown. Those former 

NDP ministers are required by law to submit those private, 

confidential letters to the provincial archives. Much of those, 

Mr. Speaker, including several members sitting in the opposite 

of the House today, have not done so. They are breaking the 

law. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Keepers of the Land 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to do 

profiles of northern Saskatchewan’s keepers of the land, also 

known as northern fishers and trappers. Trappers are the 

conscience of the land and I want to highlight their lives and 

stories. Today I want to profile one such trapper and fisherman 

from Buffalo Narrows — Leon McCallum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Leon started trapping in 1951 when he was 14 

years old. Leon began trapping after he completed his grade 9 at 

the residential school in Ile-a-la-Crosse and since this was the 

highest grade he could complete there, his parents removed him 

from school to begin earning a living off the land. 

 

The amazing part of Leon’s story is that his mother, Philomene, 

taught him how to trap while his dad, Pierre, taught his younger 

brother Gabe in a totally different area. This is how the 

McCallum family survived and thrived in those early years. 

 

Leon worked very hard over the years raising his family and 

others through trapping and fishing, and finally in 1965 he 

moved to a different type of living by becoming a successful 

carpenter/contractor. 

 

Leon continues to respect the land and continues to trap. Leon 

has not forgotten his roots or his history and continues to fight 

for respect as a trapper and a fisherman. As Leon says: 

 

Governments should provide training and support dollars 

to not only get younger trappers involved, but to preserve 

this way of life. We need to respect fishing and trapping 

much more and I tire of trappers losing their trap lines 

through clear cutting by forestry companies. All we get 

from the process is a simple letter where they plan to cut 

and that we have no choice. This is not what is meant by 

duty to consult — it seems everybody is ignoring trappers 

and fishermen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us in this Assembly need to listen to the 

words of Leon McCallum, a proud trapper and fisherman from 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Dancing with Regina’s Stars 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

great pleasure to be a participant in the Dancing with Regina’s 

Stars event that was held at Conexus Arts Centre on Saturday. 

 

Using the well-known television show as a template, six very 

accomplished instructors from the Regina Ballroom Dancing 

Club were paired with six beginners, including RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] Chief Superintendent Pierre Ménard, 

Olympic curling champion Jan Betker, Saskatchewan Express 

founder Carol Gay Bell, CTV’s [Canadian Television Network] 

personalities Carla Beynon and Lee Jones, and also myself. 

 

All the teams worked very hard to put on an entertaining show 

and the approximately 1,000 people who came to see the results 

had a great time watching the dancing and listening to singing 

sensation and Canadian Idol finalist Matt Rapley. 

 

A large number of volunteers and corporate sponsors ensured 

the success of this wonderful event and the proceeds were 

donated to worthy charities selected by the rookie dancers. My 

choice was the autism research centre. Congratulations to 

everyone who was involved, and my personal thanks to Ms. 

Karen Studlin and Mr. Roger Ambridge, my very courageous 

and patient dance partners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw School Participates in Jump Rope for Heart 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, recently Sunningdale School in Moose Jaw 

participated in the Jump Rope for Heart program through the 

Heart and Stroke Foundation of Saskatchewan. The program 

teaches the value of physical activity and healthy lifestyles with 

the knowledge that children who make physical activity a part 

of each day tend to stay active throughout their lives. Jump 

Rope for Heart offered both classroom learning and physical 

activity ending with a jump-off event. 

 

The children participating in the event were in grades 1 to 4, 

and the students were sent home with pledge forms to raise 

money for the Heart and Stroke Foundation. Grade 4 student 

Cane Fritzler said, “We need to raise lots of money to stop heart 

disease.” The exact total raised by the school will be announced 

at a later date. But as important as the money raised is, the 

promotion of fitness for the students and their families is 

equally important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and members of the House join with me 

in congratulating the students of Sunningdale School — hard 

time speaking today — and the event organizer, teacher Judy 

Quon, for participating in such a worthy activity. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Silver Ring Ceremony 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 12 my 

family and I had the opportunity and honour of attending the 

2008 silver ring ceremony program for the graduating students 

of the SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] forest ecosystem technology and integrated 

resource management programs. The Canadian Institute of 

Forestry is the proud sponsor of the ring ceremony. 

 

The Canadian Institute of Forestry has been the national voice 

of forest practitioners since 1908. Their mission is to advance 

the stewardship of Canada’s forest resources, providing national 

leadership in forestry, promote competence among forestry 

professionals, and foster public awareness of Canadian and 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

international forestry issues. 

 

The CIF/IFC [Canadian Institute of Forestry/Institut forestier du 

Canada] Gold Medal Award is awarded each year to a student 

who has demonstrated outstanding leadership, citizenship, 

sports, and scholarly abilities. This year the faculty of SIAST 

selected Rebecca West as the student who best portrayed those 

characteristics. 

 

Toast to the students from the faculty was given by Dr. 

Hamilton Greenwood, program head, SIAST natural resource 

technology programs. He gave a very inspirational toast, 

speaking with optimism about the bright future for the grads 

and the great opportunity they have as individuals to make 

changes in the future. 

 

I am very proud to say among the integrated resource 

management graduating class is my daughter Lacey. I wish the 

very best for the class of 2008 and look forward to their 

contribution in Saskatchewan in the coming years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Opposition to Bill 5 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday of this 

week, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to attend the 

provincial convention of the Service Employees International 

Union. There were people there from my own constituency of 

Riversdale, but obviously health workers from across the 

province. SEIU [Service Employees International Union] 

members provide essential services to the people of 

Saskatchewan 365 days a year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now while I was there they handed to me, provided to me, and 

asked me to deliver to the Premier a number of letters — well 

over 200, Mr. Speaker, in number. And interestingly enough 

these letters are all signed by people who live in the southwest 

of Saskatchewan: Abbey, Lancer, Ponteix, Maple Creek, and 

many from Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, the letter to the Premier 

reads: 

 

If passed, Bill # 5, misleadingly called Essential Services, 

will make it more difficult for our province to retain and 

recruit qualified health care providers. 

 

That is bad news for the people of Saskatchewan — 

quality health care depends on quality jobs. 

 

SEIU members provide essential health care 365 days a 

year. 

 

Bill # 5 does not respect the voice and experience of 

health care providers in designing an essential services 

plan. Instead, it personalizes a public debate by attacking 

individual workers. 

 

Why put health care at risk? Why attack our dedicated 

health care providers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to having these brought over to the 

Premier before the course of the day. And I congratulate the 

work of SEIU — not in terms of their fight on this issue, but 

what they do on a daily basis 365 days a year for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Drought Assistance for the Southwest 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It looks 

like the southwest part of our province is once again bracing for 

a year of drought, the fourth year in a row. I understand the 

minister’s recent budget contains some money for long-term 

water infrastructure in areas prone to drought. To the minister: 

what additional help can our drought-affected farmers and 

producers expect from this government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s actually a very good question for the 

member opposite. The farmers and ranchers in the Southwest 

are finding hard times. This is actually the third, fourth year that 

this problem has been happening down there. And, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that we’re doing right now is we’re 

in the works of dealing with a water project where maybe we 

can help alleviate some of the wells that are dry down there or a 

shortage of wells. Dugouts are going empty down there. 

 

Another thing that we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is with the gopher 

problem down there which the member also knows is a big 

problem in the Southwest. We’ve come out with a research 

program to try and also assist in getting strychnine reinstated 

after July 31. So as the member knows, number of problems in 

the Southwest, and we’re trying to deal with them as they come 

up. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Back when the Minister of 

Agriculture was in opposition, he constantly spoke about the 

drought in this part of the province. And he indicated that if 

there was a number of acres that can’t be seeded, many of these 

farmers are going to go under without federal and provincial 

help. 

 

Well as we know, the members of the Southwest Drought 

Disaster Committee are asking for a $25 per acre payout — $10 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

from the province and $15 from the feds. The Sask Party 

certainly supported those requests in previous years. To the 

minister: will he stand by the commitments that he made back 

when he was in opposition? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

find it amazing that the member opposite talks about 

commitments that I had talked about when we were in 

opposition. When I was in opposition and sitting on that side of 

the House, that drought was in the works for three years. And 

what did that previous government do? If I remember right, 

absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I guess that’s actually in line with what they did for 

agriculture for the 16 years they were in power. Not just in the 

Southwest, all over Saskatchewan — they totally ignored rural 

Saskatchewan, did absolutely nothing for the benefit of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. For 16 

years they totally ignored rural Saskatchewan farmers and 

ranchers, but they seemed to find $100 million for Domtar in a 

sweetheart deal just before the election. So I find a problem 

when that member on that side asks me what we’re going to do 

when we are dealing with problems down there when they did 

nothing for 16 years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s no money for 

Domtar, and obviously there’s no money for drought-stricken 

farmers. I understand that the minister was down in the 

Southwest recently visiting drought-stricken areas and meeting 

with the Southwest Drought Disaster Committee. Committee 

member Allan Oliver was quoted in the Prairie Post shortly 

after the visit, and here’s what he had to say, quote: 

 

“On December 6, 2006 we all descended on the 

Legislature and . . . [the] then Opposition Leader was 

really pressing for fairness and an acreage payment” . . . 

“But now there’s no commitment.” 

 

To the minister: will he make that commitment today? Will he 

promise Saskatchewan producers . . . or will he keep his word 

that he made to those producers in December ’06? Will he 

commit to a per acre payout for those producers that are struck 

with the fourth year of drought? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yes I did tour the 

Southwest. And I might mention that they also made the 

comment they’d asked previous ministers that come from that 

side of the House and wouldn’t go down to even take a look for 

the last three years to see how bad it was. I have been down 

there. I have made the commitment that right after seeding, I’m 

going to go back and see if the problem is even worse than it 

was before. We’re following that program really close, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I might also add that we have, the education tax on farm land 

and ranchland is another . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Member Responsible for 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to go back because I think it’s very important. 

We made a commitment during the election that we would deal 

with the education tax on farm land and ranchland. We’ve 

honoured that commitment. Promise made, promise kept, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Have we solved, Mr. Speaker, all the problems in the 

Southwest? Not even close. We’re going to be following it very 

closely. And I’ve made the commitment that following seeding, 

I’m going to go back down there and take more time and deal 

with the producers in that area. And we’ll see what comes, if no 

rain or snow comes by that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Court Services in Humboldt 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, apparently ready for growth 

doesn’t apply in Humboldt. With over one and a half billion 

dollars in the bank, the Minister of Justice has decided to cut 

service at the Court of Queen’s Bench in Humboldt effective 

June 1. The cut will mean decreased access to court services for 

the residents of the Humboldt area. 

 

The people of Humboldt find it strange that the Sask Party 

government, self-declared defender of rural Saskatchewan, is 

now using its first budget to tell the people of Humboldt they 

can go to Saskatoon to get their court services. 

 

To the minister: Why is he attacking rural Saskatchewan by 

cutting justice services in Humboldt? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. We carefully analyzed all of the needs 

as we went through the budgeting process. And I can advise the 

member opposite and I can advise the members of the public 

that provincial court services will continue to be provided in 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

Humboldt, as well as chamber services and a number of other 

court services. 

 

What will no longer be provided in Humboldt will be the 

opportunity to do Queen’s Bench trials. In the last year, there 

was only four trials done, and it required a full-time staff person 

there. So we believe it’s an effective use of our money to have 

those trials conducted in Saskatoon which is just barely an hour 

away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Justice minister’s axing of 

court services in Humboldt is causing concern about access to 

justice. And we understand about the Provincial Court. But this 

decision means increased costs associated with filing 

documents online, and it will also mean clients will be on the 

hook for additional travel time and expenses for their lawyers to 

go to court. 

 

Humboldt lawyer, Amber Biemans says the extra costs for 

clients may mean someone who needs more child support won’t 

have enough money to pay a lawyer to make an application for 

more, and she argues that the decision will mean some people, 

quote, “can’t afford justice.” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If members would pay attention, the 

member presenting the question will have the opportunity to 

present it. I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — What was the minister’s response to concerns 

that his decision will limit access to justice? He, quote, “hopes 

not.” To the minister: with over a billion and a half dollars in 

the bank, why is he making decisions which mean some living 

in rural Saskatchewan won’t be able to afford justice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question 

from the member opposite. We too share the concerns about 

access to justice and want to ensure that justice will continue to 

be made available as required to all citizens of the province. 

And that’s why we were looking at things such as online filing 

of documents, video teleconferencing between points in the Far 

North, and a variety of other options to ensure that we can 

continue to provide services. 

 

I can advise, Mr. Speaker, that courthouses in the past have 

been closed. Kerrobert was closed some years ago under a 

previous administration. 

 

And it’s our intention to make sure that the citizens of 

Humboldt are well served. I can advise that there’s been a 

commitment to build Highway 368 in Humboldt, school 

commitments in that area as well. It’s not our intention to 

abandon that community. It’s an important community in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it seems everyone but the Minister 

of Social Services is concerned about the cut’s impact on her 

city of Humboldt. When contacted by the president of the 

Humboldt Bar Association, the minister couldn’t have 

expressed less concern, even if she tried. She thanked him for 

bringing his concern to her attention, adding that she 

understood he had already met with the Justice minister and 

doubted she had anything to add. But if he insisted on pursuing 

the matter further, she would be available to meet on May 20 — 

11 whole days before the closure is scheduled to occur. 

 

To the Minister of Social Services: why is she so indifferent to 

a cut that affects justice, access to justice, and justice in her 

community? She’s already had one budget do-over. Can she get 

another one for her own people in the city of Humboldt? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would 

just like to state the commitment that this government has had 

to the city of Humboldt. The city of Humboldt and area has 

been asking for years for something to be done with Highway 

368, and this government is going to fix Highway 368. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the city of Humboldt has 

been asking for years for a hospital. And this year it’s gone to 

tender, and if there’s a cost overrun, we will cover the cost 

overrun on that hospital. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Humboldt has been 

asking for years for a new high school, and this year we 

announced our commitment to a new high school in Humboldt. 

That’s what we’re doing for Humboldt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The lawyers in Humboldt, without 

talking to me, expressed concerns in the Humboldt Journal of 

this particular issue. My office had not one phone call of 

concern on this issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!, 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in 2000, our government reversed 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

the pending decision to cut court services in Humboldt after 

listening to the public outcry, including that of the opposition. 

The Premier had some pretty interesting things to say when the 

closure was being considered. He railed against the government 

for considering closing services saying, quote: 

 

There appears to be $500,000 in the Justice department 

budget for increased administration, increased salaries of 

the minister’s advisers and staff, and yet not enough to 

keep court houses open in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Interesting that in 2000 the Premier was opposed to pay hikes 

for ministerial staff and advisers and the closure of rural court 

services, but eight short years later he is perfectly in favour of 

both. To the Premier: why say one thing and then do another? 

How many of his personal advisers would he have to fire to 

keep court services open in Humboldt? One, maybe two. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this 

province expect us to make efficient use of their money. They 

give us money with the expectation that we have to make 

sometimes difficult decisions. But to maintain a courthouse and 

maintain courthouse staff for a total of four trials — that’s one 

trial every three months — when we’ve got another judicial 

centre less than an hour away is just not an effective or efficient 

use of taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, ensured that there is chambers that will 

be held in Humboldt at least once a month. Provincial Court 

will meet there regularly. The facility will be kept. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we intend to work with the legal community in 

Humboldt to make sure that they’re able to file documents and 

be able to conduct their law practices in an effective and 

appropriate manner, unlike the NDP who closed the Maidstone 

Provincial Court House in its entirety, and that community lost 

its access to justice entirely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Consultation Regarding The Education Amendment Act 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — On Monday in committee, the Minister 

of Education was asked about the impact of Bill 29 on children 

with disabilities, specifically section 178. He said he had 

consulted extensively with groups and stated the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living. And I quote: “And there is 

support from those organizations as well. So the amendments 

that we’re proposing are well supported by everyone.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today the Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living issued a news release calling the legislation, 

I quote “regressive, shocking and simply unacceptable.” To the 

minister: did he really not know how the group felt about this 

legislation? Or did he knowingly mislead the public. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, the 

questions that were asked of me during the debate on The 

Education Act were extensive. We were talking about numerous 

sections, and one of them has been around the use of proper 

words, proper phrases to identify students with disabilities, 

deficiencies, and that term is now being changed to pupils with 

intensive needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the information that I was provided at the meeting 

is what I provided to the question posed by the member 

opposite. And it indicated, Mr. Speaker, that there were 

numerous organizations that had been consulted, which 

included the Saskatchewan Association of Community Living. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just want to remind members 

that in their responses and in their questions to be aware of what 

has, over the past number of years, been acceptable language. 

And knowingly misleading is not necessarily language that has 

been acceptable in the Chamber. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, so it’s he said, she said 

here. Well that’s not fair. It is clear the consultation process 

wasn’t as inclusive as the minister would have us believe. 

 

While the minister claimed on Monday that he consulted with 

groups such as the Saskatchewan Association of Community 

Living, we know now that that’s not true. Mr. Speaker, the 

SACL [Saskatchewan Association of Community Living] 

states, they have not been consulted by the Ministry of 

Education since August 2007, and despite making numerous 

requests to the ministry for meetings and information prior to 

the tabling of Bill 29, they were, and I quote, “denied 

participation in this process.” 

 

To the minister, why did he say he consulted with the SACL 

when it is clear he did not? Will he commit to listening now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

do want to indicate to this Assembly that the press report that 

the member opposite refers to was discussed yesterday because 

my office received a phone call from SACL to actually ask for 

clarification on the very thing that he has asked, Mr. Speaker. 

So that’s not new to my office. 

 

The discussions have been going on for years, Mr. Speaker. 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

They were going on by the former minister of Education in 

response to the new kind of terminology that is needed, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my office took office on November 21, 

that’s when I became the Minister of Education. There were 

many discussions that have . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there are . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

indicated, my staff indicated yesterday to the people from the 

SACL that we’re going to work with them to determine how 

they feel that they weren’t consulted. Was it the previous 

government, was it the previous government who had indicated 

in their responses, in their reports, in all of the material that my 

ministry has, was it their officials who did not do the 

consultation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — For the minister to shame Community 

Living in that way is absolutely ridiculous. This creation of this 

legislation has been faulted from the start. To say he’s consulted 

one day ago is an absolute joke. SACL President Laurie Larson 

says that the last draft of the legislation they saw was in August. 

And they expressed concerns at that time. 

 

Since the election, despite requests, desire, and willingness to 

be involved, communication has been . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member has the right to 

place his question. The member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Since the election, despite requests, 

desire and willingness to be involved, communication has been 

nonexistent. They were shocked to see that the legislation 

tabled by the minister not only failed to address their concerns, 

but that it moved in the opposite direction — a direction they 

say is regressive, shocking, and simply unacceptable. 

 

To the minister, with such grave concerns from disabilities 

experts, why did he boldly proceed with section 178 of the Act? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I think the other night 

when I was asked by that member who the traditional 

stakeholders were and who is involved in consultations, I made 

it pretty clear that the traditional stakeholders are the SSBA 

[Saskatchewan School Boards Association], the STF 

[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], LEADS [League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents], 

and SASBO [Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials], and the Government of Saskatchewan. Those are the 

traditional stakeholders. Those were the stakeholders used by 

the NDP for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the changes to The Education Act, I indicated 

that I wanted to broaden that consultation process. And I asked 

for input from SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association], SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], and the SOS [Save Our Schools]. Mr. Speaker, 

I did not involve all of the agencies, all of the boards, all of the 

groups in the province of Saskatchewan. I asked for input from 

those additional groups, Mr. Speaker, and we received some 

information. 

 

So for a period of time, there was consultation with the 

traditional stakeholders. There has been drafts that have been 

developed, and there has been input, Mr. Speaker. Not all the 

requests of the groups in the province of Saskatchewan are 

included this time around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The speaker’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well the minister has to, I guess, dispute 

this with Hansard because he stated very clearly that he 

consulted with Community Living on Monday night. 

 

It’s clear there are legitimate concerns about what the minister’s 

legislation means for children with disabilities. Groups 

representing those children say they have not been listened to, 

that the minister’s legislation is regressive and shocking, and 

that it is a threat to the rights of children with disabilities. 

 

I have a simple question for the minister. With these grave 

concerns, will he commit today to holding off on proclamation 

of this Act until he can consult with the Saskatchewan 

Association of Community Living and other concerned 

stakeholders? Will he commit to this today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the information that I 

provided to the member opposite on the night before last is this. 

Mr. Speaker, I indicated who the ministry had consulted with. I 

did not say I. Mr. Speaker, I did not say I as the Minister of 

Education because I have not been involved in the discussions 

with all of our partners. There have been four meetings, Mr. 

Speaker, and there will be a fifth meeting planned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There will be discussions with all of those stakeholders. We 

will continue to want to improve The Education Act, Mr. 

Speaker. I promise the member . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member had the opportunity to 

place the question; allow the minister the opportunity to 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I promise the member 

opposite that we will continue to work over the next number of 

years with all the stakeholders to indeed develop changes to the 

Act that will improve education in the province of 

Saskatchewan, unlike the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. Order. The member from Regina Rosemont will 

come to order. I’ll allow the member from Saskatoon Fairview 

to place his question. 

 

Privacy and Consultation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a lot of talk in 

this House recently on the subject of personal, private 

information. I’m wondering if the Minister of Labour can tell 

this House how highly he values the privacy of individuals who 

contact his office with valid disagreements about his public 

policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question. 

Mr. Speaker, obviously the Bills 5 and 6 have generated a great 

degree of interest right across that policy community. As I’ve 

said, we’ve consulted widely on this. We sent out over 84 

letters of invitation. What we’ve seen is feedback. We’ve met 

with over 100 or nearly 100 stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. And so 

what we can say, Mr. Speaker, is that obviously there’s a 

variety of opinions out there. We engage in any number of 

discussions and dialogues on these issues, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re happy to do so, especially with attentive citizens of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the member is true to form, 

still not answering questions on the question I asked about 

privacy and his respect for it. But, Mr. Speaker, we heard 

yesterday how the Minister of Labour and his colleagues in the 

Sask Party don’t respect their constituents enough to actually 

meet with them and apparently they, we now know that they 

don’t respect their privacy much either. 

 

I’d like to table an email letter sent from the minister’s office to 

almost 1,300 people who wrote to him with concerns about 

Bills 5 and 6. Mr. Speaker, what’s interesting is that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

what’s interesting is that when he sent the letter, he forgot to 

hide the email addresses of every single person who had 

contacted him. In other words, Mr. Speaker, everyone who 

received the letter also received the personal email address of 

1,300 other individuals who wrote to the minister. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: does he at the very least care 

about the privacy of people who do agree with him, or does he 

not care about anyone’s privacy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question, and as the document’s tabled, I’m happy to have a 

look at it, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the members from the 

official opposition have floated various documents around, and 

I’m happy to have a look at it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Private Bills 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Private Bills to report Private Bill 

No. 901 The Briercrest College and Seminary Amendment Act, 

2008 without amendment and to present its second report. I 

move: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

waive consideration in the Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and that the Bill be now read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw North has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

Whole on Bill No. 901, The Briercrest College and Seminary 

Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 901 — The Briercrest College and Seminary 

Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 

Bill now be read for the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Moose Jaw North that Bill No. 901, The Briercrest College and 

Seminary Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

28, The Vital Statistics Administration . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 

Bill No. 28, The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the minister responsible for Crown and 

central agencies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that this Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister of Crown and central agencies 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 28, The Vital Statistics Administration 

Transfer Act. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading of the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 — The Vital Statistics Administration 

Transfer Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this Bill be now read for the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister of Crown and central agencies 

has moved that Bill No. 28, The Vital Statistics Administration 

Transfer Act be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

27, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The chairman of the Crown and Central . . . 

Just give me one second here. I got ahead of myself. The Chair 

of Crown and Central Agencies has moved that Bill No. 27, The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read the second time. I recognize the Government Services 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that this Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Government 

Services has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 27, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act and that the Bill be now 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 27 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant 

la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des 

boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Government Services that Bill No. 27, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the standing 

committee on Crown corporations. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 1, 

The Growth and Financial Security Act without amendment. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 1, The Growth and Financial Security Act and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 1, The Growth and Financial Security Act be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

10, The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of 

Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

10, The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of 

Pension) Amendment Act, 2008. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading of the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 10 — The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes 

(Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 10, The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes 

(Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

35, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in the 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

35, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 35, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

38, The Corporate Capital Tax Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

38, The Corporate Capital Tax Act and that the Bill be now read 

the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

Minister of Finance. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 38 — The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 35, The Corporate Capital Tax Act be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 3, The 

Potash Development Repeal Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Resources 

and Energy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the 

Whole on this Bill and that this Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on Bill No. 3, The Potash Development Repeal Act and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading of the Bill. I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Potash Development Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources that Bill No. 3, The 

Potash Development Repeal Act be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 19, The 

Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 19, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading of this Bill. I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 19 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Social 

Services that Bill No. 19, The Social Workers Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 21, The 

Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 



1154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 21, The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 

Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 21, The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 22, The 

Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 22, The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading of the Bill. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 22 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill now be read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 22, The Irrigation Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 8, The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 8, The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 

2008 and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to move 

third reading. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 



April 30, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1155 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 8, The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES 

AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to submit 

further estimates accompanied by a message from His Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — Would members please rise for the message 

from His Honour. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits further estimates of 

certain sums required for the service of the province for 

the 12 months ending March 31, 2009, and recommends 

the same to the Legislative Assembly. The Honourable 

Gordon L. Barnhart, Lieutenant Governor, province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Please be seated. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure on 

behalf of the government to table the answer to questions 595 to 

615. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 595 to 615 tabled. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the good work of the committees to proceed, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. to allow for the 

workings of committees. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:51.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1139 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1139 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1139 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1139 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1140 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1141 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1141 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1141 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1141 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1141 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1142 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1142 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Volunteer Week 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1142 

 Documents for Provincial Archives 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1142 

 Keepers of the Land 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1143 

 Dancing with Regina’s Stars 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1143 

 Moose Jaw School Participates in Jump Rope for Heart 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1143 

 Silver Ring Ceremony 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1143 

 Opposition to Bill 5 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1144 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Drought Assistance for the Southwest 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1144 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1144 

 Court Services in Humboldt 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1145 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1145 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1146 

 Consultation Regarding The Education Amendment Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1147 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1147 

 Privacy and Consultation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1149 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1149 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1149 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1150 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1153 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 901 — The Briercrest College and Seminary Amendment Act, 2008 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1150 

 



 

 Bill No. 28 — The Vital Statistics Administration Transfer Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1150 

 Bill No. 27 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2008/ 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hasard 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1151 

 Bill No. 1 — The Growth and Financial Security Act 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1151 

 Bill No. 10 — The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1151 

 Bill No. 35 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1152 

 Bill No. 38 — The Corporate Capital Tax Act 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1152 

 Bill No. 3 — The Potash Development Repeal Act 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1153 

 Bill No. 19 — The Social Workers Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1153 

 Bill No. 21 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2008 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1154 

 Bill No. 22 — The Irrigation Amendment Act, 2008 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1154 

 Bill No. 8 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1155 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1155 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1155 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 




