




















































Hansard: April 29, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 34A  TUESDAY, APRIL 29, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1123 

 April 29, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is an honour to introduce three very distinguished 

people seated in your gallery to watch the proceedings this 

evening. They‟re actually accompanied by others as well, but I 

will introduce three. 

 

During the noon hour today, a number of members from this 

Legislative Assembly on both sides of the aisle had the great 

honour and privilege of participating in a very important 

ceremony to mark the Holodomor, the Ukrainian 

famine-genocide, and it was marked with the presenting, first, 

and then the passing of a flame. 

 

Joining us today, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is Orest 

Warnyca, president of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. With 

him is Ed Lysyk, president of the Saskatchewan Provincial 

Council of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress; and joining them 

today, a very, very special guest from Ontario, Mr. Stefan 

Horlatsch who is the flame bearer that was here for the 

ceremony and now joined us in the gallery. Mr. Horlatsch was 

born in 1921 in Ukraine. During the famine-genocide, his 

family had their land, their livestock, and their grain forcibly 

seized by Soviet authorities. Eleven members of his family 

perished, Mr. Speaker, so his attendance today here is truly 

remarkable as is his passion for freedom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the height of this man-made famine, this 

genocide, Ukrainians were dying at a rate of 25,000 per day. 

And we owe it to Mr. Horlatsch and those who perished and 

those others who have survived to make a very solemn vow 

today that these events will just simply never, ever happen 

again, and because that they are remembered in this way, that 

they will not be repeated. 

 

The government was asked today, by the way, for our support 

for legislation to recognize Holodomor in terms of 

remembrance and to set aside the last Saturday in November. 

We‟ll work on the details with other provinces that have done 

this, with the congress as well, but I want to say that we will be 

moving forward with that in this Legislative Assembly at the 

appropriate time. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Horlatsch has been a great 

friend of freedom. I should also say this though, if you can 

recognize him — and maybe he‟ll just stand — that at 87 years 

old, freedom‟s fight has also been good for Mr. Horlatsch. 

 

We welcome all of them here to this Assembly today. Thank 

you for coming. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I would also like to join 

the Premier in recognizing Stefan Horlatsch from Toronto, 

Ontario. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank somebody, as when I see 

Orest Warnyca and Ed Lysyk, president, and recognize them as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank somebody in Yorkton, Mrs. 

Merle Maximiuk, who last night invited me to her house so I 

could meet with Mr. Horlatsch, and we discussed some 

concerns that he had in his travels and the things that he‟s been 

doing. And I find out this morning, Mr. Speaker, that Mrs. 

Maximiuk is related to . . . her cousin lives across the street 

from my mom, and they visit for tea all the time. So they would 

be watching here tonight, but you know how that goes, Mr. 

Speaker, in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I was in Yorkton last night, we had a chance 

to visit, and I want to particularly commend Mr. Horlatsch on 

his commitment to this cause in bringing public attention to the 

famine and genocide that occurred in Ukraine in 1932 and 

1933. Mr. Horlatsch also told me that he came to Canada in 

1948. And, Mr. Speaker, what he told me was, he followed his 

girlfriend to Canada. And now there‟s a sound immigration 

policy, I think, if we were to have one. 

 

So I would thank you very much for the meeting. And I would 

ask all members to join me in welcoming our special guest to 

the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Good afternoon, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

Through you and to you I‟d like to introduce my friend and 

partner, Deputy Chief Gary Broste seated in the west gallery. 

Gary‟s had 32 years of policing in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 

serving the citizens. 

 

In 1983 he was awarded the medal of bravery in the Carnegie 

Hero award for going into the river after two drowning victims 

and rescuing them. He‟s also served on the emergency response 

team, and was lucky enough to be shot at while he was behind a 

garbage can. And I would like to welcome him through you 

today to his Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you I‟d like to introduce a very special guest to me. 

In your east gallery is my daughter Alison. 

 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2008 

It‟s been quite a week. She has finished her law degree at the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan], is now on her way to 

Toronto to do her articling with Stikeman Elliot. So it‟s been 

quite a time. She has found an interest in corporate commercial 

law. I‟m not sure where that comes from. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

would ask all members to welcome her to the House and wish 

her to come back soon. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and all members of the Assembly, I‟d like to introduce a 

group of 70 grade 11 and 12 students seated in your gallery. 

They are the students on the Interchange on Canadian Studies. 

They are from Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School here in 

Regina. I would ask all members here this afternoon to 

welcome them to their legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

my pleasure to join with the Minister of Intergovernmental 

Affairs to welcome this group of students from Dr. Martin 

LeBoldus High School in my constituency. They are 

accompanied by Dale Reed, the teacher responsible. And it‟s 

because of the efforts of people like Dale Reed that Dr. Martin 

LeBoldus High School enjoys an enviable reputation in Regina. 

And so again I want to join with the minister in extending a 

warm welcome to Mr. Reed and the students here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like 

to introduce to you and through you seated in the west gallery 

Mr. Lance Grosco of Duck Lake. And I don‟t recognize the rest 

of the group that he‟s with today. But Lance is the president of 

the Saskatchewan Hotel and Hospitality Association. And I 

would ask everyone to welcome him and the group that he is 

with to the legislature today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to introduce to you and through to all members of the 

Assembly a gentleman who just celebrated his 35th year as a 

civil servant in this province working for the Ministry of the 

Environment, serving in all parts of our province and for about 

the last 25 years in the community of Meadow Lake. Also 

happens to be my dad, Tom Harrison, in the west gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the information of 

our member of Liquor and Gaming, the rest of the people in that 

constituency is the town council from the beautiful city of Duck 

Lake. Welcome and thank you for being here at your 

legislature. I‟d ask everyone to give them a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I‟d 

like to present petitions from the good citizens of Saskatchewan 

who are concerned with Bills 5 and 6 proceeding without 

meaningful and comprehensive public consultations. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw The 

Public Service Essential Services Act, Bill 5, and The 

Trade Union Amendment Act, 2007, Bill 6, and hold 

broad public consultations about labour relations in the 

province. 

 

These petitions are signed by the good folks from Hudson Bay, 

Arborfield, Carrot River, Nipawin, Love, White Fox, Lashburn, 

Mervin, Lloydminster, Humboldt, St. Gregor, North Battleford, 

Wilkie, and Scott, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m very pleased to rise and present a petition on 

behalf of health care in the Five Hills Health Region and in 

particular to the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. And the petition 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of my Moose Jaw constituents. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition concerning the Sask Party‟s 

decision to axe Station 20 West. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 



April 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are from 

Saskatoon from both sides of the river. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Ukrainian Holodomor Remembrance Flame 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Further to the earlier introductions, I too would like to welcome 

our distinguished visitors today. This was a solemn day of 

remembrance as the Holodomor Remembrance Flame came to 

the steps of this Assembly during the noon hour. 

 

The Remembrance Flame is part of an effort by the Ukraine‟s 

foreign ministry to mark the 75th anniversary of the Holodomor 

famine-genocide. The flame started in Australia and will travel 

through 33 countries before it reaches Ukraine in November of 

this year. 

 

The event in Regina is titled “Keep the Flame Live” and is 

sponsored by the Ukrainian Canadian Congress. The event was 

designed to help us remember the victims of this terrible 

tragedy and ensure the story is communicated so that similar 

atrocities can be avoided in the future. 

 

It is indeed sadly ironic that, in one of the richest agricultural 

areas of the world, people were forced by a foreign government 

into starvation and death. In some cases, grain supplies were 

confiscated down to the last seed. People were isolated by army 

units so that they could not go out searching for food in 

neighbouring regions, and through it all the Soviet government 

refused to acknowledge starvation in Ukraine and turned down 

assistance offered by other countries and international agencies 

like the Red Cross. 

 

Parliamentarians and the public must not forget this dark 

chapter in human history. We are also obliged to honour and 

remember today the many people of Ukrainian descent in our 

province and in our country who lost loved ones in this horrible 

man-made famine. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, at noon today there was a 

gathering on the steps here at the legislature. At the centre of 

the gathering was the Holodomor Remembrance Flame, a flame 

that has been travelling across the world this year in 

commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the famine-genocide 

that occurred in the Ukraine in 1932 and 1933. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as many as 10 million people died, one-third of 

them children, as a result of this man-made famine under 

Joseph Stalin‟s harsh and dictatorial regime. At the height of the 

famine, Ukrainians were dying at a rate of 1,000 per hour, 

25,000 perishing in a day. The Government of Ukraine, the 

United States House of Representatives, the United States 

Senate, the Senate of Canada, UNESCO [United Nations 

Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization], the United 

Nations, and over 40 other jurisdictions around the world have 

officially condemned the Holodomor or recognized it as 

genocide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Holodomor Remembrance Flame is escorted 

here by Mr. Stefan Horlatsch. Mr. Horlatsch is a survivor of 

that not-so-long-ago atrocity and a living reminder of both the 

Holodomor and our ability as a people to not only survive but to 

transcend and maintain our humanity in the face of the most 

monstrous of events. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Horlatsch and the members of Regina‟s 

Ukrainian community are here today to keep the flame alive, to 

remember the victims of the Holodomor, and to ensure the story 

is passed on. I want to thank them for this important work. 

Through the efforts of people like them, we may reach a time 

when such atrocities are no longer repeated. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Thunder Creek. 

 

Pense School Earns Earth School 2 Designation 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Debbie 

Quinlan has been encouraging her students at Pense elementary 

school to do their part to protect the environment for the past 16 

years. She wanted Pense to be a green school. Last week the 

Pense School was recognized by the Green School program and 

became the 14th school in Canada to earn the Earth School 2 

designation. 

 

Debbie Quinlan who acted as the program coordinator said 

Pense School joined the program in 1992, 16 years ago. The 

students and staff completed 1,000 projects to earn an Earth 

School. The Green School program then decided to extend its 

program, and if a school completed an additional 1,000 

projects, it could become an Earth School 2 which Pense did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, staff and students have held rummage sales, 

written and presented plays about the environment, designed 

T-shirts with environmental messages, became involved in 

energy conservation and recycling initiatives, created a climate 

change video, and planted dozens of trees and flowers in the 

schoolyard. 

 

Debbie Quinlan has had a 30-year career as a teacher and, 

incidentally, taught all of my three children during those years. 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2008 

She said she hopes she has been able to foster and instill in the 

students a lifelong sense of civic responsibility and the need for 

good environmental stewardship, and I know she has. My 

congratulations to Debbie Quinlan and Pense School on this 

wonderful achievement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Thai Food and Cultural Night 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it was my very great 

pleasure yesterday to attend, along with 300 other people, the 

Thai Food and Cultural Night at the University of Regina. 

 

Did I say pleasure? Mr. Speaker, the food was superb, the 

hospitality warm and real, and the dance and music 

performances were captivating and entertaining. Although not 

much appreciated in this Assembly, the speeches were short and 

to the point. 

 

The Student Association of Thais at the University of Regina 

organized this fun evening. This student body is the largest and 

arguably the most active Thai student society in Canada. 

Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, these Regina students have received 

many visits by the Thai ambassador. Last night the deputy chief 

of mission represented the Royal Thai Embassy in Ottawa. 

 

One of the goals of the student association is to promote a 

positive image of Thai culture and the Kingdom of Thailand. 

Well they certainly succeeded with their goal. People left happy 

and with a deep appreciation of Thai food, culture, and Thai 

people. Last night‟s theme was “Unseen Thailand,” and the 

focus was on scenic locations in Thailand. We all left better 

informed and looking for the nearest travel agency. 

 

Please join me in congratulating the Student Association of 

Thais at the University of Regina on their successful event, and 

in particular the president of the association, Punnamee 

Sachakamol, and vice-president, Supranee Lisawadi, on their 

organizational leadership. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Highlighting a Local Writer 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, as National Poetry Month draws 

to a close, I would like to take this opportunity to highlight the 

literary successes of one of our own provincial writers, Rita 

Bouvier. Ms. Bouvier‟s poem, “Better that Way,” is the latest 

publishing project by Gabriel Dumont Institute in Saskatoon. 

 

“Better that Way” is a poem written by Ms. Bouvier that has 

been adapted into a children‟s book and contains text in both 

English and Michif. The beautiful, colourful illustrations were 

done by Sherry Racette, and the Northern Michif translation 

was done by Margaret Hodgson. 

 

Not only is this a wonderful opportunity to highlight a local 

writer, illustrator, and publisher, but also to relate the important 

message of Ms. Bouvier‟s mother, Annie, who told her that 

passing on our knowledge and wisdom to our children is a 

sacred act of love. The last lines of this poem about growing up 

are: 

 

when your mother tells you 

that she loves you to the moon 

and back times infinity 

try to out-do the immensity 

of the love she describes to you; 

there really is no end to it. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Michif.] 

 

finally, believe what you say 

or don‟t say anything at all; 

it is better that way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

True Ambassador for Prince Albert 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well he‟s done it again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Prince Albert was host to the 19th annual 

Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards on April 11 

and 12, and I‟m pleased to report that Prince Albert‟s own 

Donny Parenteau won two of the four awards he was nominated 

for on Saturday and all five awards he was nominated for on 

Sunday. 

 

On Saturday Donny won in two categories: all-star band fiddle 

and backup band. On Sunday Donny won for Song of the Year 

for Father Time, Single of the Year for Postmarked Heaven. He 

also won in the categories of Aboriginal Artist of the Year, 

Male Vocalist of the Year, and Fans‟ Choice Entertainer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Donny‟s friends and family watched with pride as 

he accepted his awards. Donny acknowledged his father who 

passed away in 1990 and, Mr. Speaker, two of his songs — 

Father Time and Postmarked Heaven — were dedicated to his 

father. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Donny returned to Prince Albert in 2003 to 

embark on his solo career after spending many years in 

Nashville. He continues to be a true ambassador for Prince 

Albert and indeed for Saskatchewan. His pride in his 

hometown, his heritage, his family, his music, and his infectious 

personality are evident in everything that he does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

acknowledging the accomplishments of Donny Parenteau and in 

extending him congratulations on his success at the SCMA 

[Saskatchewan Country Music Association] Awards. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 



April 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

Lloydminster Super Cities Walk 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the great 

pleasure of attending Lloydminster‟s 10th annual Super Cities 

Walk for MS [multiple sclerosis] this past Saturday morning. 

The walk route started at Lakeland College, then around the 

lake at Bud Miller Park and through the city, allowing 

participants to do either the 1-, 5-, or 10-kilometre walks. 

 

Johanna Green, the CEO [chief executive officer] and walk 

coordinator of the MS Society along with Darrel Frisken, 

president of the board, planned and executed a terrific day. 

They marshalled 80 eager and friendly volunteers in a smooth 

run event. They also had the help of the Lloydminster Junior A 

Bobcats hockey team to warm up the participants before the 

walk began. 

 

The Lloydminster walk is one of the largest in Western Canada 

with over $125,000 raised through the footsteps of over 400 

walkers. After a week of snow and wind in Lloydminster, we 

awoke Saturday morning to find a beautiful day for the event. 

They had the trails cleared and they had put up warming tents 

along the way just in case. Mr. Speaker, after two and a half 

months here in the legislature, I was particularly appreciative 

that the route was so well marked. If I had missed the 

1-kilometre walk turnoff and had got caught on the 

10-kilometre loop, Mr. Speaker, I may not have made it back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

Johanna, Darrel, and the many other organizers and volunteers 

for this worthwhile walk. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to oral questions, I‟d just 

like to remind members that we‟re not to use props of any kind 

at any time, whether members‟ statements or question period. If 

members would just keep that in mind, that would be 

appreciated. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Support for Regional Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Advanced Education fancies himself, quote, “a political 

scientist.” As a political scientist, he ought to know the 

importance of listening to stakeholders. The Association of 

Saskatchewan Regional Colleges has said that the Sask Party‟s 

budget falls far short of helping regional colleges share in the 

economic boom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, both the Minister of Social Services and the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs have been allowed to rewrite 

their own budgets. When can we expect the Minister of 

Advanced Education to rewrite his budget to correct his failure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question. What we‟ve inherited, Mr. Speaker, is a lack of a 

post-secondary or advanced education system. As it was 

formerly organized, what we saw are two different streams. 

That is, under SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] there were regional colleges 

organized, and under the universities there were affiliated 

associate college and federated colleges. 

 

What we‟ve said, Mr. Speaker, is we want to come up with a 

post-secondary system that Saskatchewan should and have had 

in place for years. Other jurisdictions have had this. So what 

we‟re moving forward on, Mr. Speaker, is we‟re hiring a new 

ADM [assistant deputy minister] within this area to help make 

sure that we‟re staffed up, to make sure that we can actually 

move forward on a strategy, thereby we can begin to 

contemplate in the coming years how we‟re going to make sure 

that the resources needed actually are commensurate with the 

strategy that that government did not put in place and this 

government will be happy to put in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll the take the word of regional 

college Chairs over the word of that minister any day of the 

week. 

 

A letter written to the minister and co-signed by every single 

regional college states that the regional colleges association is, 

quote, “. . . shocked at the level of funding allocated to 

Regional Colleges for technical and trades training.” Training 

institutions are saying that there‟s not nearly enough money in 

this budget for new programming or training seats. In fact some 

may even be looking at program reductions. Mr. Speaker, all 

this from a government which used to call a labour shortage a 

crisis. 

 

To the minister: with the government sitting on more than $1 

billion, why is he doing so little to help train the workers of 

tomorrow, especially the workers outside major urban centres? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate 

the question on this. What we‟ve seen in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is what we‟ve done is focused on 5,500 training seats, 

Mr. Speaker. That does not include the $5 million that will be 

going towards community-based organizations. 

 

But I think what this really highlights, Mr. Speaker, is that there 



1128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2008 

was recently a meeting held by board Chairs, board members, 

and some of the CEOs of the regional colleges, Mr. Speaker. I 

went to that meeting, Mr. Speaker; I spoke with them; I said 

this is the beginning of a dialogue. During the coming months, 

during the summer I‟m actually going to be going out to the 

respective institutions, better understanding their institutional 

needs. 

 

And as I‟ve said, Mr. Speaker, we‟re focusing on moving 

forward on a strategy rather than ad hoc approach that the 

former government had practised where the institution 

standards should be mutually reinforcing, Mr. Speaker. Again 

the legacy of the previous government is that there was no 

strategy in place. As we move forward with investments on 

training, Mr. Speaker, within the budget, we are also going to 

be moving forward in the coming months on the development 

of a strategy for advanced education in Saskatchewan. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Stall, stall, stall, Mr. Speaker. With more than 

$1 billion in the bank, they should be doing more. I‟ll continue 

to quote from the letter: Quote, “. . . with the exception of a 

very few . . . adult basic education seats on reserve, regional 

colleges received no meaningful increase in programming 

capacity funds.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not only ongoing programming funds 

that are inadequate. It‟s also capital funding. Out of the 

so-called historic $1 billion in infrastructure, a measly $800,000 

is being devoted to regional colleges for capital projects. Last 

year the NDP devoted over 2 million just for renovations to the 

Cumberland College in Nipawin. 

 

To the Minister of AEEL [Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour]: why does his budget so horribly ignore the 

infrastructure needs of regional colleges? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, I would just 

like to remind members that sometimes it gets very difficult to 

hear either the question or the response as members engage in 

other dialogue. I would ask members to have respect to the 

person who has the floor. 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again, thank you, Mr. Speaker. What 

we‟re working, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re working on is to 

overcome a significant infrastructure deficit left by the 

opposition members. So what we‟ve done, Mr. Speaker, in this 

budget — obviously a $1 billion infrastructure initiative, Mr. 

Speaker — part of those funds are going towards advanced 

educational . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, part of 

what we‟re doing is working to overcome this very significant 

infrastructure deficit left by the previous government, Mr. 

Speaker. What we‟ve done, as I‟ve said, is we, on a go-forward 

basis, we‟re hiring a new ADM where we can actually integrate 

the institutions into a much more comprehensive strategy. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re doing is we‟re getting out, 

out to the regional colleges. That work is already begun. I was 

recently out visiting with the president of Lakeland College, 

Mr. Speaker. That work is under way. What we‟re doing, Mr. 

Speaker, is ensuring that there‟s a strategy. With that strategy 

will be commensurate resources, Mr. Speaker, and the whole 

approach on this is to overcome the deficit left over by the 

previous government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know that people who are 

trained near their home communities are far more likely to stay 

and work in those communities. And we know that regional 

colleges are a very important part of what this minister often 

refers to as the rich tapestry that is our post-secondary sector. 

Unfortunately his walk doesn‟t match his talk and regional 

colleges are feeling left out. The minister of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs was able to 

rewrite his budget to make up for shortchanging municipalities. 

The Minister of Social Services was able to rewrite her budget 

when she failed to comprehend what she had actually approved. 

To the minister: when will he rewrite his budget, and this time 

will he speak up for regional colleges? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we can do is 

maybe offer a tutorial on how to read budgets. Because what we 

see, Mr. Speaker, is a $4 million increase, Mr. Speaker, into the 

regional colleges, Mr. Speaker. In addition, Mr. Speaker, in 

addition to this initial money, what we‟re doing is working to 

build a post-secondary strategy in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

Obviously that includes hiring a new ADM. Mr. Speaker, it 

means getting out and doing outreach and engagement to ensure 

we understand the local . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

be clear, what we saw last year under the NDP government, a 

$20 million approximate budget. What we‟ve seen this year is 



April 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1129 

$24 million, Mr. Speaker. So I want to be very clear on, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve seen an increase in spending. We‟ve seen 

increase in investment. What we do see, sir, is the need for a 

strategy that that side was sorely lacking in undertaking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Consultation With Labour 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, first it‟s videos and now we‟re 

going to get tutorials. Mr. Speaker, governments don‟t get to 

pick and choose who their stakeholders are. They don‟t get to 

decide to meet with only people who like their decisions, and 

they don‟t get to choose to listen to some and not others. 

Governments are supposed to govern for everyone and not just 

the people they agree with. Unfortunately this Minister of 

Labour thinks the rules don‟t apply to him. 

 

Yesterday he did attend a Day of Mourning ceremony. But it 

seems that the minister is content to do the absolute minimum. 

According to a newspaper report this morning, nearly 100 SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union] members had to 

protest outside of his Saskatoon office to try and get the 

minister‟s attention. 

 

To the minister: is he so unhappy with the reception at CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] a few months ago that 

he‟s decided to stop attending labour AGMs [annual general 

meeting] and conventions altogether? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m happy to report that I met with members of SEIU on 

February 14 in the afternoon, Mr. Speaker. What we were able 

to say, Mr. Speaker, is that we did receive, we did receive an 

invitation, Mr. Speaker. We sent regrets in early April saying 

that due to the legislative schedule, I was not able to be in 

Saskatchewan . . . or in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. I was going to 

be here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only did I go to the events last night, Mr. Speaker, we then 

had a committee meeting, Mr. Speaker, here in the legislature 

where some of his colleagues were present, Mr. Speaker. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I can only say, Mr. Speaker, I‟m disappointed in 

the question, Mr. Speaker. On issues of consultation, Mr. 

Speaker, our record is very . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister will finish his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to report that last 

night, with some of the members opposite, we actually went 

through the Labour estimates, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s one of 

the reasons that I couldn‟t be in Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, shame on that member. Shame 

on that member. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they control the 

scheduling. Mr. Speaker, it seems that this minister is content to 

be one . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I remind members that the . . . Order. I 

will remind members of the fact that if you want the Speaker to 

continually be on his feet, that will mean fewer opportunities 

for questions in the Assembly. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that this minister is 

content to be one of the most invisible ministers of Labour in 

Saskatchewan history. And it‟s not, it‟s not just the Minister of 

Labour who won‟t meet with unions. It seems that other MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] have been instructed to 

ignore their own constituents. According to the Canadian Union 

of Public Employees, dozens of union members have been 

refused meetings with their MLAs, including the member from 

Meadow Lake and the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

You know, we‟ve heard from the Premier that the cabinet is just 

too busy, Mr. Speaker, to discuss something as mundane as 

spending over $300,000 of taxpayers‟ money. And now it 

seems that MLA time is too valuable to spend meeting with 

constituents. 

 

To the minister: are he and his colleagues so thin-skinned that 

they can‟t even meet with people who disagree with them on 

Bills 5 and 6? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

question despite its incoherence. Mr. Speaker, what I can say is 

in committee, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve already spent 40 hours. I 

don‟t think that‟s invisible, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what I 

can say is during our consultations we met with 20 stakeholder 

groups, we met with nearly 100 people between the deputy 

minister and myself. We took insight from stakeholders right 

across the policy community. We came up with amendments to 

the essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker. What we can‟t 

understand, Mr. Speaker, is why there isn‟t a higher order of 

question coming from that side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members to address 

their questions to the floor, and I would also suggest that it does 

not enhance debate when members start aiming and taking shots 

at each other . . . for the member to address your comments 

through the Chair. Thank you. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2008 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — That member‟s performance in committees 

speak volumes for themselves. He doesn‟t need any help in that. 

 

A one-time consultation between the Minister of Labour and 

labour federations is no substitute for ongoing discussions 

between constituents, MLAs, stakeholders, and ministers, 

which are so vital to the way that government works. 

 

Unfortunately it seems that more and more people are having 

problems being heard by this government. We saw municipal 

leaders having to contemplate tax increases to get a fair share of 

the province‟s wealth, and we saw over 2,500 people march 

through downtown Saskatoon demanding that the government 

reverse its terrible decision to axe Station 20. And now it seems 

that neither the minister nor his colleagues will even meet with 

their constituencies on labour legislation. 

 

To the minister: why is he refusing to meet with people who 

disagree with him? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we can go back 

through the consultation process. Mr. Speaker, we sent out 84 

letters of invitation; we put out ads in nearly 100 newspapers, 

Mr. Speaker. What we did is we met with nearly 100 

individuals, the deputy minister and myself, Mr. Speaker. There 

were views expressed from right across the policy community, 

Mr. Speaker: some very, very constructive; others simply 

curious, Mr. Speaker. What I can say is, this government 

remains responsive and accessible, Mr. Speaker, which stands 

in stark contrast to the last government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Accountability and Transparency 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Several days ago I 

had an opportunity to put some questions to the Premier about 

his commitment in the campaign to accountability and 

transparency in government. I have a few more questions today 

about what many have described now as the unaccountability 

Act, Bill 31. 

 

I‟ve asked this question, but I‟d like to ask it again so the 

Premier would have an opportunity to respond to it. My 

question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. The question‟s simple: 

did the Premier actually read the Bill before it was tabled in the 

House? And if he did, how is it that he could read that Bill and 

not see it a complete betrayal of his campaign commitments to 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, while we‟re on the 

question of vetting, I wonder if the Leader of the Opposition 

would care to stand in his place and confirm as to whether he 

approved the questions that we just heard from his Labour critic 

that managed, if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, to weave in the 

Day of Mourning of lost workers in this province into a 

question on the labour legislation facing this Legislative 

Assembly. That is, Mr. Speaker, worthy of an apology to the 

Assembly, especially to the families of those who have lost 

their lives in the workplace. Did that Leader of the Opposition 

approve those questions from that member? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I just want to remind ministers that the 

answers should at least be responsive to the questions 

presented. I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in the Premier‟s response, in the 

Premier‟s response, Mr. Speaker, I have an answer. He 

obviously did not read the Bill before it was tabled. 

 

He has now suggested, or at least his Attorney General has 

suggested that, once caught, now they are going to amend the 

Bill. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are within the confines of this 

Bill at least 15 instances where they want to raise the 

expenditure to $350,000, whether it‟s in agreements with the 

federal government, out-of-province purchases of property and 

so on — 15 instances. 

 

I‟m going to ask the Premier now: is he committing to this 

House that through his amendment all of those references to the 

raising of expenditures to $350,000 will be gone? Or better yet, 

why does he just not drop this Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we seek, Mr. Speaker, the 

support of the members opposite who raised some good points 

when this Bill was introduced. We seek their support for a 

House amendment which will simply return the threshold back 

to what it was previous to the Bill being tabled. That‟s what 

we‟re proposing. We will then refer the question of a balance 

between efficiency and transparency to the Provincial Auditor. 

 

We have learned in the wake, in the days since the Leader of the 

Opposition first raised some very good questions, we‟ve learned 

that his characterization of what other provinces do wasn‟t 

completely accurate. Some provinces have more onerous 

requirements with respect to reporting — some much, much 

less. 

 

We want to strike a balance between efficiency in government 

. . . We want to place trust in ministry officials on things like 

fish filters and what kind of picnic tables should be in the parks. 



April 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

We want to balance that against the need for immediate 

reporting and transparency. We think the Provincial Auditor is 

the perfect officer of the province to provide some advice to the 

government in this regard. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier ran on a campaign 

for accountability and transparency. How can he suggest that by 

raising the expenditure limit without public scrutiny is an 

improvement in accountability and transparency? How could he 

even table such a Bill if he had read it? And interestingly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Leader of the Opposition has the 

right to place his question. The member. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And interestingly, Mr. Speaker, usually when 

a Bill of this nature comes to the legislature — in fact, when 

most Bills come to this legislature — they come with 

explanatory notes that will explain to the opposition, to the 

media, and to the public what is the goal of this piece of 

legislation. No explanatory notes with this Bill, Mr. Speaker, so 

today I ask the Premier: will he commit today to provide the 

explanatory notes to Bill 31 to the legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The answer to the question is that we will 

provide all of the information that hon. members need in this 

Assembly and we will look for their support for the House 

amendment which will simply turn the thresholds that he‟s 

concerned about — and has some justification to be, for the 

reasons he pointed out — that we would introduce this House 

amendment to return the thresholds as they were previously, 

refer the matter to the Provincial Auditor. 

 

But while he‟s on his feet next — and I assume he‟ll ask 

another question — on this theme of accountability and 

transparency, I wonder when he will direct his former ministers 

of the Crown from his government to abide by the laws of the 

province of Saskatchewan, to abide by the archive laws to turn 

over property that is not theirs, to provide to the archives . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier can wrap up his 

question if it‟s relevant to the question given. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s an entitlement 

mentality over there, but they are not entitled to the originals of 

those letters. They have them in their possession, including the 

Health minister, the Justice minister. These are private 

correspondences between . . . [inaudible] . . . people. When will 

they abide by the archive law of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, early on in his career as Premier, 

this Premier is developing this knack. When he does not want to 

answer a question or cannot answer or knows that he‟s been 

caught, he‟ll throw in a red herring. He‟ll throw in a diversion. 

Well we‟ve just seen it again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My questions are very simple to the Premier. They are these 

today . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier can‟t 

answer, his caucus tries to help him out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my questions to the Premier today are very direct 

and very simple. Did he read the Bill before he tabled the Bill? 

If he did, why would he table a Bill that clearly violates his 

campaign commitment to accountability? 

 

I‟ve asked him, will he commit today to remove every reference 

in this Bill, not just the one but every of 15 references to raising 

the limit to $350,000? And will he provide to the public of 

Saskatchewan, this legislature, and the media the explanatory 

notes behind the Bill? Those are very simple questions. We‟d 

appreciate a straight answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think in answers to questions last week the Minister of Justice 

committed to the fact that the previous thresholds, the House 

amendment that will be introduced by this side of the House, 

the House amendments that are coming will return the 

thresholds to what they were prior to the Bill being tabled in the 

Legislative Assembly, in other words as they exist today. 

 

And then we will refer the matter, and it will be a public report 

from the auditor which we will share with the member for 

Riversdale. We‟ll refer to the auditor this question of a balance 

between efficiency and our desire to make sure there‟s 

transparency and prompt accounting. 

 

But it‟ll be difficult to take counsel from a party opposite whose 

former ministers are still outside the archives law. Yesterday 

the Justice minister outside the House said it was his option to 

return these papers and that he had left them with the Ministry 

of Justice. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, they have not been left 

with the Ministry of Justice. They have not been returned to 

archives and if that member has . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2008 

Minister’s Comments and Ministerial Documents 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, just for the information of 

members and the media, 400 boxes of information, records 

from ministerial and Executive Council offices, were sent to the 

archives, Mr. Speaker — 400 boxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another question. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member from 

Canora to come to order. I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be curious to see 

how the Premier tries to divert or deflect or red herring this 

question. My question again is very simple. To the Premier, on 

a different matter: does this Premier believe that it‟s acceptable 

for a minister of his cabinet, particularly the Minister of Justice, 

to find himself in scrums day after day having to correct, having 

to correct the information that he provided to the public the day 

before? I refer to the comments of the Attorney General, the 

Minister of Justice, in regard to the stolen police records that 

were in the hands of the Sask Party caucus. 

 

Will the Premier do the right thing, will he do the right thing 

and ask the Conflict of Interest Commissioner of this province 

to do an investigation on the Attorney General and his 

comments to the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that question was asked 

yesterday and it was answered yesterday. What has not been 

answered though, however, is why the following former 

ministers of the NDP [New Democratic Party] government have 

not yet complied with the archives law. Are they rifling through 

these private correspondences from private citizens, prepared to 

use them for their own political end in question period? 

 

How about the former minister of Municipal Relations? How 

about the former minister of social services, the former minister 

of Health, the former minister of Justice, the former minister of 

Labour, the former minister of Post-Secondary Education, the 

former minister of the Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I find that the response 

is not as direct response to the question, the relevance. And 

question period has elapsed. Move on to ministerial statements. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 13, The Teachers‟ Life Insurance (Government 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If members have something they 

would like to discuss between themselves, please exit the 

Chamber. I recognize the member for Human Services. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 13, The 

Teachers‟ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) 

Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 13, The 

Teachers‟ Life Insurance Amendment Act, 2008 and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I now move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 13, The Teachers‟ Life Insurance 

(Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 14, The 

Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Repeal 



April 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 14, The Saskatchewan Association of School Business 

Officials Repeal Act and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 — The Saskatchewan Association of School 

Business Officials Repeal Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 14, The Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials Repeal Act be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 26, The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 26, 

The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 26 — The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I move that this Bill be now read a 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 26, The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 29, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on this Bill and that this Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 29, The Education Amendment Act, 2008 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 

2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 29, The Education Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure on 

behalf of the government to table the answers to questions 588 

to 594. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 588 to 594 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 37 — The Parks 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m once again pleased 

to stand and continue deliberations on this piece of legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation changes a 

number of boundaries within the provincial parks themselves 

and excludes parcels of land and adds parcels of land. It may on 

the surface look like it‟s simply housekeeping, but each of those 

changes could have significant implications to local businesses, 

local cottage owners, and perhaps local landowners in the area, 

Mr. Speaker. 

Without the proper clarification on what the impacts are on 

these particular changes, the local impacts on the communities, 

on the parks themselves, and on to those landowners in the area, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s very difficult to proceed and move this Bill to 

committee. We‟ve asked the minister‟s office for more details. 

This Bill was introduced just a short period of time ago, and in 

a normal legislative sitting where we had several weeks left to 

go if not months . . . If this had been brought forward in the fall, 

we would have adequate time to talk to all the stakeholders in 

each of the various provincial parks and check with the various 

stakeholders individually to see whether or not those changes 

were in fact supported by the local communities and cottage 

owners and others in the parks themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Without that adequate time, we need to rely on the minister and 

the officials to provide us greater detail of what those changes 

mean to the various parks, what the local landowners may think 

about those particular changes, or if in fact there is simply 

housekeeping, Mr. Speaker. Neither the explanatory notes that 

have been provided or the Bill themselves can give you that 

level of detail. 

 

Now we‟ve asked the Minister Responsible for Parks for some 

additional details. We are still waiting for that detail to come 

from the minister‟s office. Once we get that detail and we have 

the opportunity to examine it and understand what the impacts 

are on each of these changes in those provincial parks, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟re in a better position to determine whether or not 

we want to move this particular piece of legislation on to 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all fairness to the minister, I asked for that 

information late last week. We‟re hoping the minister‟s office 

continues to try to get that information. I know I spoke earlier 

today to the minister‟s office, and I‟m hoping that before many 

more days go by, Mr. Speaker, we can actually have that 

information provided by the minister and the department, so we 

can analyze what each of these changes mean and whether or 

not there are any concerns or things that we should be looking 

in more detail to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those few brief remarks, at this time, I‟m 

going to take my seat and allow one of my colleagues to share 

some of their experiences and their feelings about this particular 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too want 

to say a few words today on Bill 37, The Parks Amendment 

Act. I appreciate the opportunity that my colleagues have 

provided to me to speak on Bill 37 that deals with the provincial 

parks. 

 

I just want to give an example to support what my colleague in 

Regina Dewdney had to say about the reasons why we need 

some additional information. Mr. Speaker, the constituency I 

represent is The Battlefords. Now mind you, that‟s the town of 

Battleford and the city of North Battleford and basically 



April 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

everything inside the municipal boundaries. 

 

But a great number of citizens of The Battlefords have cottages 

or property or they use land within the Battlefords Provincial 

Park. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, a number of businesses lease 

land within the Battlefords Provincial Park to operate and 

provide business and service opportunities to residents of the 

area and visitors to the Battlefords Provincial Park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also our tribal council from The Battlefords Tribal 

Council representing a number of bands around The 

Battlefords, under lease looks after the golf course, the 

convention centre, the hotel, and have for a number of years 

been anxious to expand the land base that they currently have 

under lease to make the business operations of the land that they 

lease more appropriate for their circumstances. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that as a result, changes in that lease and the 

boundaries within that leased area, would also have a very 

beneficial impact on the people who utilize those services, that 

business interest, and utilize the services of the Battlefords 

Provincial Park. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I asked my colleagues who are managing this 

Bill for the New Democratic Party, our side of the House. And, 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues can‟t provide me with the 

information that I need on which to base a decision as to 

whether or not this Bill has beneficial or negative effects for the 

citizens that I represent. My colleagues indicate that they‟ve 

asked for additional information to assist them in providing me 

with advice as to how to proceed with making a decision on 

supporting or not supporting this legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just by way of example, this legislation may 

have — because I don‟t know; I say may because I don‟t know 

for sure — may have an impact on constituents that I represent. 

And I would rather know before the Bill is dealt with, Mr. 

Speaker, so that I can consult with my constituents somewhat, 

than to find out after the fact, Mr. Speaker, and to say to my 

constituents that oh I‟m sorry; I didn‟t know. 

 

I think it is my responsibility, Mr. Speaker, not only to 

communicate the wishes of my constituents to the legislature, 

but also, Mr. Speaker, to be able to communicate the wishes 

and intentions of the legislature or the government to my 

constituents so that they understand the impact that these 

decisions have on them. They can provide feedback to me, and I 

can then provide that feedback to government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m at, somewhat, at a loss to fully recognize 

whether or not I personally can support or not support the 

legislation that‟s in front of us. My colleagues assure me that 

that information, when it‟s available, should make it very easy 

for me to make a decision in this regard. We have some very 

specific questions that have been asked, and I think that it‟s 

important before I‟m able to make comments to the government 

that I have some of that information. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, by way of example and in support of the 

comments made from my colleague from Regina Dewdney, Mr. 

Speaker, I would at this time, to ensure that we have more 

information provided to us, I would adjourn debate, or I would 

move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 37. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 37. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 25 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 25 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this particular Bill, 

there are quite a number of changes to the land that‟s either 

included in this wildlife habitat protection plan or taken out. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that the minister has been 

able to provide us with some maps of the land involved and 

that‟s helped substantially. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the 

explanatory notes, which I know are available, are not there, 

and that often will provide the rationale for the changes that are 

being made. A number of those things have some questions to 

us. 

 

We know that in some areas, it‟s quite a contentious issue; other 

areas, it‟s quite an ordinary situation. But, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

in a situation where we don‟t have all the information that we 

require. And so I‟m suggesting to my colleagues that until we 

get that kind of information, which we know is available, that 

this matter should not proceed from this stage. I know that some 

of my colleagues have some similar comments to make about 

this particular legislation, and so I will let them have their say. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased this afternoon to stand and speak on Bill No. 25, The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, much like Bill 37, The Parks Act, before we can 

move this Bill forward, we need some additional information, 

Mr. Speaker. The minister has provided some maps, and there 

are explanatory notes that are available, but they don‟t give us 

all the information we would like to have. And that information 

we need, Mr. Speaker, is why are these particular changes being 

made? Why are the designations changing on each parcel of 

land? And, Mr. Speaker, without that type of information which 

we normally would get several months in order to examine the 

Bill and talk to stakeholders, in this case we have a relatively 

short period of time. 

 

So we need some additional information from the ministers in 

order to determine whether or not there‟s any implications that 

are not obvious in these changes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve asked the ministers, and hopefully we‟ll get that 

information shortly. In all fairness, those questions were just 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2008 

asked in the last couple of days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to talk a little bit about why we want to 

protect habitat land, Mr. Speaker. Wildlife habitat protection is 

very important for a number of reasons. Because those lands 

protect species of both animals and plants, Mr. Speaker, that 

may be on an endangered or at-risk list, Mr. Speaker, there are 

certain types of habitat in Saskatchewan we need to protect in 

order to protect certain types of both plant species and animal 

species, Mr. Speaker. And keeping those particular species safe 

and protected within their natural environment is very, very 

important to continue those species‟ lives and keeping them part 

of the beautiful habitat we have in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re protecting about 400 different species here 

in Saskatchewan that are unique, and it‟s very important in 

order to protect those species to have land set aside for that 

purpose. Mr. Speaker, most of the land that we‟re talking about 

that‟s protected is in fact Crown land. It‟s land that‟s held by 

the Crown and protected as such, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, because we continue to need 

additional information, I would move that we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 25. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 24 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 24 — The Trade 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once again, 

I‟m pleased to enter into the debate on Bill No. 24. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very narrow piece of legislation. It in fact 

makes a single change, a relatively simple change. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it is a very symbolic change. What it does in fact 

reduces the number of Vice-Chairs in the Labour Relations 

Board, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s quite significant in its impact on 

the ability to have cases heard before the Labour Relations 

Board, on its ability to render decisions in a timely manner, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We‟ve heard repeatedly from the members opposite that they 

want to have a more efficient and more timely response to the 

needs of both business and labour in the community as they 

bring forward concerns to the Labour Relations Board, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well we have a number of questions about how they plan to do 

that while reducing the size of the board itself, the number of 

people who can actually hear cases before the board, Mr. 

Speaker? And how do they expect to get out responses in a 

more timely manner, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It defies logic in many ways that you can reduce it by a person, 

from three to two and actually have the ability to speed up cases 

before the board, because cases take periods of time to be heard, 

Mr. Speaker. And then even the very best and most diligent 

workers take a great deal of time, Mr. Speaker, to consider a 

case and to write in fact their response to that case, which in 

many times has a great number of conflicting legal issues to be 

considered within them, Mr. Speaker, which need to be very 

clearly and very concisely put forward in response to the parties 

that may have spent considerable time making a case before the 

Labour Relations Board, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, the 

change itself may seem relatively simple, Mr. Speaker, but the 

implications of that change can be far-reaching, Mr. Speaker, 

and have significant impact on portions of our community in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also warrants some consideration why, when we 

have an amendment to The Trade Union Act before us that 

deals with some of these issues, why this particular piece wasn‟t 

put forward, and this change wasn‟t put forward in the first 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and why we need to have 

another piece of legislation put forward for such a small 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as we seek answers for those questions and consult with 

others, Mr. Speaker, and go deal with stakeholders in the 

community about this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, we are going to need additional time. We‟re going to 

need to talk to people in the community. 

 

And as I have several other of my colleagues who‟d like to 

speak at this time, Mr. Speaker, I am going to take my seat and 

give the opportunity for one of my colleagues to enter into the 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park, I believe. Yes. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is an 

interesting Bill. It does really a very simple thing. It reduces the 

number of Vice-Chairs on the Labour Relations Board under 

The Trade Union Act from two to one notwithstanding, Mr. 

Speaker, that the language of this second amendment to The 

Trade Union Act is very, very specific. The amendment says, 

“. . . amended by adding „not more than‟ before „two 

vice-chairpersons‟.” 

 

And so it‟s not more than two Vice-Chairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a Minister of Advanced Education and 

Employment that clearly takes his responsibilities in other areas 

much more seriously than he takes his responsibilities to 

working women, men, and young people or working women, 

men, and people of all ages in the province of Saskatchewan. 

By his actions and by his speeches, this is no friend of labour, 

Mr. Speaker. This is no friend of labour. 

 

This Bill is being presented ostensibly, we‟re told, because it 



April 29, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

will somehow improve the efficiency of the Labour Relations 

Board, making decisions more timely. Well, Mr. Speaker, it 

smells to me like — dictatorship is too strong a word — but it 

smells to me like what is happening, what is being proposed is 

the withdrawal of the ability for working people and for 

employers to plead their case before the board, to have their 

day, so to speak, before the Labour Relations Board — which is 

a quasi-judicial board — before that board will make its 

decision. 

 

[14:45] 

 

If you go from three — you know, a Chair, two Vice-Chairs — 

to two, it doesn‟t provide for more time to listen to concerns. It 

clearly provides much less time, much less time. And so my 

argument here is, or our argument here, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

province of Saskatchewan, people — be they employers or be 

they working people — are not well served by these 

amendments to Bill 24. 

 

It‟s not conducive to thoughtful, written decisions because 

when you previously had three people, Chair and two 

Vice-Chairs — one appointed after consultation with business; 

one appointed clearly after consultation with labour, the 

Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, probably the CLC 

[Canadian Labour Congress], and others — you go from three 

to two. 

 

Clearly under the existing trade union Act, hearings can be 

conducted . . . the Chair has the ability to appoint a Vice-Chair 

to conduct a hearing alone, under certain rules here. No 

objection to that. 

 

But what we‟re saying is that this Bill takes it from three people 

who can conduct certain business alone — hear information and 

make decisions, make rulings — reduce it from three to two 

people, and somehow we‟re told that that‟s going to speed 

things up or provide greater efficiency. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

absolutely counterintuitive. Nobody will ever draw a line saying 

two people doing a job independently can be any more efficient 

than three people doing the job independently, recognizing that 

there are many hearings going on simultaneously. 

 

There‟s not just one piece of business before the Labour 

Relations Board on any given day. There are many, and it‟s a 

juggling act for board members to try and provide rulings in a 

timely . . . not just provide rulings, Mr. Speaker. Of course to 

hear complaints, to hear and adjudicate in a judicious way, in a 

timely fashion, we need three members. 

 

And clearly I haven‟t even spoken yet to the issue of employers 

having their representative, being consulted, and being their 

representative as the Vice-Chair, and working people to be 

consulted through their organization, the SFL [Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour], and have their advocate or their 

representative on the board. 

 

Without that balance, Mr. Speaker, you really have grave 

concerns. You have huge doubt with one group or the other, one 

group or the other because you cannot name some one person 

that‟s going to represent both groups. And each of those parties 

feel like that person is their person they can take their concerns 

to or they can have working on their side. 

Mr. Speaker, I haven‟t even gotten into the election promises 

around The Trade Union Act. But I want to point out that before 

and during the recent general election, there was not one peep 

about, not one murmur about us needing to change the makeup 

of the board for The Trade Union Act. There was just not one 

peep of it from the then opposition, the now government. 

Clearly had that been any discussion of that in the run-up to the 

election, had there been any promise written, any . . . if that was 

part of the now government‟s platform, there would be all kinds 

of credence to the argument that, well hey, the people spoke on 

November 7 and they won. We lost. That would have all kinds 

of water if it were only the case — if only that had been the 

case. 

 

And so I‟m wondering what happened in the interim — these 

short months — what happened that caused a crisis that would 

cause this Bill now to be coming before us, this Bill which is 

the second trade union Act Bill before this Assembly. 

 

And it‟s not like we have a huge number of Bills — what? — 

30, 40 Bills. It‟s sort of half a typical number of Bills. We‟ve 

already passed quite a number of Bills, Mr. Speaker, as you‟re 

well aware. So it‟s not that somehow or other the opposition is 

able to hold everything up. That‟s not what it‟s about, but what 

it is about is the opposition having its say. The minority will 

have its say, and the majority will have its way. That‟s the way 

of democracy. But this Bill is so fundamentally unexplained, so 

fundamentally wrong, that we clearly need to do some more 

consulting around this Bill No. 24, the Act to amend The Trade 

Union Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is some more consulting that I wish to do 

before I speak again. Therefore I adjourn the . . . Do I adjourn 

the debate? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I want to speak 

again; I want to be clear on that. So I move to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 

Park has moved adjournment of debate. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

order to allow the valuable work of the committees to function, 

I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly 

do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:51.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1123 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1123 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1123 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1124 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Ukrainian Holodomor Remembrance Flame 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1125 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1125 

 Pense School Earns Earth School 2 Designation 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1125 

 Thai Food and Cultural Night 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 

 Highlighting a Local Writer 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 

 True Ambassador for Prince Albert 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1126 

 Lloydminster Super Cities Walk 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1127 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Regional Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1127 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1127 

 Consultation With Labour 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1129 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1129 

 Accountability and Transparency 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1130 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1130 

 Minister’s Comments and Ministerial Documents 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1133 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 13 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1132 

 Bill No. 14 — The Saskatchewan Association of School Business Officials Repeal Act 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1133 

 Bill No. 26 — The Midwifery Amendment Act, 2008 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1133 

 Bill No. 29 — The Education Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1134 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1134 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 



 

 Bill No. 37 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2008 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1134 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1134 

 Bill No. 25 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1135 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1135 

 Bill No. 24 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1136 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1136 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


