




















































Hansard: April 28, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 33A  MONDAY, APRIL 28, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1107 

 April 28, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to advise members of the Assembly that Mr. 

Speaker will not be here today to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Assistant Deputy Speaker, thank you. 

Through you, to you, and to all the members of this Assembly I 

would like to introduce two special people to me, two special 

guests today, my wife, Leone, and my youngest daughter, 

Rayanne, in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re visiting the 

Assembly today after spending the night. Rayanne competed 

last night in the last of the semi-final of the 31st annual CKRM 

Big Country talent shows. I believe this is the longest-running 

talent show in Canada, if I’m not mistaken. 

 

Three girls successfully made it through to the finals, to next 

Sunday: Kelsey Fitch, Megan Lynn Nash, and my little girl, 

Rayanne. They will be performing at the finals along with nine 

others next Sunday, and some other venues over the next little 

while. 

 

Mr. Assistant Deputy Speaker, I know what you’re thinking — 

Rayanne’s a pretty girl just like her dad. But I can assure you 

her looks and her talent come from her mother. I would ask all 

members to welcome two of my three favourite girls in the 

world to this Assembly today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of this legislature two 

individuals seated in the east gallery, Nancy Broten and Matt 

Johnson. They came down for the day to see the activities of the 

legislature. 

 

Nancy is my sister. She has a B.Ed. [Bachelor of Education] 

from the U of R [University of Regina] and currently works at 

the University of Saskatchewan in the language centre. And 

Matt Johnson is from Saskatoon as well. He holds a Bachelor of 

Science in land use, environmental studies and was most 

recently working for Saskatoon Curbside Recycling. But he’s 

headed to Calgary for the summer to work at the U of C 

[University of Calgary] as a guide in their outdoor canoeing 

program. He’s an experienced whitewater paddler. So I’d ask 

all members to join me in welcoming them to their legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Assistant Deputy 

Speaker. Boy that’s a long title, isn’t it? It’s a great pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 

Legislative Assembly Sharon and Bernie Grebinski in your 

gallery. I’d like them to stand and take a brief bow if they 

could, please. These are long-time residents of south Regina, 

and they’re great community builders. So a warm welcome to 

them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to 

you and through you to the Assembly a group of young visitors 

with us today. They are seated in the west gallery. They’re a 

grade 4 class from St. Gabriel School here in Regina in my 

constituency of Regina Wascana Plains. With them is their 

teacher, Yvonne Reding. 

 

They’re going to be observing our procedures here today and I 

will be joining them later to discuss their impressions. I really 

want to see if we do get a passing grade. Please join me in 

welcoming these young folks here today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to present a petition on behalf of South Hill 

businesses in my community of Moose Jaw, and it has to do 

with the closure of our South Hill liquor store. The petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reassess its decision to close the South Hill 

liquor store, allowing it to continue to serve the people of 

Moose Jaw and provide valuable revenue to the people of 

this province. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise to 

present a petition today and it’s a petition in support of Station 

20 and the concerns that many people in Saskatoon and across 

the province have about the taking back of $8 million funding 

for this project. I’ll read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2008 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks come across the city of Saskatoon. Thank you 

very much. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to present petitions in opposition to the government’s Bill 

5, The Public Service Essential Services Act, and Bill 6, An Act 

to amend The Trade Union Act. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed from people in Watson, LeRoy, Lake 

Lenore, Quill Lake, Spalding, Saskatoon, and Englefeld. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

National Day of Mourning for Workers 

Killed or Injured on the Job 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, April 28 is recognized in Canadian law as a National 

Day of Mourning for persons killed or injured in the workplace. 

An initiative of the Canadian Labour Congress in 1984, this day 

is marked by unions, governments, and concerned employers 

who recognize that any workplace death or injury is 

preventable. 

 

While the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board reports 

a reduced injury rate for the year 2007, we are mindful that 

40,000 injured workers a year and 37 deaths from job-related 

injuries or illness is by any account unacceptable. Members of 

this House know that much more must be done to ensure that no 

one in this province suffers injury or death as a result of 

providing for themselves and their loved ones. This goal of zero 

loss can only be achieved through strong labour laws and 

proper enforcement of existing laws that are designed to help 

workers. 

 

Day of Mourning ceremonies will be held across the province 

today, including a vigil hosted by the Regina & District Labour 

Council to be held at 5:30 p.m. this evening in front of the cairn 

in the city hall courtyard here in Regina. It is my sincere hope 

that next year no other names will have to be read into the 

register of workers injured or perished on their job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Wood River. 

 

2008 Snowbirds Acceptance Show 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the distinct pleasure, along 

with the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, of attending the 

formal acceptance show for the 2008 Snowbirds. The show was 

performed for the approval of the commander of 1 Canadian Air 

Division, Major-General Marcel Duval, as well as Canadian 

and US [United States] air traffic regulators. 

 

431 Air Demonstration Squadron, better known as the 

Snowbirds, represent a tradition of excellence as ambassadors. 

This group demonstrates the skill, professionalism, and 

teamwork of the men and women of the Canadian Forces. 

While not a combat unit, the Snowbirds exhibit the skills and 

courage that Canada’s combat forces count on and contribute to 

world peace and security. 

 

The Snowbirds are a Canadian institution, flying Tutor jet 

aircraft adorned with the colours of the Canadian flag. The team 

represents the vibrant spirit of this nation, thrilling audiences 

across the continent with precision formation flying and crisp 

solo acts. Now in their 38th season, the Snowbirds have flown 

in well over 2,000 shows for more than 125 million spectators. 

The 2008 team will fly 65 shows at 45 locations across North 

America from May until October. 

 

I would like to congratulate Major Rob Mitchell and his 2008 

team for an excellent acceptance show demonstration, and 

would ask all members to join me in congratulating the 2008 

Snowbirds and wishing them a successful season. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to join with the member from 

Wood River and really talk about what a great pleasure it was to 

be in the audience this morning at 15 Wing Moose Jaw and 

announce that the Snowbirds air demonstration team is truly set 

to take to the skies for their 2008 show season. 

 

And the team recently put finishing touches on their 

manoeuvres by practising over water, mountains, and other 

diverse terrain while in 19 Wing Comox, BC [British 

Columbia]. 

 

The show’s format for the 2008 Snowbird season will be 

slightly different from previous years. The duration of each 

show has been shortened slightly while still performing the 

same number of manoeuvres and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

means that they will be flying tighter patterns and closer to the 

crowds. 

 



April 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

The Snowbirds will do 65 performances in 45 communities 

right across North America. And the team is especially looking 

forward to the Quebec City shows on June 14 and 15 where 

they will be one of five aerobatic demonstration teams from 

across the world to participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to attend the team’s annual 

acceptance show this morning along with the member from 

Wood River being held at 15 Wing Moose Jaw, which is 

situated in the constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow. And 

although the acceptance show was not open to the public, 

Moose Javians will have a chance to see the Snowbirds in 

action on Armed Forces Day on August 23. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members join me in congratulating 

Major Rob Mitchell and wishing the Snowbirds a successful 

2008 season. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Volunteer Week 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

am pleased to let members of this House know that this 

government has proclaimed April 27 to May 3 Volunteer Week 

in Saskatchewan to coincide with National Volunteer Week. 

 

Canadians’ spirit of volunteerism is renowned by far beyond 

our borders. Saskatchewan in particular is recognized for its 

extraordinary high rate of volunteering. Those visiting 

Saskatchewan have been astonished by the volunteer-driven 

events we have hosted — events such as the Scotties 

Tournament of Hearts and the Grey Cup. 

 

Volunteers are active in all Saskatchewan communities. Our 

soccer and hockey coaches are volunteers. Our neighbours who 

shovel seniors’ walks or help them buy their groceries are 

volunteers. Saskatchewan’s volunteers help to raise millions of 

dollars a year for worthwhile causes. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when fires or floods force people from 

their homes, volunteers help distribute food, blankets, and 

arrange shelters. We all know who they are and no doubt each 

and every one of us or our families have benefited from their 

goodwill. 

 

The theme of this year’s National Volunteer Week is From 

Compassion to Action, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what an 

appropriate theme. This province’s volunteers are famous for 

springing into action to make a difference in the lives of others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this House to take a week 

of heartfelt thank you to our volunteers who are truly making 

Saskatchewan a greater province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Youth Art Exhibit in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to stand today and 

to extend my congratulations to Saskatoon Community Youth 

Arts Programming Inc., more commonly known as SCYAP, on 

another successful project. 

 

On Friday, March 18, I attended SCYAP’s newest exhibit 

called Urban Messages. This is SCYAP’s first project that has 

focused exclusively on graffiti-style art. Mr. Speaker, the 

quality and diversity of the artwork on display was indeed 

impressive. Judging from the reactions of other people 

attending the opening and judging from the number of art 

pieces that were already sold, I think others agree. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the artists in Urban Messages had to compete with 

other applicants to be accepted into the program. While 

participating, the individuals agreed to refrain from tagging in 

the community. This format allows participants to further 

develop their artistic ability in a supportive and constructive 

environment. It also helps put some money in the pockets of the 

participants through the sale of their artwork. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are nine artists participating in Urban 

Messages. I would ask the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating Tyrone Whitehawk, Alex Mann-Keufler, 

Spencer Robinson, Kris Moffatt, Lukas Broste, Nick Racine, 

Cody Watier, Riley Frank, and Jesse Zabos for a successful 

show and wish them the best as they continue to grow as people 

and artists. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize the staff and board 

of SCYAP who continue to do a fine job of providing 

leadership to the program. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Corporation Supports Weyburn Community 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, today I rise in the Assembly to recognize a great 

Canadian company that is an important employer and 

community partner in the Weyburn area. Mr. Speaker, the 

company I speak of is EnCana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, EnCana Corporation, headquartered in Calgary 

but with significant operations in the Weyburn area, is a leader 

in corporate Canada and beyond for its environmental 

stewardship, community giving, and industry-leading use of 

new technologies. Named this past year as one of the most 

admired companies in a worldwide survey by Fortune 

magazine, EnCana has played an important role in Weyburn 

and area as a major employer, a good corporate citizen, and by 

putting southeast Saskatchewan on the map due to their world’s 

largest carbon sequestration project. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, employees of EnCana’s Weyburn 

operations are well known throughout the community for their 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2008 

many hours of volunteer work and for the financial support they 

and EnCana donate to so many worthwhile community 

organizations including the Youngfellows’ TV auction, local 

sporting teams, and other organizations focused on serving the 

youth of Weyburn. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, last Friday various EnCana officials from 

Calgary joined with employees from the Weyburn operations to 

announce a donation of $100,000 to the city of Weyburn that 

will go towards the outdoor pool reconstruction project. Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy I want 

to offer my congratulations and thanks to EnCana Corporation 

and, in particular, operations superintendent for the Weyburn 

field, Darcy Cretin, and community relations manager, Twila 

Walkeden, for this incredible level of support they continue to 

show in Weyburn and area. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Sports Official Recognized 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, recently the Saskatchewan Sport 

Awards Banquet was held at the Conexus Art Centre and 

recipients in each category were announced. Mr. Speaker, 

David Dice from Prince Albert was the recipient in the 

volunteer recognition category. 

 

In 2007 Mr. Dice officiated at track and field meets as a level 5 

track referee, a level 5 umpire, and a level 5 horizontal jumps 

official. He also managed entries and results for the ’07 SHSAA 

[Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association] provincial 

cross-country championship, served as a jury member for the 

Western Canada Summer Games, was the coach of the CC 

Track Club in Prince Albert as well as head coach of Carlton 

Comprehensive High School Track Club. In ’07 he also assisted 

schools across Saskatchewan with use of Hy-Tek meet 

management software. 

 

He also has served as Chair of the Saskatchewan athletics 

officials committee. Closer to home he’s the Chair of the 

committee pursuing the rebuilding of the Harry Jerome track in 

Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in recognizing 

the hundreds of hours of time Mr. Dice donates for amateur 

sport and in congratulating David Dice on being the 

Saskatchewan Sports Award recipient in volunteer recognition 

category. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Assistance for the Livestock Industry 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, all members of the House have 

heard first-hand about the economic crisis facing the cattle and 

hog industries. The high dollar, low-market prices, and 

skyrocketing input costs are hitting the sectors hard. And while 

prices have started to inch back up, our hog industry is still 

wondering if it will even be around at the end of the year. 

 

Shortly before Christmas, the minister unveiled a short-term 

hog program . . . or loan program. According to the minister, of 

the $30 million set aside for the hog industry, one-third still 

hasn’t been used. What’s more, I’ve been told by producers and 

industry players that the cap on payouts is limiting the 

program’s ability to really help. 

 

My question to the Minister of Agriculture is, will he consider 

extending the program, given that much of the funds are still 

unused, and will he consider lifting the cap? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, I 

appreciate the question from the member. I haven’t had that 

many opportunities to actually stand. Mr. Speaker, the member 

asks some very important questions. We met with the 

cattlemen, as she may well know, the second day I was Minister 

of Agriculture. We also met with the hog industry the second 

day, and they asked for a short-term loan. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

delivered on that very quickly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — $60 million for the cattle industry, 

$30 million for the hog industry. 

 

And as she talked about in her question, the hog loan is 

ongoing. The cattle one has just come to an end, and the uptake 

was fairly decent on that. The hog industry is by formula of 

how many dollars there actually is per 100 kilograms, and that’s 

an ongoing process into June, Mr. Speaker. So those programs 

are up and running. 

 

We’ve also dealt with the federal government and talked to 

them on a number of occasions and got the TAP [targeted 

advance payment] program approved for 2007 — but, Mr. 

Speaker, not only that, but for 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — While I understand and can appreciate that 

the minister has a very close relationship with the federal 

government, producers are starting to wonder how far this 

special relationship is getting them. It certainly doesn’t appear 

to have made its way into their pocketbooks. In addition to the 

cap placed by the minister on the short-term loan program for 

hogs and livestock, producers also have to deal with the cap 

placed on payouts from the AgriStability program. I’m told that 

the cap on federal payouts is particularly unhelpful as it relates 



April 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

to the cattle and hog industry facing severe uncertainty over its 

long-term viability. 

 

To the minister again: what has he done to lobby his 

counterparts in the federal government to increase the cap, and 

what exactly is his new relationship doing in terms of getting 

actual help to producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’ve also been contacted on many occasions by producers on 

both the livestock and the hog industry out there, wanting the 

caps raised. We’re in the process of working with the federal 

minister as the member has talked about. We feel that’s a 

worthwhile thing. And as times have changed and costs have 

rose dramatically in both those industries, we feel that that cap 

also should be raised and are working with the federal minister. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention the 

relationship we have with the federal minister, contrary to 

where we were before when that government was in, or that 

opposition was government. The minister at that time wouldn’t 

deal with the federal minister, whether he was Liberal or 

Conservative or whoever he was, and we’re paying that price. 

Our producers are paying that price. 

 

If we’d have got to the table and designed the programs like 

AgriStability, AgriInvest, and AgriRecovery properly, we 

wouldn’t be running out to try and find an ad hoc program. 

Those programs would have dealt with it. We’re dealing with 

the federal minister, no matter what government’s in power, for 

the best to the advantage of our producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I do know that the minister has 

spoken a lot in committee on his new relationship with the 

Minister of Agriculture, and I know the Minister of Agriculture 

comes from Saskatchewan, as does the minister. And I know 

that he is negotiating a program at present. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, one of the major problems facing the 

cattle and hog industry is input costs. Fertilizing prices are up. 

Feed costs are going up. And as we all know, the price of diesel 

and gas is spiralling up, and it seems to not be showing any 

signs of stopping. 

 

I remember hearing from the minister in his days in opposition 

when he asked the government to step up to the plate and help 

out Saskatchewan farmers. I guess my question to the minister: 

is he willing to look at providing assistance to our producers to 

help them with their input costs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as I informed the member opposite in committee and 

here again today, that when the cattle industry and the hog 

industry came to meet us the second day I was Minister of 

Agriculture, the first thing they asked for was a loan program. 

And why that was, because they were very worried about 

countervail with the US. What we did was honour that 

commitment. We did what they asked us to do. We provided a 

loan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that things are still tough out there in the 

livestock industry both on the cattle side . . . We know that in 

the hog industry they are really up against it. The little bit of 

positive things that are coming out of the hog side are the prices 

are starting to improve, very small, but I think it’s a step in the 

right direction. 

 

But as I said, Mr. Speaker, what we should have done years ago 

is dealt with this problem, genuinely at the table with the 

federal government. And our producers are once again paying 

the price for the inadequacies of that opposition when they were 

the government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, the 

Conservatives have been in office in Ottawa for over two years, 

and they have the ability with the minister to renegotiate these 

programs. 

 

But as I have mentioned earlier, a major problem facing the 

cattle and hog industry is growing input costs. The province of 

Alberta has gone much farther than just offering a loan 

program. They have made a direct offer of $165 million to 

make up for rising fuel and input costs. The funding is meant to 

inject immediate funds into the cattle and hog industry in order 

for them to adjust to short-term economic strain, and the 

payments have already begun. Further east, the Ontario 

government announced shortly before Christmas an additional 

$100 million for the cattle and hog industry. 

 

To the minister: we have a province with a billion and a half 

dollars in the kitty, and with the cattle and livestock industry in 

trouble, isn’t there anything more that he can do than offer 

short-term loan programs with a cap, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2008 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe what the member opposite is asking me to do is to undo 

what they’ve done in 16 years and for us to do it in five months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working on these programs. As I told her 

on the hog industry, we’ve dealt with the 2007 TAP program. 

They come to us and ask us if we could do anything about the 

2008 program. That’s in place by dealing with the federal 

minister and the federal department. That’s in place. They ask 

for a hog loan; we provided that. They asked for a cattle loan; 

we provided that. We promised a crop insurance review on the 

grain side; we’ve provided that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made the commitment to look at 

bringing the CAIS [Canadian agricultural income stabilization] 

administration home, something that opposition wouldn’t do 

when they were in government because they actually might be 

responsible. We want to bring it home, so it’s reactive to the 

needs of our farmers, Mr. Speaker. And in our department, 

farmers come first. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Release of Confidential Documents 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Justice has been caught a half a dozen times or so 

making statements on the public record with respect to the 

unlawfully obtained police files, which later turned out to be not 

true. I am hoping that concern about being caught out again 

might have forced that minister to be more conscientious. To 

the minister: he has had the whole weekend to review his files 

and the weekend newspapers; does he still deny holding a 

media event with the individual who gave him the police files? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, last Thursday the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin made very serious and false 

accusations about me. He said, and I quote, that I “. . . was very 

involved in the arranging of these police files to end up in the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus office.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not true. The member knows that. He has 

accused me of criminal wrongdoing. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

cannot and will not allow those allegations to stand. Sometimes 

in the heat of a scrum people say things they later regret. I 

would like to give the member opposite the opportunity to rise 

in the House today and unconditionally withdraw the allegation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier surely knows, 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner legislation sets out strict 

guidelines for what members of the legislature can call on him 

to investigate but much wider parameters for the Premier. 

 

When the NDP [New Democratic Party] was in government, 

our premier called for the Conflict of Interest Commissioner to 

investigate a member who had put conflicting statements on the 

public record. 

 

Now the Premier’s Justice minister has been caught putting 

conflicting information on the public record with respect to his 

relationship with a suspect in the unlawfully obtained police 

files. To the Premier: will he show that he truly has nothing to 

hide and ask the Conflict of Interest Commissioner to 

investigate the activities of his Minister of Justice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, regardless of who is 

requesting anything to be looked at, whether it is the member 

opposite or my office, this request to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner and his response — which is now public today 

— I’m not sure that the facts would change. The facts, as has 

been pointed out by this independent officer of this Assembly, 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, is that there are no facts 

to support the claim. There is no factual assertion in his letter. 

 

These are quotes now from the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner: “There is no detail given as to what 

misstatements, if any, were uttered . . .” And “There is no 

assertion that this conduct was done in the execution of the 

office.” 

 

Moreover the letter sent by the former premier to the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner asking him to look into the NDP fraud 

scandal centred on the fact that it involved the misappropriation 

or the disappearance of taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

It also involved — that scandal, if you remember, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — involved the assertion by a then sitting member of 

the NDP caucus that it was the intent of the NDP caucus to 

conceal fraud. And I think that last part’s a quote. I think there’s 

a material difference between that and the recollections of a 

phone call versus a meeting four years ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier set a 

precedent. The Sask Party government’s called on the Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner to continue his investigation into a 

member who is no longer an MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], suggesting it is in the public interest to continue. He 

has said he believes in accountability and transparency, but it 



April 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

now seems that those values do not apply to him and his own 

ministers. 

 

To the Premier: will he do the right thing and ask the Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner to conduct a special investigation into 

the actions and statements of his Justice minister with respect to 

the unlawfully obtained police file suspect? If not, why the 

double standard? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Kindersley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on last Thursday the member opposite released two 

letters he had received as minister of Justice. Obviously he 

didn’t just keep those two letters. He must have kept all letters 

while he was the minister of Justice, and now he’s prepared to 

release those private and confidential letters when it suits his 

political purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under The Archives Act passed by that former 

government, all ministers’ records including correspondence are 

to be sent to the provincial archives once a minister leaves his 

office. So, Mr. Speaker, why does that member still have 

ministerial correspondence? Why hasn’t it been archived as the 

law requires? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Casino Profits and Ministerial Documents 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

once said in this Assembly: “. . . accountability only happens in 

here under the auspices of the legislature and its committees 

. . .” 

 

My question is quite simply for the Minister of SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority]. Does he still 

support his statement that a true accountability only exists here 

before the Assembly and its committees? 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Liquor and Gaming. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this floor of the Assembly is the accountable portion 

of government to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s why I 

wonder, Mr. Speaker, why the members opposite haven’t 

returned their cabinet papers and turned them over to the 

archives, the provincial archives. That individual member, Mr. 

Speaker, when she was a minister received ministerial 

correspondences which have not yet been returned as the 

legislation demands to the provincial archives. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as part of the Sask Party 

government’s unaccountability Act that they introduced, Bill 

No. 32, this is definitely not a piece of housekeeping legislation. 

And according to the Bill, a section of The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act will be repealed. This section is the provision 

that requires the government to receive the approval of cabinet 

and to issue an . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. Order. I’m 

having trouble hearing the question. I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the section that’s being repealed 

is a provision that requires the government to receive the 

approval of cabinet and to issue an order in council for all 

expenditures of casino profits. No longer will the government 

be required to disclose these expenditures to the public, the 

media, or the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why does the Saskatchewan Party 

intend to withhold disclosure of casino profits and erode 

government accountability to the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the holding back of information and the non-disclosure 

of information is being carried out by the members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there clearly is The Archives Act in Saskatchewan 

which demands that previous cabinet members return their files 

to the Archives Board when they’re no longer ministers. 

Virtually every one of the members that sat in cabinet on the 

opposite side have failed to do so, Mr. Speaker. The hidden 

information, the information that that government has, that 

previous administration has, is now being used, Mr. Speaker. 

That private information is now being used for partisan political 

purposes, not what it was . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I’m finding it 

difficult to hear the questions or the responses. I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well it’s nice for the nice rant that the minister is giving us, but 

he’s not even coming close to answering the question as to why 

they are again trying to bury spending of this government. 

 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2008 

Last week the Sask Party government was substantially raising 

the threshold for disclosure expenditures. It was pointed out to 

them that the potential existed for money to be spent 

inappropriately and that the public, the media, and the 

opposition would have no way of knowing. Now we see the 

Sask Party intends to remove any requirement to disclose 

expenditures of casino profits of any amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the Saskatchewan Party 

removing the requirement to disclose how the profits from 

casinos are spent, and what do they want to conceal from the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to non-disclosure, when it comes to 

breaking the law of this province, it’s the members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, that are in contravention of The Archives Act. 

They have retained their ministerial papers, their ministerial 

correspondence. Much of that is private information, Mr. 

Speaker, that was related to the business of government and to 

individuals contacting the ministers at the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those members opposite, including the member asking the 

question, are in contravention of The Archives Act, have failed 

to return those papers. They’re property of the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s not their personal property. It’s not their 

personal information, and when will they come into line with 

the law, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I’d like to remind 

members that rule 19(3), that the responses to questions must be 

relevant to those questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Minimum Wage Indexation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — A bit of amnesia, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, these past few weeks have been a study of 

contrasts. We’ve learned about a series of mean-spirited cuts to 

Station 20, the dental sealant program, and the vulnerable 

workers benefit, all while the government was busy giving their 

friends raises. 

 

We learned that a party which promised open and accountable 

government has a Premier who wants to be able to spend 

taxpayers’ dollars without impunity and a Justice minister who 

changes his story more often than he changes his socks. Mr. 

Speaker, we learned that while the Minister of Labour is quite 

happy collecting an indexed salary, he’s not quite sure that the 

minimum wage earners really deserve that security. 

 

To the minister: why is he even reviewing government plans to 

index the minimum wage? And can we assume that his review 

also covers his own salary? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate that 

question. When it comes to reviewing minimum wage, what we 

said, Mr. Speaker, is we would go forward on our campaign 

commitment to keep in consistent step with the previous 

government. That’s in the midst of rolling out. I said that we 

would do a review as part of due diligence. Mr. Speaker, as a 

new associate deputy minister came on, he’s now taken that on. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that work continues. 

 

All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is I hope the member opposite is 

also asking some quiet questions to the former minister of 

Labour about where his archived papers are. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, back when the minister 

announced that he was going forward with the NDP increase to 

minimum wage, his news release conveniently neglected to 

mention indexation. An enterprising reporter asked him what 

happened? And he said it was being reviewed, with a view to 

making a decision in 2008. He’s now saying the review will 

take longer than planned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what is taking so long. It’s not like 

this minister has been busy reading his own pieces of 

legislation. You know, if the minister wants to review 

indexation, maybe he should open up his wallet and look at his 

most recent paycheque. 

 

To the minister: what’s taking so long? Is he putting off making 

this decision until the dog days of summer in hopes that nobody 

will notice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, once again I appreciate the 

question. We’re moving forward as we said that we would with 

the review, Mr. Speaker. Regarding the issue of the timing, Mr. 

Speaker, I was a little bit optimistic. I thought the work might 

move forward. The reality is, Mr. Speaker, as the associate 

deputy minister came into that position a little later than we had 

anticipated, that work’s taking a little longer than we’d first 

thought, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I have every confidence in the 

work that’s under way. 

 



April 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

But, Mr. Speaker, I guess what’s most troubling, Mr. Speaker, 

relates to this fearmongering, Mr. Speaker, that is as if there’s 

something going on. Mr. Speaker, the great fear is that people 

of this province are going to be concerned that their private 

correspondence with their former government is going to be 

used for political purposes that we’ve seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, a bit lame. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister tells us he is reviewing the situation with 

a view to making Saskatchewan minimum wage quote, “more 

predictable.” I certainly hope again that he does a better job of 

reviewing this than he did Bills 5 and 6, and particularly, 

particularly his work around the Labour Relations Board. 

 

The way I see it, there are really two main ways to make 

minimum wage more predictable. He can either go ahead and 

index it as the Sask Party promised, or he can freeze it 

altogether. That would certainly be predictable, and I wonder if 

he wouldn’t be closer to his ideological preference. 

 

To the minister: will he skip the review? Will he act? And will 

he bring predictability to Saskatchewan’s minimum wage? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

Minister of Advanced Education and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, once again I appreciate the 

question. It’s important for the people of this province. What 

we’ve said, Mr. Speaker, is we’re keeping our promise. The 

schedule as far as the rollouts are proceeding as planned, Mr. 

Speaker. We said that we would review it. That review is 

underway, Mr. Speaker. What we said is again, the assistant 

deputy minister would actually take the lead on that. It took a 

little longer as far as getting him into position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the question as it was asked also noted an 

element of predictability. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, it relates to 

Bills 5 and 6 and what’s been going on in committee, Mr. 

Speaker. And perhaps there’s a new question, Mr. Speaker, a 

new question that we can ask because it seems that not 

everyone on that side, Mr. Speaker, shares this common view. 

And that is, Mr. Speaker, perhaps there can be a question raised 

there and that is, will the members opposite agree to have a free 

vote on Bills 5 and 6, Mr. Speaker, a free vote? Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

standing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave of our 

Assembly to make a statement of remembrance and reflection 

on this National Day of Mourning. 

[14:15] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Leave is granted. I 

recognize the member for Advanced Education and Labour. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

National Day of Mourning for Workers 

Killed or Injured on the Job 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today is the National Day of Mourning, an important and 

solemn day in which we honour and recognize the women and 

men who have lost their lives or have been injured on the job. 

 

The day is an annual event. First declared in 1984, it takes place 

each year on April 28, recalling the anniversary of the federal 

government’s final reading of Canada’s first comprehensive 

workers’ compensation Act in 1914. Today workplaces across 

the country are observing this day through moments of silence, 

candle lightings, and similar acts of remembrance. On 

Parliament Hill today, as at our own legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

flags fly at half-mast. 

 

The names of those who lost their lives in the last year are being 

read into the official record and inscribed in the national 

registry at the Canadian Labour Congress in Ottawa. Here in 

Saskatchewan, we acknowledge the women and men who lost 

their lives building a strong and prosperous future by reading 

their names into the provincial record. 

 

It saddens me, Mr. Speaker, to report that in the last year, the 

Workers’ Compensation Board has recognized the loss of 36 

Saskatchewan people in the course of this work. Each loss is a 

poignant reminder that one death is too many. It is the loss of a 

family member, a co-worker, a member of our community. One 

loss remains too many. 

 

I would ask on this day, Mr. Speaker, that all members renew 

their commitment to ensuring that health and safety in the 

workplace always remains a priority. As recent tragedies have 

reinforced, we must continue to strive for fewer workplace 

injuries and deaths, recognizing our shared responsibility to 

build a healthier, safer Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please rise. When I have 

read the names of those who have died on the job this year, I 

ask that we also observe a moment of silence in the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Nathan Adrian Peter Boersma 

Cory Braaten Ross Castle 

Arthur Dale Terrance Donaldson 

Walter Essar Alfred Genereux 

David Gonor Scott Greenham 

Terry Grohn Edgar Guillemin 

Byron Gwilliam Melvin Halfe 

Garth Hamilton Jeffrey Johnson 

David Knorr Frank Krieger 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2008 

Stuart Lord Vernon Lund 

William Maves Lyle Myrheim 

Ivan Mykytyshyn Rudolph Nienaber  

Gudmund Nordal John Oxtoby 

Shawn Parker Stanley Pinnell 

Terry Riley John Russell 

Matthew Scharf Spencer Skagen 

Henri St. Pierre Darren Stone 

Richard Stone James Wightman. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Leave to make a statement of reply. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Every year 

on April 28, a National Day of Mourning is observed to 

commemorate those killed or hurt by workplace injuries or 

disease. The date of April 28 was chosen in 1984 when the 

Canadian Labour Congress proclaimed the date to coincide with 

the day third reading took place for the first comprehensive 

workers’ compensation Act in Canada back in 1914. 

 

The workers of Canada are not alone in their observance of this 

special day. April 28 is recognized and observed in 100 

countries worldwide, making it truly a global event. 

 

Since 1984 the Day of Mourning observances have become 

more widespread across the country as they are led by unions 

and labour councils in many communities. The labour 

movement across the country has made great strides in raising 

awareness of the importance of safety on the job. 

 

Today as the Minister of Labour read the names of the workers 

who lost their lives through workplace accidents, my thoughts 

turned to the families — the tragedy and the pain they have 

endured. 

 

The numbers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, speak for themselves and 

reflect the need to draw attention to this important issue. We 

must continue to build on the improvements that have been 

made, while pressuring all levels of government to enforce the 

laws and regulations there are in place. Lives are not saved by 

governments simply adopting legislation. Lives are saved by 

governments enforcing legislation. 

 

We continue to see alarming numbers of deaths in certain 

industries. Manufacturing and construction top the list. A study 

done earlier this year points to the significant increase in 

fatalities caused by occupational disease, mainly asbestos 

related. Asbestos-related deaths alone account for a significant 

percentage of the increase in occupational disease, with the 

fatality rate continually rising. 

 

The time has long come for us as members of the Legislative 

Assembly to enforce the laws that are in place to protect 

workers from making the ultimate sacrifice. All workers, their 

families, their communities, and the public are directly affected 

by workplace death, injury, and diseases. Each of us must 

continue to fight. 

 

April 28 is a day that we join together in our commitment to 

eliminate all workplace injuries and fatalities and to strengthen 

our resolve to establish safe conditions in the workplace for all. 

 

Across the country, workers will light candles, don ribbons and 

black armbands, and observe moments of silence to publicly 

renew their commitment to health and safety in the workplace. 

On this day we mourn for those who have lost their lives. 

However it is equally important that we continue to fight for the 

living. It is as much a day to remember those who have died 

due to workplace accidents as it is a call to protect the living. 

 

This evening I will be speaking at the Yorkton and District 

Labour Council commemorative ceremony, and I’m sure many 

of my fellow colleagues in our Legislative Assembly and many 

other legislative members throughout Canada will also be 

attending ceremonies throughout our province and our country. 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — To request leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member for Martensville. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

would like to introduce to you and through you Deb Grey, who 

is seated in your gallery. 

 

I had the absolute honour of working with Deb while I was in 

Ottawa. Deb was the first Reform MP [Member of Parliament] 

to sit in the House of Commons, and she sat as a caucus of one 

for a while. And throughout her career in politics and before 

that as a teacher, she showed her dedication not just to her 

constituents and her students, but to the country as a whole and 

is a role model not just to women in politics — although she 

certainly is that — but to all of us. 

 

Deb, I’m sure, wouldn’t mind me calling her opinionated 

because I think we’re aware of that, but it is based on a set of 

principles and beliefs that she holds dear. And you don’t ever 

have to question where you stand with her, which is something 

that I certainly appreciate. 

 

And in my role in Ottawa I helped out with question period a 

little bit and I have to say that Deb was an absolute superstar. 



April 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

And I value her friendship and I’m honoured to know her and I 

welcome her and I ask that all members of the Assembly 

welcome her to this Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. With leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join with the member from Martensville in welcoming 

Deb Grey to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I have watched Deb Grey in the House of Commons for a long 

time. And in fact I was sorry to see her go. She was able to ask 

questions and she did it with lots of wit. And I particularly 

remember the binder boy response to, I think it was the House 

Leader on the government side. And I remember that because I 

carry around a lot of binders, or have in the past, and thought at 

one stage someone in the opposition was going to call me 

binder girl. 

 

Anyway, Deb, it’s wonderful to see you here in Regina. You 

really are an inspiration to women from all political parties and 

we hope you have a nice time. The weather’s getting a little 

nicer. Enjoy your stay here. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I recognize the 

member. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s also 

my honour to introduce to you and through you to this 

Assembly a Canadian political legend, Deborah Grey, who I’ve 

had the great honour of knowing since I’ve been about 18 or 19 

years old, who’s been a great inspiration to me and an 

encouragement to me — who was first elected in 1989, sat as a 

caucus of one for our party for four years, was re-elected in 

1993 with a whole bunch more people that followed along 

largely because of the work that she did. 

 

Truly one of the finest questioners that ever graced the floor of 

the House of Commons, and somebody I’m honoured to call a 

friend. Welcome to Deborah Grey. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

[14:30] 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: — I now call this committee meeting to order. 

We’re in Committee of Finance dealing with interim supply. I 

would ask the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

a pleasure to have with me from the Ministry of Finance this 

afternoon Doug Matthies, to my left, who is the deputy minister 

of Finance; Kirk McGregor, directly behind me, who is the 

assistant deputy minister in charge of taxation; Karen Layng, 

assistant deputy minister responsible for treasury board; and 

Joanne Brockman, who is the executive director of the 

economic and fiscal policy branch. 

 

The Chair: — Question? I recognize the member from Regina 

Douglas Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 

Chair, I just received a summary from the ministry for 

two-twelfths interim supply, and I’ve not been able to analyze it 

in the few moments that I’ve had this information. But 

essentially what I want to ask the minister, does this interim 

supply provide for anything other than two-twelfths? And if so, 

could he indicate what those circumstances are. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I realize in 

Committee of Finance I think I’m supposed to be standing for 

the response, so I apologize to the House for that oversight. 

 

In response to the member’s question, there are some changes 

to the, actually, two-twelfths that are provided for in this 

interim supply. There’s one-twelfth is provided for within the 

budget vote for one-twelfth, and then another one-twelfth is 

required to finance the month of May. And then when we bring 

this forward, we actually lump it together to get approval of the 

House for the entire two-twelfths. 

 

Over and above that mathematical two-twelfths, there is an 

addition of $20.703 million for the Ministry of Education, 

which represents two-tenths of the operating grant for K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] schools instead of two-twelfths. And 

the reason for that, member, is that the school system works on 

a 10-month basis, and so to properly fund the months of April 

and May, they are allocated two-tenths of the total allocation. 

So that’s an addition. 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2008 

There’s an addition of $8.944 million for the Ministry of 

Government Services, and that’s for the end-of-the-model-year 

purchase of vehicles that are required. Normally there is an 

additional amount of purchases of vehicles at this time of the 

year. Last year this additional amount wasn’t required because 

there was a rail strike and the models could not be delivered. So 

this is to provide for that recognition in Government Services 

that there are additional vehicles that are coming on in this 

two-month period of time over and above an even 12-month 

distribution. 

 

And there is an exclusion from the one two-twelfths formula in 

the amount of $1.397 million for the Ministry of Enterprise and 

Innovation which would represent the grant to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. And this is in recognition of the fact that the 

legislature has not approved the legislation in order to create the 

entity Enterprise Saskatchewan. So that amount was excluded 

from the estimates of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. 

Mr. Minister, I’m just looking at the allocation for Municipal 

Affairs and I don’t see here if there’s any additional funds that 

are proposed to be allocated to Municipal Affairs. Taking into 

account the announcement by the Minister of Municipal Affairs 

and the Premier that additional funds would be allocated to 

municipalities this year, can you enlighten us as to when that 

money will in fact start flowing to municipalities? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, member. The 

funding that’s allocated and requested two-twelfths of is the 

base budget funding. There will have to be introduced 

incremental monies from further estimates that will be 

introduced, I believe, Wednesday of this week that will provide 

for the extra money that was referred to in regard to the top-up 

money for revenue sharing to the municipalities. And so that is 

the way that issue will be handled as opposed to adjusting the 

two-twelfths as existing budget. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — The proceedings here are probably 

somewhat arcane for people who are watching this on 

television. But if I might try to explain that the budget, the 

government cannot spend money unless it’s approved by the 

Legislative Assembly. Pending the approval of the budget — 

and we have not had that final budget vote yet — the 

government nevertheless needs money to operate on starting 

April 1, which is the start of the government’s fiscal year. And 

so the government needs to come to the Legislative Assembly 

for approval to spend money, pending the vote on the budget 

and the approval of the budget. 

 

Speaking of which, I note that in estimates, the detailed 

estimates for the government under Finance is a subheading 

called servicing the public debt. And I’m wondering why, given 

your commitment as a government, you’ve indicated that — 

and also as a party — you’ve indicated that you would pay 

down $250 million in debt this year, why there’s no allocation 

on a monthly basis here for paying down that debt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m advised 

that, as opposed to a family’s household mortgage where there 

may be monthly mortgage payments on their long-term debt, 

the province’s debt is not treated in that same regard, and so we 

will make payments as it’s appropriate as the maturity of bonds 

will mature and then need to be replaced. So the $250 million 

payment of long-term debt will be cycled in at the appropriate 

time within this fiscal year as the commitment indicated in the 

budget. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I understand that, and that 

certainly has been the practice. But I just want to say that your 

government has signalled a whole new approach and has set out 

specific debt reduction targets unlike the previous government 

that reduced debt in a major way. But you say that you want to 

improve on that. Wouldn’t some allocation on a monthly basis 

at least give the public some assurance that you’re serious about 

reducing the debt? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you to the member. Certainly I 

think that it’s important to reiterate that we do have a special 

long-term commitment to pay down the public debt. In this 

fiscal year and in this budget, we committed to making a special 

payment of $250 million. And it is fully our commitment to 

make sure that happens at the appropriate time when the bonds 

mature and it’s appropriate for us to do that. 

 

Over and above that, we have on the floor of the legislature the 

growth and financial security legislation that will dictate as we 

go forward that surpluses in the provincial budget, one-half of 

those surpluses will be allocated against long-term debt 

reduction. And as those surpluses are declared and accumulate, 

I’m very, very optimistic that indeed that’ll be the case going 

forward. We certainly are intending to make a major 

commitment on using 50 per cent of those surpluses in the 

payment of long-term debt. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — So just as I understand it then, Mr. 

Chair, what we have is a government that says they have a 

long-term commitment to reducing debt, but there’s no 

short-term indication of that commitment in the interim supply 

estimates that are before us. Is that correct? 

 

[14:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — That is correct, but again the member 

has to remember — and he did a pretty good job of explaining 

what the purpose of interim supply is — interim supply is to 

provide operating funds for those ministries of government that 

need to operate on a monthly basis as the requirement for funds 

to outline and to initiate their programs are expended. And so 

there are really two different components. What the member is 

asking questions about specifically do not pertain to interim 

supply, but the member certainly, if he’s asking for our 

commitment to make sure that those commitments are 

honoured, he has that commitment from this government. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I believe it 

is appropriate then that I move two resolutions. The first 

resolution, no. 1: 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding 1,452,828,000 be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 2009. 

 

I so move. 



April 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved that, no. 1: 

 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $1,452,828,000 be 

granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 

ending March 31, 2009. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Motion carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

second motion, no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

for the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, the sum of $1,452,828,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance in 

no. 2: 

 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses 

of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 

2009, the sum of $1,452,828,000 be granted out of the 

General Revenue Fund. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for 

leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance: 

 

That the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 

committee has agreed to certain resolutions and asks for 

leave to sit again. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just 

briefly want to thank the minister and his officials for attending 

here today and for answering our questions. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. I usually take every 

opportunity I can to thank the officials from the Ministry of 

Finance for their exemplary work, and I do that again on behalf 

of the members of the Assembly and the Government of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The committee will now rise and the 

Chair report that the committee has agreed to certain resolutions 

and asks for leave to sit again. Is it agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — It’s agreed. 

 

[The Deputy Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 

agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 

same, and to ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read 

the first time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 39 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly I move that Bill No. 39, The Appropriation Act, 

2008 (No. 2) be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 

that Bill No. 39, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now 

introduced and read the first time. Is the leave of the Assembly 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2008 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 

the Assembly and under rule 72(2), I move that the Bill be now 

read a second and a third time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is leave of the Assembly granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 39, The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 2) be now 

read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second and third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Assembly will pause for a short 

time while we are waiting for the Administrator for Royal 

Assent. 

 

His Honour the Administrator is here for Royal Assent. Please 

rise. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 15:06 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 

took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 

following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Please be seated. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this 

Legislative Assembly in its present session has passed several 

Bills which in the name of the Assembly I present Your 

Honour, to which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s 

assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 15 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2008 

Bill No. 4 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 

(Fixed Election Dates) Amendment Act, 

2007/Loi de 2007 modifiant la Loi de 2007 sur 

l’Assemblée législative et le Conseil exécutif 

(élections à date fixe) 

Bill No. 30 - The Statutes and Regulations Revision Act 

Bill No. 11 - The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la 

Loi de 2002 sur l’exécution des jugements 

canadiens 

Bill No. 20 - The Administration of Estates Amendment Act, 

2008/ Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi sur 

l’administration des successions 

Bill No. 12 - The Consumer Protection Amendment Act, 2008 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this 

Legislative Assembly has voted supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 39 - The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

 

to which I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 15:09.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

order that the good work of committees can proceed, I move 

that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly 

do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:10.] 

 



April 28, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 955 of Hansard, No. 26A Tuesday, April 15, 2008, left 

column, the last sentence of the second last paragraph reads, 

“[And Mr. Wheeler states].” 

 

The sentence should read, “[And Mr. Weiler states].” 

 

We apologize for this error. 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1107 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1107 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1107 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1107 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1116 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1117 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1117 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1107 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1107 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1108 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1108 

 2008 Snowbirds Acceptance Show 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1108 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1108 

 Volunteer Week 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1109 

 Youth Art Exhibit in Saskatoon 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1109 

 Corporation Supports Weyburn Community 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1109 

 Prince Albert Sports Official Recognized 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1110 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Assistance for the Livestock Industry 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1110 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1110 

 Release of Confidential Documents 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1112 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1112 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1112 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1113 

 Casino Profits and Ministerial Documents 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1113 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1113 

 Minimum Wage Indexation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1114 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1114 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1115 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1116 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 Motions for Interim Supply 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1117 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1117 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1119 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 Bill No. 39 — The Appropriation Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1119 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1120 

CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1121 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


