




















































Hansard: November 04, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1555 

 November 4, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in the 

gallery I have three very special guests — James and Bryce 

Wilson, a father and son who happen to be very good friends of 

mine. James is a SaskTel manager from Yorkton as well as a 

very respected city councillor. His son Bryce is 16 years old, an 

excellent role model for his peers in Yorkton, and is very active 

in the community. Those are two of my guests, Mr. Speaker — 

very good friends. 

 

As well, there‟s a very, very special guest in the Assembly 

today I‟d like all members to welcome. It‟s my mother, Pat. 

She‟s been here a number of times, Mr. Speaker, but I‟ve never 

had the opportunity to introduce her because it‟s usually been a 

special occasion, so this is it. She‟s a great role model, a loving 

mother, a hard worker. Hopefully I‟ve acquired most of her 

work ethic and traits. And I feel bad for having to read this, Mr. 

Speaker, but there‟s so many things I‟ve just got to read it off. 

 

She‟s in large very responsible for why I‟m here today, and she 

did give birth to me, so that‟s another big reason why I‟m here 

today. She‟s an awesome mother for my two brothers and my 

sister, and I think a large part of her job as we were younger 

was keeping the three brothers from killing each other. Many 

times in my teens she probably thought she‟d be visiting me in 

the big house, not in this House, and for that I‟m very grateful. 

She was a very good role model to keep me from that path. 

 

A very energetic lady, very active. I‟ve had comments from 

people around this building as to how fast I move on my feet 

around here. In no small part it comes from my mother. In fact 

when she‟s doing her morning walks around Yorkton . . . She‟s 

retired but still moves like a gazelle, I‟ll tell you. And very 

often you‟ll hear a sonic boom around Yorkton, not from 

aircraft but from my mom. 

 

She continues to work part-time in her retirement as well as 

volunteer in the community, church, and hospital, and local 

child hunger programs like the Soup Haven, and always has 

time for her family, Mr. Speaker. In fact continually she goes 

above and beyond and was probably the main caregiver to my 

two daughters as we spent our time helping our young son with 

his fight with cancer. So I‟d just like all members here to 

welcome my mother to this Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly a group that are seated in your 

gallery, and these are a group of graduate students who are 

pursuing a master‟s degree in either public management or 

public policy, and they are doing so at the Johnson-Shoyama 

school of public policy at the University of Regina. And they 

are accompanied by a person who is no stranger to the public 

service in Saskatchewan, Lynn Minja, who I believe is known 

to both sides of the Assembly. And I would ask all members to 

join with me in extending them a very warm welcome today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan and as Minister Responsible 

for the Public Service Commission, I would like to join the 

member opposite in his welcome of the graduate students from 

the school of public policy. The Johnson-Shoyama school of 

public policy is an important addition to our post-secondary 

potential and capability in the province, and we‟re glad that 

they‟re here to join us today; hope they learn much as a result of 

their attendance here. And we look forward to visiting you at 

the school at some point in the near future to discuss on a 

one-to-one basis some of the things that you‟re learning. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

honour today to introduce 28 grade 12 students seated in the 

east gallery. These students are from Thom Collegiate. Their 

teacher is Jeff Perry, and Mr. Perry has brought successive 

grade 12 classes to this legislature. I think it‟s safe for me to 

call this an annual event, for which I am very grateful because 

of the opportunity for the grade 12 students to see us in action 

and to just get a little bit of a discussion going about what it is 

to have a parliamentary democracy. 

 

I met with this group a little bit earlier. They had some very 

interesting questions. And before I take my place I want to 

point out this 28-person, grade 12 soon-to-be-graduating class 

from Thom Collegiate really epitomizes what Saskatchewan‟s 

future is all about: bright, energetic, intelligent and they‟re 

going to go far. That‟s my prediction. Mr. Speaker, please join 

me in welcoming the grade 12‟s from Thom Collegiate. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to introduce to you in the western gallery an individual 

who‟s a sound engineer, a musician. I‟m speaking of John 

Bidochka, of course. John had been a constituent of mine. I 

unfortunately lost him to a move. I believe he‟s now in Regina 

Douglas Park. But John recently entered a great rendition of his 

anthem for the Hockey Night in Canada contest. It was a great 



1556 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

song, Mr. Speaker, but it didn‟t make it to the final cut, sadly. 

But anyway I‟d invite all members to join with me in 

welcoming John Bidochka to his legislature. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise with a 

petition in support of public safety and security in 

Saskatchewan. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, in the interest of the safety and security of 

Saskatchewan families, residents, and communities, to 

immediately cause the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing to undertake a thorough consultation 

with a broad group of stakeholders — including the 

policing community; corrections community; community 

agencies, organizations, and educators that interface with 

gangs — so that he might understand the risks and 

challenges that gangs present to our communities. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents who have concern 

that Saskatchewan families are struggling to find quality child 

care for their children and concerns that this limits their future 

in our economy. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government through consultation with the child care 

community to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of the early child care community to enable new child care 

spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed personnel. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of citizens in Pilot Butte and 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition concerning the Sask Party‟s decision to axe 

funding for Station 20. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately restore funding to the Station 

20 project. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition, some of 

them are from my constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place, and 

other individuals are from various neighbourhoods of 

Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of a reduction in the education 

portion of property taxes. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to stop withholding and to provide 

significant, sustainable, long-term property tax relief to 

property owners by 2009 through significantly increasing 

the provincial portion of education funding. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners are from Regina, concerned folks in 

Regina. And I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call my next order of the day, I wish 

to rule on three matters that arose during yesterday‟s 

proceedings. I have chosen to make my statements at this earlier 

point in the day in order to allow my rulings to guide the 

proceedings during statements by members and question period. 

 

Yesterday while listening to the statements by members during 

routine proceedings and later during debate on the address in 

reply, I became concerned over the choice of words and the 

level of discourse on display in the Assembly. I have reviewed 

the Hansard from yesterday and wish to highlight two matters 

of concern. 

 

Firstly I find that on one occasion during the period of 

statements by members, remarks were made that insinuated 

untruthfulness on the part of hon. members. This occurred 

during the remarks of the member for Wood River where he 

indirectly insinuated that members of the NDP [New 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1557 

Democratic Party] had knowingly misled this Assembly and the 

public on the Carriere settlement agreement. 

 

Members are well aware that it is not permissible to accuse or 

suggest that another member was not being truthful or that they 

intentionally misled the House. This practice is codified in our 

rule 50(f), in paragraph 484(3) of Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary 

Rules & Forms, 6th Edition, and on page 525 of Marleau and 

Montpetit‟s House of Commons Procedure and Practice. 

 

I call upon the member for Wood River to withdraw his 

remarks. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll withdraw those 

remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the member. 

 

Secondly I wish to remind members of their responsibility to 

conduct themselves in a manner befitting this Assembly. There 

have been several instances in recent days when the choice of 

language has given cause for concern. In these early days of a 

new session, it is beneficial to revisit the guidance found in a 

ruling of May 29, 2000: 

 

. . . Members are responsible for the words that they 

choose to use. Their words may be enthusiastic . . . but 

that enthusiasm must be tempered by honest beliefs and 

an absence of insinuations and aspersions levelled against 

colleagues. 

 

Previous rulings have often referred to paragraph 491 of 

Beauchesne‟s, 6th Edition, and I find it fitting to remind the 

House of one quotation from it, namely, that the “. . . language 

used in the House should be temperate and worthy of the place 

in which it is spoken.” 

 

I now wish to address the point of order raised yesterday by the 

Opposition House Leader. His point of order concerned the 

relevancy of certain responses given during question period. I 

also wish to thank the Government Deputy House Leader for 

her remarks. 

 

In stating his point of order, the Opposition House Leader cited 

rule 19(3), which requires that “Responses shall be relevant to 

the question.” This recently adopted rule codifies a 

well-established parliamentary practice: while ministers have a 

degree of latitude in how they choose to phrase their replies, the 

answers must nevertheless deal with the subject matter raised. 

 

I direct members to page 431 of Marleau and Montpetit‟s 

House of Commons Procedure and Practice, and to rulings by 

previous Speakers on December 22, 1986, December 18, 2002, 

and April 3, 2006, which also dealt with this point. 

 

The exchange at issue can be found on pages 1503 to 1505 of 

Monday‟s Hansard. The questions were posed by the member 

for Regina Dewdney and centred on public safety and the 

government‟s approach in notifying the public when offenders 

escape from custody. 

 

Two ministers responded on behalf of the cabinet. The 

responses provided by the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing outlined the policy and actions taken by his 

ministry to address the matter. In contrast, the responses 

provided by the Minister of Environment related to a previous 

government‟s handling of the Murdoch Carriere settlement. 

 

I find that the Minister of Environment‟s responses to the 

question posed by the member for Regina Dewdney were not 

relevant and they were not in order. Members are advised that 

their answers must be relevant to the question asked. If they are 

unable to provide a relevant response, they may decline to 

answer or they may take notice of the question. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Delisle Chiefs Remember Terry Rak 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recently had the 

honour of attending the home opener of the junior hockey club, 

Delisle Chiefs. The game was dedicated to the Rak family. The 

origins of the Delisle Chiefs goes back to the Saskatoon Chiefs 

hockey club which, as Mrs. Rak states, was founded by Terry 

Rak‟s passions. He loved the game and especially the 

interaction with players, coaching staff, and other team 

managers. 

 

This love affair lasted until Terry was diagnosed with colon 

cancer and his untimely passing on June 22, 2007. The family 

was keenly interested in keeping Terry‟s legacy of love for the 

Chiefs alive. After a one-year leave of absence from the league, 

the title of the Chiefs moved to Delisle, Saskatchewan, under 

the helm of the highly enthusiastic and motivated hockey 

persona of Gordy Ouellette. The Rak family is very happy with 

the continuation of the Chiefs hockey club and extremely 

pleased with the team‟s jersey sporting the initials T.R., and 

thank the town of Delisle for embracing the Chiefs. 

 

[13:45] 

 

I would like to extend my congratulations to the volunteers, 

managers, coaches, parents, owners, and players that have 

brought the Chiefs junior hockey club to Delisle. The 

dedication it takes to put a team on the ice is immense and 

commendable. To all involved with the Delisle Chiefs, keep up 

the good work and good luck in the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Celebrates First Nations Culture 

 

Mr. Furber: — On October 9 and 10, Prince Albert hosted the 

2008 Aboriginal Music and Arts Festival The event began with 

the Waniska Gala Banquet held at the Art Hauser Centre. 

Gordon Tootoosis was the guest of honour. This event was 

well-attended, Mr. Speaker, and was a wonderful prelude to the 

Music and Arts Festival also hosted by Gordon Tootoosis and 

held the following evening at the E.A. Rawlinson Centre. As 

part of the festival, 25 talented youth produced and performed 

the second annual Northern Spirits Showcase. 



1558 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, the celebration of First Nations culture continued 

throughout the weekend with the Northern Lights Casino 10th 

Annual Thanksgiving Powwow at the Art Hauser Centre which 

saw over 500 dancers competing in various categories. The rich 

pageantry was a sight to behold, to be sure. I was very pleased 

to attend the powwow and take part in the grand entrance 

Sunday evening. The weekend concluded with a spectacular 

fireworks extravaganza, which is still being talked about in 

Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating and acknowledging the accomplishments of the 

organizers and artists of the Waniska Gala Banquet, Aboriginal 

Music and Arts Festival, the Northern Spirits Showcase, and the 

Northern Lights Casino 10th Annual Thanksgiving Powwow. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Positive Reaction to Funding for Technology Infrastructure 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In recognition of 

Education Week, our government made a major announcement 

that will give Saskatchewan people, no matter where they live, 

access to educational opportunities they have never had before. 

We announced nearly $10 million in funding to enhance 

technology infrastructure in libraries, schools, and regional 

colleges. 

 

About half of that money will go to implement a computer 

system that enables libraries province-wide to share their 

resources. The rest will be spent on setting up systems to 

facilitate online and satellite learning for schools 

province-wide. 

 

Reaction has been overwhelmingly positive. Southeast Regional 

Library director Allan Johnson described the announcement as 

the most significant since 1967 when regional libraries were 

first developed. Multitype Library board Chair Zenon Zuzak 

said: 

 

A lot of work has been done to develop the vision, to 

dream the impossible dreams . . . With this funding 

announcement today this dream will become a reality. 

 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association executive director, 

Ernie Cychmistruk, said: 

 

The fact that the satellite hardware and supports will soon 

be in every Saskatchewan school — rural and urban — 

holds a great deal of promise for enhancing learning 

opportunities for students. 

 

But perhaps it was Jan Smith, Palliser Regional Library 

director, who summed it up best and definitely most shortest 

with “We are so happy.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, improving and maintaining our province‟s 

infrastructure is closely linked to our growing economy, 

improving our quality of life, and taking pride in where we live. 

These long overdue technology improvements for schools and 

libraries will play a key role in that. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

The 100-Mile Journey 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On July 18 and 19, 

Shannon Loutitt, a neighbour of mine from Saskatoon Centre, 

ran a very special journey from the Edmonton legislative 

grounds to Athabasca. Calling it the 100-mile journey to bring a 

hero‟s spirit home, she retraced her great-grandfather‟s run in 

1904 when, as a Métis mail runner for the Hudson Bay 

Company, he ran from Athabasca to Edmonton to warn of an 

impending flood. He did it in 16 hours, beating a rider on a 

horse by an hour. It was an extraordinary feat. 

 

I was delighted to be there at the start to wish Shannon 

Godspeed on behalf of her neighbours back home. She 

completed the run with lots of help from supporters, including 

the Saskatchewan senator, Lillian Dyck, Chief Willie 

Littlechild, and Chief Tammy Cook-Searson of the La Ronge 

Indian Band, who ran the last eight hours, some 60 kilometres 

with Shannon. 

 

Of course Shannon‟s journey to bring a hero‟s spirit home was 

very personal, but Shannon sees a larger role for running in 

building and strengthening our community as she helped 

organize a one-day, city-wide relay that included over 10,000 

Saskatoon schoolchildren this past May. She also helped 

celebrate Tom Longboat‟s 100th anniversary by running in the 

Boston Marathon, and I was delighted to speak of Shannon‟s 

experience in Boston in the legislature a few years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Shannon on this truly amazing accomplishment, and we wish 

her the very best in her future endeavours. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Food Drive 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A big salute to the 

citizens of Moose Jaw for the success of the Food Bank food 

drive last Friday. Each Halloween for the past three years, the 

Hillcrest Apostolic Church has organized a city-wide food blitz 

in support of the Moose Jaw Food Bank. 

 

Some 350 volunteers committed their time to solicit the entire 

city for non-perishable foods. Dozens of drivers with pickup 

trucks and vans, followed by hundreds of door-to-door 

canvassers throughout the city. Meanwhile dozens of other 

volunteers were kept busy sorting the foods into specific 

categories to be boxed up and delivered for distribution by the 

Food Bank. The scene of the sorting centre reminded me much 

of the hustle bustle of a stock exchange as people hurriedly 

worked together for the cause. 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1559 

I was part of the campaign and I can speak proudly of the 

volunteers and the citizens of Moose Jaw who showed their 

support and generosity. In most cases the pre-circulated Food 

Bank paper bag was filled and placed by the trick-or-treat treats, 

ready for volunteer pickup. In some cases people simply didn‟t 

have time to fill up the bag but insisted on being part of the 

process and went through their cupboards to find products to 

donate. This year a record of 39,500 pounds, almost 20 tonnes 

of food, was collected. 

 

There are dozens of gracious stories where people expressed 

their appreciation of the campaign and enjoyed donating and 

volunteering for this worthy cause. Thank you to the donators, 

the volunteers, and the organizers for giving such generosity. 

Our efforts are appreciated, to show that Moose Jaw is a 

community of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Sports Hall of Fame Induction Dinner 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. North Battleford is 

home of one of seven community-based sports halls of fame in 

Saskatchewan. It is managed by a large team of volunteers 

throughout The Battlefords and has amassed over the last 20 

years a collection second to none in the province. As has been 

said, Mr. Speaker, you go in to look around for half an hour and 

you‟ll stay for half a day. 

 

On Saturday, November 1, the eighth annual induction 

ceremonies for the Hall of Fame were held. This year‟s 

inductees are Alex “Wuttunee” Decoteau, originally from the 

Red Pheasant First Nation, an athlete and soldier who, as a 

runner, represented Canada in the 1912 Olympic Games in 

Stockholm, Sweden; Fiona Smith Bell, a women‟s hockey great 

who played nine years with the Canadian national program and 

brought home nine international medals; Ray Hickson, whose 

community-building efforts in many fields included an 

extraordinary commitment to The Battlefords minor baseball 

program, especially for equipment and facilities. 

 

Also inducted were two teams: first, the 1999-2000 North 

Battleford North Stars hockey team, which became the first 

team in franchise history to capture the Saskatchewan Junior 

Hockey League title, and with it went on to achieve the Anavet 

Cup; and, Mr. Speaker, the 1958 North Battleford Junior 

Beavers baseball club, which captured its first provincial junior 

baseball championship in the history of the Saskatchewan 

Junior Baseball Association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to recognize and congratulate 

this year‟s inductees and the hard and dedicated work of the 

volunteers of the North Battleford Sports Hall of Fame and 

Museum. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

Comments Regarding Settlement 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to read to this Assembly a statement written last Friday by 

one of Murdoch Carriere‟s victims, and I quote: 

 

Upon reading the article in today‟s Leader-Post, victims 

of the Carriere assault are all in shock. 

 

It was very painful to hear that Carriere received such a 

large amount of money to compensate him for all his pain 

and suffering. 

 

Those words are unbelievable to us — that the man 

responsible for assaulting us for years received 

compensation for pain and suffering. 

 

Murdoch Carriere was a friend to many politicians in 

office at that time, and it‟s clear our feelings as victims 

were secondary in the former government‟s battle to keep 

their friend Murdoch from hard times. 

 

Murdoch Carriere should have been fired with cause 

several years before 2003 for harassing women. 

 

We have all suffered for many years, and the injustice of 

the incident continually comes back and strikes us in the 

face. 

 

Unfortunately this does nothing to ease the anger and the 

shock that the victims have experienced over hearing 

about this secret agreement. 

 

We all hoped that justice would prevail. 

 

Apparently not. 

 

Where is our justice? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskEnergy’s Investment Strategy 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government is 

talking about selling our majority stake in Heritage Gas. To the 

Minister Responsible for Crown Investments Corporation: is 

Heritage Gas a profitable company? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I notice Heritage Gas is quite important in Halifax. I 

know that as well that the people there are utilizing the services 

of Heritage Gas. However Saskatchewan has made a large 

investment in Heritage Gas but as yet have not received a 



1560 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

positive return, Mr. Speaker. So as of the present time, the best 

information I have is that Heritage Gas is not profitable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from 

the Halifax Chronicle Herald. Quote: 

 

. . . a Saskatchewan government spokesman, would not 

disclose the amount of the investment made in Heritage 

Gas but said it wasn‟t one of the investments losing 

money for the provincial government. 

 

Ergo, it‟s got to be making money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government‟s own spokesperson, the 

government‟s own spokesperson says this is a profitable 

investment. If the minister plans to go ahead and sell the 

profitable Heritage Gas, how will this affect the revenues of 

SaskEnergy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Heritage Gas, as in any large construction operation, 

takes place over a period of time. You have costs upfront, Mr. 

Speaker, and you have ongoing costs. The construction of the 

Heritage Gas system in Halifax is not yet completed, so the 

costs are not yet completely known to SaskEnergy to be able to 

make an evaluation as to whether this company will or will not 

be profitable . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister may complete his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the 

costs continue to occur to SaskEnergy. We are unable at this 

time to make a determination as to whether or not at some point 

in the future it may be profitable. Mr. Speaker, it‟s an 

investment, however, outside of Saskatchewan when this is the 

number one economy in Canada, and we should be investing 

here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know where to go. The 

government‟s own spokesperson . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I call the members to order. The member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — And, Mr. Speaker, if you think I‟m confused, 

you want to check with the government ministers about this. 

I‟ve never seen more confusion than what they‟re displaying 

right now. Their own spokesman says Heritage Gas is 

profitable, and yet the minister stands here and says, well 

maybe somewhere in the future it might be. Well who‟s on first 

here? It‟s a profitable corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again quoting from the Halifax Chronicle Herald. 

Quote, “Mr. Woods said the government will use the money 

from the eventual sale of Heritage Gas for an investment within 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Well this Saskatchewan investment will have to earn tens of 

millions of dollars just to make up for the lost earnings from 

Heritage Gas. To the minister: what will this investment in 

Saskatchewan be, and can he guarantee the investment will 

replace all of the profits of Heritage Gas? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said earlier, this is an ongoing project. The final 

costs are not yet determined because the entire construction 

project has not been built. But I can assure the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, that we will be investing any returns that 

we gather from that project, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:00] 

 

We won‟t be, Mr. Speaker, investing in those kind of projects 

that they invested on previously, like $15 million loss in 

Channel Lake while that member was sitting on the government 

side of the House; $2 million in Guyana, Mr. Speaker; $16 

million that they lost in Chicago; $9.4 million lost in 

Newfoundland, Mr. Speaker; $24.7 million lost in Atlanta, 

Georgia, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear the government is selling 

off a profitable investment of SaskEnergy‟s. Heritage Gas is 

profitable now and it‟s signed a 25-year lease. It‟s projected to 

be profitable far into the future. The heavy work and the heavy 

investment of a start-up company is just ending, Mr. Speaker, 

and the rewards are now flowing and growing with Heritage 

Gas. 

 

To the minister: since he is replacing a profitable investment 

with an unknown one, can he guarantee that this means no loss 

of revenue for SaskEnergy and therefore no more rate increases 

for Saskatchewan consumers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

understand that member asking the question, which way to go. 

Because clearly, Mr. Speaker, when they were in government, 

they didn‟t know which way to go. 

 

You know, the member opposite says that they foresee a profit 

far down into the future, Mr. Speaker. Well their own projects 

that they initiated, Mr. Speaker, outside of the province were 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1561 

saying a 22 per cent return, and yet they recovered a negative 

15 per cent. Now that‟s what I would call profits far into the 

future, Mr. Speaker, because they never occurred. 

 

Things like, Mr. Speaker, $10 million lost in Manitoba on Craig 

Wireless; $72 million — you know how much support that 

could give to the people of Saskatchewan — $72 million lost by 

Navigata in British Columbia. We‟re not going there, Mr. 

Speaker, like the NDP. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve already seen a 20 per 

cent increase in SaskEnergy rates. The government‟s already 

told us they‟re not going to use one dime of their surplus to help 

out Saskatchewan ratepayers. But now they won‟t even 

guarantee that their ideological drive to sell off profitable 

investments won‟t result in yet further rate increases. 

 

So the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]: if he is so convinced that this plan is good for 

SaskEnergy and good for the people of Saskatchewan, then why 

is he so afraid to say that it won‟t result in a rate hike for 

Saskatchewan consumers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, when you look over the list of losers that the 

previous administration invested in, you understand why the 

Crown corporations have to have an increase in rates, Mr. 

Speaker — because we have to pay for all the losses that they 

incurred, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only were those investments not made here in 

the province of Saskatchewan, they blew this money, Mr. 

Speaker, around the world. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite know SaskEnergy merely 

passes on the price of gas to the consumers. We do not make a 

single red cent of profit on that gas price, Mr. Speaker — not 

one red cent. This is the same policy that the previous 

administration carried forward, but we have to pay for their 

losses now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 

announced yesterday the sell-off of 1.6 million acres of 

agricultural Crown land. 

 

To the minister: who did he consult with before announcing this 

decision yesterday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to the member opposite, actually the consultation has 

been all over the province of Saskatchewan. Producers, lessees 

all over the province, where they had cultivated land or pasture 

land, have been saying for years that they want an opportunity 

to purchase the land that they lease. 

 

What we saw yesterday was a group in the rotunda yesterday — 

whether from SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] or the cattle industry out there — saying that 

this was a positive move that we made and long overdue. And I 

think the member should take notice that when their 

government was in power, they also sold about 600,000 acres 

since 1991. What we put on the table yesterday was 600,000 

acres of cultivated land and 1 million acres of pasture land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, according to the minister, the 

sale of all 1.6 million acres of land will raise about $350 

million. When asked on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] radio what the government will do with this 

money, the minister replied, and I quote, “We want to improve 

the programming and things for producers out there right now, 

and I think this would loosen up some dollars for programs like 

that.” Mr. Speaker, the minister is now telling livestock 

producers they should pay for their own assistance. 

 

To the minister: given that the government is sitting on $2 

billion in cash, why doesn‟t he spend some of those dollars to 

aid livestock producers today instead of waiting for producers 

to pay for their own assistance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 

member opposite, and actually all the producers in the province, 

that if they aren‟t in a position financially to purchase the land 

or they‟re not interested in purchasing the land, they can 

continue on with their lease. We‟re not ending their lease. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, to make the statement that the member 

opposite did right now, we wouldn‟t have to repair the 

programs for agriculture in this province if, for 16 years, the 

NDP hadn‟t gutted every program that we have for farmers and 

ranchers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



1562 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry is 

struggling. In fact it‟s referred to as a tsunami when it comes to 

livestock. When asked if the government was going to provide 

any more help to producers, the minister replied, and I quote, 

“Not at the present time. We‟re hoping the market starts to 

return and the dollar has dropped, and I‟m hoping that‟s going 

to make up our calf prices go up.” 

 

Hoping the market returns and the dollar drops is not the 

answer. Livestock producers deserve more than a minister that 

hopes things will turn around. 

 

To the minister: what is his immediate plan to assist this 

struggling industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

believe this last 10, 11 months we‟ve worked on a number of 

fronts to help out the livestock industry out there. One of the 

very first things we did at the request of livestock, both on the 

cattle side and hog producers, is put out a $90 million loan — 

something that they actually asked for from this government. 

They didn‟t want an ad hoc payment because they were worried 

about countervail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There‟s a number of other areas. On the grain side, we‟re doing 

a crop insurance review to improve that program that has had a 

lot of cutbacks under the NDP. AgriStability, we‟re looking at 

bringing that back to Saskatchewan to try and improve the 

reliability and bankability of that program for producers. And 

by the way, producers are looking forward to that 

announcement. 

 

Farm and ranch infrastructure water program in the Southwest. 

We‟re trying to help producers in the Southwest deal with three 

or four years of drought, on top of where we had a government 

under the NDP that never even had the Ag minister go down 

and take a look at how bad it was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the list goes on: gopher rebate program, Mr. Speaker, 

where we‟ve gone in and we‟re going to pay for half of the 

strychnine . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Alberta beef producers have 

received $465 million in assistance in the past year. 

Saskatchewan producers are asking their government to put 

them on a level playing field with their Alberta neighbours. 

What they have received from their government so far are more 

studies and more information is required. We do know that we 

do have now in the province a gopher control program. 

Will the minister place Saskatchewan cattle producers on a 

level playing field with their Alberta counterparts and provide 

them with some meaningful assistance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

should maybe do a little homework and check with the Alberta 

beef producers if she thinks that‟s a great program that 

Alberta‟s come out with, because the livestock industry in 

Alberta is not happy with what‟s going on in Alberta. Mr. 

Speaker, they‟re talking about mandatory age verification, 

traceability — full traceability being forced on them in Alberta. 

They‟re talking about breeding and animal husbandry. But all 

these things are being driven by the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to that member: I have made one commitment to 

the livestock industry here and I stand behind it. We will not 

force them into any program like Alberta has done until they 

ask for it, and then we will assist them to go that way. But right 

now Alberta producers are not happy with their program. And 

we‟re working with our producers to see where they would like 

to go. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public Notification Policy 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Public Safety‟s 

August 26 news release stated, “Effective immediately, if there 

is an escape from any provincial correctional centre, the public 

will be notified immediately . . .” It did not limit public 

notification to adult correctional facilities or to people 

considered dangerous. 

 

Yesterday the minister admitted that his news release was 

unclear. Well, Mr. Speaker, we want to know what else might 

have been unclear. For example, how clear was his email to 

corrections staff? Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he table 

today the email he previously referred to and any other 

documents that explained his new policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

member opposite, thank you for the question. The policy 

statement was given to my deputy minister after the escape. He 

transmitted that to senior officials. They are fully aware of the 

new policy to implement and to advise the public as well as the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], via the media that 

we have a dangerous offender or not, but they‟re unlawfully at 

large from a secure adult facility. That‟s the critical point, Mr. 

Speaker, a policy never once given consideration by the 

previous government. We took care of that business, Mr. 

Speaker. Now we will have a policy to ensure public safety. 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1563 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to show that he 

has done his job. Many people believe the failings of his new 

policy are directly related to his incompetent handling of a 

hastily announced policy. If the minister admits that his news 

release was unclear in communicating his new policy, why 

should the public have any faith that it was clearly 

communicated to his employees? 

 

To the minister: if he has nothing to hide, why will he not table 

the email and other documents related to its communications 

policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety.  

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again thank 

you to the member opposite for that question. Public safety is of 

the most important thing to this government, Mr. Speaker. And 

on that note alone, when this government recognized that there 

was a void in ensuring the public had immediate information 

about an escape from adult correctional facility, the RCMP are 

aware of that. We took one more step, Mr. Speaker, we made 

sure the media knew about it so they could give it to the public, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

What‟s important here is the lack of credibility on that side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, on public safety. We spoke out last 

week, Mr. Speaker, 21 escapes from adult facilities never once 

released to the public, Mr. Speaker; never, never once done that, 

Mr. Speaker. The policy‟s in place to protect the public safety, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟re very proud of that. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister told 

reporters that he could not disclose the escapes from a youth 

correctional facility due to provisions of the Youth Criminal 

Justice Act. It‟s my understanding that those provisions relate to 

naming of young offenders, not to the fact that a young offender 

is unlawfully at large. But more to the point, Mr. Speaker, it 

doesn‟t explain what the minister did after the escapees in 

question were caught. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: can he explain how it was legal for 

the Ministry of Corrections and Public Safety to inform the 

public that escapees had been caught, but illegal to tell the 

public they had escaped? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in that 

case, that was public on Friday. There was two young offenders 

sentenced to open custody facility by a judge. They were 

deemed low risk, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why the information 

wasn‟t released to the public. 

 

I‟ll have this Legislative Assembly know that from 2002-2007, 

35 — 35 — young offenders escaped from secure custody 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, that there is no record at all of any 

government official or officials in the ministry . . . Justice has 

checked this out. They have never brought it forward to the 

public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, 35 times in a 

5-year span from a secure custody facility where young 

offenders escaped from, Mr. Speaker. No policy talk about that, 

no direction to the people of this province. You know what, Mr. 

Speaker? We respect the law. The law‟s a great thing. I respect 

the laws. I‟m a former police officer.  

 

I have to wonder, maybe we talk about reviews back and forth, 

maybe they should have had a better review of Murdoch 

Carriere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Seniors’ Income Plan 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

Minister of Social Services announced with much fanfare that 

she was increasing the seniors‟ income plan benefit to $190 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Forbes: — And that singles earning up to $18,593 would 

now be eligible. Mr. Speaker. To the minister: can she tell this 

Assembly how many seniors will actually receive the full $190 

a month under SIP [seniors‟ income plan]? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was very 

pleased last week to make that announcement for the seniors of 

our province. They have been absolutely ignored for 16 years 

under the previous government. For 16 years, they received a 

free fishing licence and a pin. Their supplement was totally 

ignored. 

 

As I said in my announcement last week, Mr. Speaker, that this 

would bring an additional 10,000 seniors that would receive 

some money through this income supplement as well as 



1564 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

receiving additional health benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when that is all calculated in January when it takes 

place, that‟s when we will know where the income levels are 

and the different levels that they will qualify for. The member 

should know that. It‟s a matter of knowing the income, doing 

the calculations. That will be done when the whole, entire plan 

takes place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we‟re being told by seniors whose 

taxable income is less than $5,000 that they will not be getting 

the $190 a month at all. One senior earning $280 on CPP 

[Canada Pension Plan] was told she will get just $31 a month. 

Others are being told they will receive nothing at all. And the 

reason, Mr. Speaker, they‟re being told that is that they don‟t 

qualify. They earn too much money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this begs the question, how much is too much? 

Is it the $18,593 as stated by the minister in her news release 

last week? Or is it the $4,560 outlined on SIP‟s own 

backgrounder? Or is it the $16,313 as stated on the revised 

news release that now appears on the government‟s website? 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what is the maximum taxable 

income a senior can earn to be eligible for benefits? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

has a senior that has concerns about their exact qualification, I‟d 

be more than welcome for him to issue a letter with that 

senior‟s concerns, and we will do the calculations, Mr. Speaker. 

I cannot do the calculations here in this House on the spot, and 

he knows that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I can tell him is it will be more than what they received 

under the previous government. It will be more than what they 

received for the last 16 years. They will also receive the 

low-income tax credit announced by this government which is 

additional money that they will receive. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

what I can tell them right here in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, seniors are confused and 

this government is responsible. A backgrounder from SIP 

suggests that anyone earning up to $4,560 may receive as little 

as $10 a month. The minister‟s news release issued last week 

used a cut-off of $18,593 a year for singles and says that seniors 

will receive $190 a month. Now the version of that news release 

that now appears on the government website — and still dated 

October 29, by the way — says the cut-off is just over $16,000. 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why has she created such 

confusion among seniors, and why is she trying to cover up her 

mistake by rewriting history? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe the 

pettiness of that member. If there was a calculation error, it was 

a small error made by officials. They‟re very apologetic. It does 

not, it is . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Allow the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — . . . place until January, Mr. Speaker, 

and we will field any phone calls. 

 

This is coming from a member that did nothing, absolutely 

nothing for 16 years. Now he‟s going to quibble away about 

this increase. Why? Because it makes them look bad. It makes 

them look incompetent. It makes them look petty. It makes 

them look like they ignored the vulnerable seniors in our 

province for 16 years, and that‟s because that‟s what they did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Saskatoon’s Credit Union Centre Expansion 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we held a 

news conference in Saskatoon to announce an expansion to 

Credit Union Centre. I am pleased to announce that the 

Government of Saskatchewan has committed 3 million for 

improvements to Credit Union Centre in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — This project is scheduled for completion in 

time for the 2010 World Junior Hockey championships to be 

held from December 22, 2009 to January 5, 2010 in Saskatoon 

and in Regina. 

 

The Credit Union Centre project will include the addition of 

2,868 upper-deck seats to the west end of the arena. With this 

expansion, Credit Union Centre will surpass Winnipeg‟s MTS 

Centre in seating capacity for concerts, and compare favourably 

to other Western facilities in overall seating capacity for 

sporting events, trade shows, and conventions. Seating capacity 

is a major factor in the competition between cities for hosting 

major events. 

 

Credit Union Centre is regularly competing with facilities 

outside of our province and, if we are to be successful in bid 

competitions, we must be able to offer optimum capacity. Event 

promoters look for the ability to attract the largest number of 

patrons which will provide the greatest revenue potential. This 

expansion will allow Credit Union Centre to compete for class 

A concerts and major national and international sporting events. 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1565 

We all know that infrastructure is a major concern to this 

government, Mr. Speaker. Our government has much work to 

do to address the deficit left behind by the former government. 

We will be working hard to bring those deficits up to greatly 

improved standards. 

 

At the same time, we are investing in new projects that will put 

us in good position for the future. Investing in infrastructure 

projects like the Credit Union Centre will ensure a stronger 

Saskatchewan and a better life for our people. 

 

2010 World Junior Hockey championship tickets will go on sale 

November 8. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is good news for 

the Credit Union Centre in Saskatoon. This is a facility that‟s a 

pride of all people in Saskatchewan. And I know many people 

come from outside the province to attend concerts at that 

facility, so they‟ll be very pleased to hear about the expansion. 

 

We know that the World Junior Hockey championship event, 

which is the goal to have all the seats ready for in Saskatoon, is 

also taking place in Regina, so I‟m assuming that there‟ll be a 

similar announcement about the Brandt Centre here in Regina 

to prepare for the same event, because it also has a need for 

some seats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this work that goes to further developing the 

recreational facilities in this province builds on the long-term 

plans of the government. And clearly the amount of money 

that‟s been available to the government allows for many of 

these projects to proceed, as has been planned for quite a 

number of years, and we‟re very pleased to see that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to question no. 74 through 85. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 74 through 85 tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Duncan, seconded by Ms. 

Schriemer.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Indeed it is a pleasure to rejoin the 

debate after initially joining it last night. I‟m just going to 

recapture a little bit of what I talked about last night, which is 

why I will be supporting the Throne Speech from our 

government. 

 

And I talked a little bit about housing and the fact that the 

previous government only increased the shelter allowance in 13 

years, from 1992 to 2005, Mr. Speaker, they only increased the 

shelter allowance by $5. There is no wonder that when the 

housing prices escalated at a very rapid rate, something that the 

NDP didn‟t even think was possible, they were in denial that 

our province could grow at all, that the $5 increase was not near 

enough. There was already a discrepancy that was in place, and 

those that are most vulnerable could not deal with the escalating 

rental prices. That is why we increased the shelter allowance, 

we increased the rental supplement, we increased the 

emergency shelter rates, and we did it very quickly after 

forming government. 

 

I talked a little bit last night, Mr. Speaker, about the support that 

we have given to the community-based organizations within our 

province. We have a year-over-year increase of 9.3 per cent — 

that‟s within our first year of forming government — and it‟s 

interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the previous NDP 

government had an increase in ‟04-05 of 1 per cent, an increase 

of ‟05-06 of 1 per cent, an increase of ‟06-07 of 3 per cent, and 

then in ‟07-08 of 3 per cent. So if you add that together, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s an 8 per cent increase to the CBO 

[community-based organization] sector over four years. We did 

better than that in less than one year, Mr. Speaker. In the very 

first year we increased year over year 9.3 per cent. 

 

I talked a bit last night, and it‟s unfortunate that the member 

opposite still wants to find fault with the seniors‟ income plan 

that we more than doubled. I know he talked about having it 

indexed, and over the 16 years that it‟s been totally ignored, if 

we index those 16 years, they would have seen a 40 per cent 

increase. We decided that 110 per cent was a little better than 

that, and that‟s what we did. And so talking about those 

initiatives, Mr. Speaker, I believe it shows leadership in a 

number of fronts. And it‟s leadership directed by the member 

from Swift Current, and I am proud to be in that government 

that shows that kind of leadership. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about what we have 

done for the disability community. The disability community 

has been very active in meeting with the new government and 

outlining the discrepancies that they have seen over the past 16 

years as well. It‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that we have 

accumulated a waiting list of over 440 individuals with 

disabilities who are waiting for assisted living and/or 

programming that would more suit their need. 

 

I was happy, Mr. Speaker, to be able to make a significant 

announcement to the disability community that we do not find 

that acceptable, that we will be meeting that need within the 

next four years. Mr. Speaker, we announced $32.2 million to 

eliminate that waiting list. We were proud to do it. It was part of 

the Throne Speech; it was part of the promise of our 

government. 



1566 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

In addition, we talked about additional support for approved 

private service home supports. It‟s a very, very important part 

of our communities and one that we cannot allow to disappear, 

Mr. Speaker, due to the lack of support. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am very, very happy to support the 

Throne Speech. I‟m happy to support a government that is 

going to meet the needs of the most vulnerable people within 

our society, a government that has announced the largest tax 

reductions that we have seen in our province, a government that 

has made the largest announcement for seniors in almost two 

decades, a government that has made the largest announcement 

in support for the disability community than they have seen in 

many decades. I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne 

and proudly so. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I 

too am pleased to enter into the debate on the Speech from the 

Throne. Before I get into the text of my remarks, I do want to 

congratulate the new member of the legislature from 

Cumberland. The member of the legislature for Cumberland is 

well known in the educational field in the province having 

served in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] system as a 

trustee and also having served as a member of the Gabriel 

Dumont Institute, SUNTEP‟s [Saskatchewan urban native 

teacher education program] board of governors. Mr. Speaker, I 

expect that the new member of the legislature will serve this 

House with distinction, and he comes to this House ready to 

represent the people from northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into my remarks, I also want to talk a 

little bit about Saskatoon Nutana which is located on the east 

side of Saskatoon. Nutana is made up of a number of 

communities including Buena Vista, Nutana, the exhibition 

area, some parts of Haultain and Holliston, as well as 

University Heights, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a real mix of people 

that live in the constituency who work at the university, who are 

involved in the business community, who are professionals, 

who are involved in the service sector, and I have a large 

number of constituents that make their living working at 

Prairieland exhibition, particularly around the horse racing 

industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us have referred to our constituency 

assistants. I‟d like to thank my constituency assistant, Judith 

Gossen, who has been with our constituency for over 10 years. 

Judith is someone who pays attention to detail. And, Mr. 

Speaker, in our constituency we‟ve been able to be voted the 

best MLA in the city of Saskatoon for over seven years. And I 

think that as a result of Judith‟s work in assisting me, we have 

garnered the support of citizens from all across Saskatchewan. 

So I do want to thank Judith. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the legislature adjourned in the spring, all of 

our members of the legislature were tasked with the job of 

going and listening to what our constituents had to say, as well 

as going to other parts of the province and listening to what 

citizens were saying about the future of our province. 

Mr. Speaker, in the constituency that I represent, we have seen a 

number of condo conversions in Saskatoon Nutana. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, in the area that I live in, which is the 800 block of 

Main Street, there are in fact five buildings at present that have 

been converted to condominiums. These are buildings that at 

one stage used to house senior citizens, people who work in the 

service sector, as well as students and professionals, Mr. 

Speaker. Those five buildings are not yet rented, and it appears 

as though, Mr. Speaker, with the slowdown in the real estate 

market, those units have not yet been sold to people coming to 

Saskatoon or living in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, five units times, 

you know, 30 is a significant number of housing availabilities 

that are no longer there for students, seniors, working people to 

rent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have seen a significant increase in rents in the constituency 

that I represent. Those would be the buildings that have not yet 

been converted to condominiums. And rent increases have been 

quite astronomical. I have seen rent increases that have ranged 

from 100 to 200 to $300 a month in some apartments, as well as 

a significant increase in rents when it came to individual houses 

that were being rented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the first time in a very long time I am having 

senior citizens coming to the constituency office. And they‟re 

saying a couple of things, particularly since the meltdown of the 

market in September and October. They are saying that it is 

becoming more and more difficult for them to pay their rent if 

they are renters, pay their property taxes and utilities if they are 

homeowners, as a result of what‟s been happening in the 

province. Now, Mr. Speaker, many senior citizens in June, in 

Saskatoon, received a notice of the increase of their assessment 

when it comes to their individual homes, and this was based 

upon 2006 figures. And they are anticipating a significant 

increase in their property taxes as a result of where their 

individual homes and condominiums are located. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, we have been 

extremely fortunate since the early 1980s that our senior 

citizens, relative to seniors across the country, do not live in 

poverty, Mr. Speaker. And in fact we have some of the lowest 

poverty rates or had some of the lowest poverty rates in the 

country when it came to senior citizens. In fact we are well 

below the national average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we will need to pay attention very carefully 

to what is happening to our senior population in the province of 

Saskatchewan particularly with changes in the stock market and 

the impact that this is having on many seniors‟ savings as well 

as significant increases in rent and also significant increases in 

property taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have received a number of calls about the 

Minister of Social Services‟ announcement with regards to the 

senior income plan. And while the minister may not want to 

acknowledge this, there is a lot of confusion as to whether or 

not people who receive the old age pension along with the 

guaranteed income supplement and, Mr. Speaker, Canada 

pension will receive any of this new increase in the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s imperative upon the 

minister to indicate very clearly that if you earn more than 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1567 

$18,000 a year as a single senior citizen, which is $1,500 a 

month, you will not receive any Saskatchewan Income Plan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess the question is . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . or is it $16,000 a year? And there seems to be 

some confusion about that. 

 

What senior citizens need to understand is if they receive the 

old age pension, the OAS, and the guaranteed income 

supplement only and they have no savings with interest or no 

Canada Pension Plan to speak of, they will receive $190 

increase, Mr. Speaker, but it is very, very confusing. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, there is confusion for those citizens that 

live in low-income housing, and they are under the belief that if 

their income goes up that they will pay 30 per cent of their 

income to live in these low-income accommodations. And I 

think it‟s incumbent upon the minister once again to clarify that 

for those citizens living in the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation facilities, as I understand it, there will be no 

clawback of any Saskatchewan Income Plan that they may 

receive. If you‟re living in Métis housing or First Nation 

housing or other housing, I understand it that there could well 

be a clawback. And I think the reason why there is some 

confusion about this is for those seniors that received the old 

age pension and the guaranteed income supplement in the past 

— now those are federal programs — that income was 

recognized as part of the formula for determining what type of 

rent you paid at the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I really think that, given that senior citizens 

are vulnerable — and they‟re certainly vulnerable when it 

comes to mass communication — it would be very wise on the 

part of the Minister of Social Services to try and clarify this 

situation as quickly as possible because I do know that the 

1-800 number and the 787 number for this program has been 

inundated. And people — which is understandable — so many 

people are calling that they cannot get back to them as quickly 

as possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make this point. Senior citizens‟ incomes 

at this stage are in jeopardy because of what‟s happened in the 

marketplace. Certainly their pensions are. They are seeing 

escalating costs of housing, particularly when it comes to 

property taxes and rent increases and utilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I will make the point to the members opposite that a few 

years ago, certainly when we were in government, there was a 

significant increase in SaskEnergy rates. The rate review panel 

agreed to this, and the Government of Saskatchewan 

determined that we would two things. First of all we would 

send money from the General Revenue Fund over to 

SaskEnergy to mitigate that increase in natural utility rates and 

stop that increase to a bearable level, and we also put a 

significant amount of money into energy conservation. Mr. 

Speaker, we have not seen a response like that from the 

members opposite. 

 

They have determined that they‟re just going to let the real cost 

of natural gas be passed on to the individual consumer, and the 

reality is for a lot of those consumers, particularly senior 

citizens and young families, seniors have been hit hard by the 

market, and young families have not seen the kind of wage 

increases to deal with escalating costs of consumer goods and 

services in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another group of people that live in the 

constituency that I represent are students that attend the 

University of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s quite clear 

that the government has signalled that the tuition freeze that has 

been in effect for four years now is over. And, Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of that decision by the government opposite, our students 

fully anticipate that they will see some significant tuition 

increases going forward into next year. Mr. Speaker, not only 

are students going to be faced with significant tuition increases, 

but they too have been hit hard with the escalating costs of 

accommodation, as well as food costs have seen some 

significant rises, as well as transportation costs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the government issued a press 

release, I believe it was last week, about Saskatchewan‟s 

average weekly earnings being up to $760.46 a week. But I do 

point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are other provinces in Canada 

— namely British Columbia, Ontario, and Alberta — that have 

higher average weekly wages. Newfoundland is coming close, 

Mr. Speaker, to our wages, and yet if you look at the tuition that 

Newfoundland students pay, they pay $2,600 a year in tuition. 

And our students in Saskatchewan are paying on average about 

$5,000 per year for university tuition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing I note by looking at some of the 

statistics is that our consumer price index is escalating all across 

the province. And I think it‟s fair to say that while there are 

those of us that have certainly benefited from the economic 

growth that has taken place in the province of Saskatchewan, 

there are citizens in our province that have not felt the benefits 

of that economic growth, other than they have experienced 

significant rent increases, significant utility increases — 

particularly natural gas — significant increases in the cost of 

food and goods and services, and significant increases in the 

cost of transportation. And at the same time, their wages have 

not kept pace with those significant increases. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear from paying attention to the 

speeches that have been presented in this legislature by the 

members of the opposition that they are trying to negate the 

16-year record of the NDP. And, Mr. Speaker, as someone who 

was part of the NDP administration, when I go to the University 

of Saskatchewan campus which has been in my constituency 

and out of my constituency, I can say this. I see a new 

Kinesiology Building on the University of Saskatchewan 

campus. I see a synchrotron, the only one of its kind in Canada, 

on that university campus. I see a renovated convocation 

building which we‟re all very proud of . . . or the College 

Building. It‟s where some of our relatives convocated from in 

the ‟30s and the ‟40s. 

 

[14:45] 

 

I see a new InterVac facility. I see VIDO [Vaccine and 

Infectious Disease Organization] facility; I see it expanded. I‟ve 

seen it expanded, that Medicine college. I see a renewed 

College of Law, renewed College of Commerce, the 

Thorvaldson Building. As well, Mr. Speaker, my old Arts and 

Science building certainly got a bit of a facelift last year when 

the Congress was there. 

 



1568 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

So what we have seen is tremendous growth on the University 

of Saskatchewan campus, Mr. Speaker. And it is clear that we 

have a new academic health sciences building, that it‟s well on 

its way to being constructed at the University of Saskatchewan. 

And the members of the opposition are extremely proud that 

that building went ahead at a time when oil was not at $150 a 

barrel. At the time when oil was below $50 a barrel, Mr. 

Speaker, we made the decision to construct that new academic 

health sciences building on the University of Saskatchewan, and 

we are very, very proud that that building is going ahead. 

 

Now I have not seen any evidence, any evidence of the last year 

in terms of construction of new projects that were not 

previously in place by the former NDP administration. I‟ve seen 

no evidence whatsoever of anything that resembles the Sask 

Party‟s investment in infrastructure. 

 

I also want to report to the citizens that it was an NDP 

government that built three or four new high schools in the city 

of Saskatoon during that 16-year period. We also saw a 

significant investment by SaskTel in the soccer centre, which is 

certainly a significant investment that is a showcase of what can 

happen when communities come together with a Crown utility 

to provide important services to our young people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we will be watching with interest to see what the Sask Party 

invests in in any real tangible way in the city of Saskatoon that 

will in fact enhance our quality of life in the city of Saskatoon. 

And thus far, Mr. Speaker, we haven‟t seen much evidence. We 

have seen a lot of spin. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other area that I think the Sask Party 

should be aware of is that we have a significant number of 

families in the province of Saskatchewan that are waiting for 

child daycare. And the Government of Saskatchewan has $2 

billion in its rainy day fund or its Fiscal Stabilization Fund — I 

think they‟re calling it the insurance fund now — and we have 

young people with young children that are trying to get their 

children into some kind of licensed child care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And there are literally hundreds and hundreds 

and hundreds of families or children that are waiting to get into 

these licensed child care operations. 

 

And I think this is a policy area that the Sask Party really could 

be of some assistance to, particularly to those young working 

families where both people are working or a single mom or a 

person trying to get a university or a technical education. It 

certainly would be helpful if the Sask Party could put some 

resources into beginning to invest significantly in child daycare 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The other thing I note, Mr. Speaker, is that the Sask Party has 

said over and over and over and over again that there has been 

this growth of some 16,000 people since they came to office. 

And I want to put it on the record because it‟s important for 

posterity that people understand that since the Sask Party came 

to office — we‟ve just got the second quarter results of 

population increase — we‟ve seen growth of about 8,000 

people, Mr. Speaker, not 16,000. I know they want to take 

credit for all of the population increase, but in fact it is simply 

incorrect. We‟ve seen about 8,000 people. 

 

And what is a bit disturbing in terms of starting to look at those 

numbers, certainly in the last quarter, we saw some significant 

numbers of people leaving the province again, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think that‟s one area that we‟re going to have to keep an 

eye on. And it‟ll be interesting to see what happened with the 

results for July, August, and September because my sense from 

living in Saskatoon is that for a lot of people it was becoming 

very unaffordable, and there were more affordable places to go 

and make a living, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was interested to learn of the Sask Party‟s policy 

on the Crown sector. This is a file that I spent some time on, as 

I was given this portfolio after the 2003 election. And we made 

a decision that it was our expectation that our Crown utilities 

were going to deliver the lowest cost bundle of utility rates in 

Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, we kept that promise. People in this 

province had the lowest cost utility rates in Canada after we 

were re-elected in 2003. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Still do. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now the member opposite says we still do. 

Well we don‟t know that because there is no reporting to the 

public. One of the commitments that was made by the previous 

administration is that each year it would be reported to the 

public, through Meyers Norris Penny, where we stacked up 

relative to other parts of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they have indicated as part of this new 

policy as enunciated by the Minister Responsible for CIC — 

who happens to come from Saskatoon, who happens to have 

wanted SaskTel to invest in that soccer centre, Mr. Speaker — 

he has indicated to us that DirectWest and Hospitality Network, 

which are two profit centres for SaskTel, that they are going to 

be sold. They are profit centres and they are profitable, and they 

are profitable and they are profit centres. 

 

And in fact if you look at SaskTel‟s annual report for 2007, you 

will see that there is a significant amount of revenue that is 

generated by DirectWest, Hospitality Network, as well as 

SecurTek, Mr. Speaker. Now what they have indicated to the 

public is that they‟re going to sell DirectWest and the 

Hospitality Network. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think this is foolish to say the least. We 

know that long distance revenues, certainly for telcos all across 

the country, are down as a result of deregulation by the CRTC 

[Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission]. We know that telecommunication companies in 

North America have gone to other areas in order to generate 

revenue, in particular the Internet, mobility or cellular 

telephone, as well as Max. We know from the annual report in 

2007 that had SaskTel not done this, we would have seen a 

significant decline in the profitability of the company and also 

the company‟s . . . It would have been very difficult for them to 

have provided dividends to the people of the province. 

 

Now I don‟t quite understand how their Crown policy is going 

to work. They have instructed the companies, the boards of 

directors as well as the CEOs [chief executive officer] and 

CFOs [chief financial officer], that they are not to invest outside 

of the province. They have instructed the CFOs and the CEOs 

that they are not to compete inside the province. Yet SaskTel is 

a competitive Crown. Yet SaskEnergy is a competitive Crown. 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1569 

Yet SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] is a 

competitive Crown. And who knows what they‟re going to do 

with SaskPower? 

 

We certainly saw what a right wing Conservative government 

did in Alberta, and they basically wrecked the electrical system 

there, Mr. Speaker. So it‟ll be interesting to see how they‟re 

going to make this, as I say, this policy, this dog hunt. It‟ll be 

very interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see how we proceed. They‟re 

not going to be able to compete in the province, and they‟re not 

going to be able to grow outside of the province. But you know, 

they‟re supposed to provide services to the people of our 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what we may have is a decision by the 

government. Because they‟re not prepared to say to us, we‟re 

going to sell off those Crowns, but we‟re just going to run them 

into the ground. And then what will happen, Mr. Speaker? 

We‟ll be all glad to get rid of them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are the people that say they are the 

business sector. They know how to run business. In fact if I 

look at the minister‟s biography, he‟s supposed to be a business 

person in the city of Saskatoon, and yet he is saying to four 

companies, you can‟t compete with the private sector and you 

can‟t invest outside of the province if a good business 

opportunity comes along. You can‟t make money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the public — it‟ll take a little time — 

but I think the public needs to be watchful as this policy 

unfolds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the livestock 

industry and the hog industry. These are actually people that are 

in some very significant difficulty. Mr. Speaker, they have 

witnessed escalating costs of production, they have seen a 

dollar that has skyrocketed, and a declining industry. 

 

And one of the realities for the livestock industry is that, in 

order to sell their cattle, there is really no place to go in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And in fact there is very little place 

to go, period. There‟s Tyson‟s and Cargill and Lakeland, and 

that is about it, Mr. Speaker. So there‟s very little competition 

in the marketplace when it comes to the livestock industry. 

 

And when it comes to the hog industry, we know that there‟s 

Brandon, and Maple Leaf didn‟t go ahead with their plant here 

in Saskatoon. So, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are a lot of 

hog barns across the province that are empty as people have 

gotten rid of hogs. We know that our tallow population is being 

depleted. 

 

And yet at the same time we live next door to Alberta . And I 

know the minister says he‟s going to listen to what the livestock 

industry is saying here, but we live next door to Alberta where 

over the years they have put literally hundreds and hundreds of 

millions of dollars into their livestock industry in order to make 

sure that they had an industry relative to other parts of Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say this, that at a time when we have 

record revenues, I‟m not sure we‟ll ever have another time in 

our history where we will see oil at $150 a barrel or where we 

will see potash prices at $1,500 a tonne. I‟m not sure we will 

see that again in our lifetime, but we do have revenue. We do 

have revenue, Mr. Speaker, because of significant commodity 

prices in the province of Saskatchewan. Now I note . . . I don‟t 

know if these folks read the newspapers — maybe they don‟t, 

maybe they don‟t. But I think that we have seen some 

significant revenues, and we may never see them again. And we 

have this window of opportunity to diversify our economy, 

And, Mr. Speaker, I see no evidence by the members opposite 

that they are doing anything to diversify our economy and 

support those industries that we will need here in the future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you look at Alberta what they have done 

with their revenues, they certainly are not relying upon the 

commodity industry in order to ensure that they can deal with 

commodity prices that not only go up but, Mr. Speaker, they 

also go down. Now, Mr. Speaker, we are waiting for this vision. 

We‟re waiting to hear what they are going to do to ensure that 

we‟re not totally dependent upon resources that are 

non-renewable resources. 

 

We need to have an economy that responds to the ups and 

downs of commodity prices where basically we‟re insulated, 

and we have not seen any evidence of that. And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, by just simply leaving the livestock industry and the 

hog industry to the vagaries of the market, I would say to the 

members opposite that a year or two from now, we will see a 

very, very, different industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

We certainly have seen that in the last year or so, and I‟m afraid 

given the resources that the Alberta government has put into the 

industry, they have positioned themselves, and in the meantime 

we‟ve simply been here twiddling our thumbs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one area that I want to congratulate the 

government on, and that is the area of people with disabilities. 

They certainly have indicated to the disability community that 

they are prepared to look at an income plan for people who have 

disabilities. It‟s certainly something that our government had 

been working on. It‟s complicated, Mr. Speaker. But I do want 

to congratulate the minister for her intention to ensure that 

people with disabilities, whether those disabilities have been 

from birth or as the result of accident, that those folks that are 

disabled will be able to have an income that will support them 

well into the future. 

 

So we‟re looking forward to seeing how that income plan will 

roll out. But certainly I wanted to congratulate the members 

opposite and the minister for putting money into the disability 

community and the services for the disability community, but 

also signalling in a very clear way that it‟s their intention to 

move towards an income plan for persons with disabilities. So 

congratulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end my remarks by saying that we think 

there is so much more the Government of Saskatchewan could 

have done in this Throne Speech. And it‟s extremely 

disappointing that they did not do anything more when it came 

to child daycare. And, Mr. Speaker, we are disappointed that 

they really haven‟t addressed the whole affordability issue in 

the province of Saskatchewan or those people who are working 

and have seen some significant escalations in their costs of 

getting by, Mr. Speaker. 



1570 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure for me 

to enter into the debate and the reply to the Speech from the 

Throne. First, I‟d like to just congratulate the member from 

Cumberland. He did a very good job with his speech, and he did 

ask some questions. So congratulations. 

 

I‟d like to thank my family. As an MLA it‟s very trying on 

families, so I‟d like to thank my wife, Cindy, and our three 

children for putting up with my absence from home. And I‟d 

also like to thank my constituency assistant, Ed Young, and his 

spouse, Terry, and their two girls, which have been a lot of help 

to me as I have been carrying out my duties as MLA [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly]. Of course I‟d like to thank the 

constituents of Biggar constituency who has put their faith in 

me again, and I certainly have always tried to do my best and 

will continue my best on behalf of my constituents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think looking at this Throne Speech and the fall 

announcement by the Premier, I think 50 years from now 

people will look back to this point in Saskatchewan history and 

say that this is a turning point in our history. I truly believe that 

it‟s a historic moment in Saskatchewan‟s history from a point of 

many points. When you look at the fall announcement of the 

Premier, it‟s incredible what we have been able to do as far as 

the help that we‟ve been able to provide people. 

 

When last spring after the spring session ended, the Premier 

asked the Saskatchewan Party, the government MLAs to go out 

and listen to the people in our constituents about how to spend 

the $3 billion that we found they had a surplus. And certainly 

every member of our caucus did that. And we came back with 

very solid information and brought it to our committees and to 

caucus. And as you see from the announcements, that the 

government and our cabinet responded to what the people of 

Saskatchewan said to us. 

 

In the summer I‟d just like to point out an interesting situation. 

There‟s three members of the NDP Party came on a tour 

through Biggar constituency, and I‟d like to quote from the 

Biggar Independent. 

 

Cam Broten (Saskatoon Massey Place), Frank Quennell 

(Saskatoon Meewasin), and Andy Iwanchuk (Saskatoon 

Fairview) toured the Biggar constituency, August 12, 

gauging residents‟ response. 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

“Those of us who have been out and about can share our 

experiences and what we‟ve heard, and maybe pick up on 

some common themes,” added Quennell. 

 

The concerns are many and varied. 

 

“Here, we‟ve heard some concerns with the narrowing of 

the highway between Biggar and Perdue — No. 14 and 

the shoulders shrinking,” stated Quennell. 

 

And he goes on to add a few other things. And then it goes on 

to say, “What they learn from constituents will be brought back 

to the party and used in the House this October.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very interesting from the comments 

from the other side that there seemed to be something radical 

that our Premier would ask the government MLAs to go out and 

speak to the constituents, and which we did. And now we find 

out, well, the NDP Party were out going around the province 

speaking to the constituents and to people of Saskatchewan. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we heard when we went out to speak 

to our constituents, there‟s three messages came back how to 

spend the $3 billion surplus: they wanted tax cuts; they wanted 

more money towards infrastructure; and they wanted an 

insurance policy, really, for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to bring the three members of the NDP 

Party up to date that toured the Biggar constituency. The 

highway No. 14 has been widened. They went through before 

the job was done. So you can say that the highway‟s been 

widened and the wider shoulders. And so everything, 

everything is fine. 

 

The other theme that we heard from the NDP Party that I think 

they just expected that when we as a government had this 

surplus money, that we would only look at doing things like the 

hard economic things, like tax cuts and paying down debt and 

putting more money into infrastructure. Well we did do that. 

 

But the other thing I think what the NDP didn‟t expect us to do 

— for some reason they start to believe their own rhetoric — 

that we weren‟t going to help people that are disadvantaged, 

like the low-income seniors and people with disabilities. And as 

we know, the government has rolled out one announcement 

after the other, Mr. Speaker, to help people who are 

disadvantaged in our society. It‟s called sharing the wealth. 

 

Everyone is getting something from our announcements and 

from our Throne Speech. Some of it‟s tax reductions. There‟s 

infrastructure investments, and it just goes on and on. But I‟m 

very proud of our government to have made the priority to help 

people like low-income seniors and to help people with 

disabilities and more funding toward CBOs so that the people 

that work in CBOs can get a higher wage. 

 

And locally in Biggar, I‟d just like to point out one example of 

where the Minister of Social Services responded to a request in 

Biggar which was very much needed. And the group is called 

the Biggar Community Connections. And they started out as a 

group home — and they still operate a group home — but they 

do many other things in the community. Like I said, they have a 

residential group home. They support independent living 

programs, support apartment living programs, activity 

programs, vocational programs. They support employment 

programs. 

 

And this group expanded. They bought the old Novawood 

School in Biggar, and they expanded their programming. They 

ran into a shortfall of funding, and they made the request to 

Social Services to get some bridging money to keep their 

program going. And it wasn‟t long, without very little 

hesitation, the minister responded by granting them that 

bridging money so that they could continue their programs into 

the future. And that‟s something that‟s very, very hopeful — 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1571 

this is a sign of how our government and our cabinet and our 

Premier respond to concerns when they hear about the problems 

in the constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can certainly go on. I‟m looking forward to 

hearing the Premier‟s reply to the Speech to the Throne, but just 

a couple of items what our government has done for the Biggar 

constituency. In the MRIF [Municipal Rural Infrastructure 

Fund] program there‟s a total of $1.82 million investments in 

MRIF projects across the constituency, Mr. Speaker. And also 

through the Saskatchewan infrastructure growth incentive 

program, $1.3 million is approved and will be invested into the 

constituency of Biggar. That is substantial investments which is 

needed, and the government has responded. 

 

I can go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but time is running short. I‟d 

just like to tell a bit of a story. As I was driving to Regina, I 

always stop at the Co-op in Perdue and gas up. And as I was 

coming out after paying, the gas attendant, she just asked me 

was I going to Regina. I said, yes. And she said, well have a 

good week. And I said, well thanks. And I says, we will have a 

good week. Then she stopped and turned and she says, I want to 

thank you for that tax cut. She says, that means — in a real 

sincere voice — she says, that means so much to me. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of that woman in Perdue and many 

other families across the province, that is the reason I am 

supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

going to be difficult to follow just the conclusion there of the 

member for Biggar and the Government Whip because I think 

he has quite aptly put into perspective for each of us — 

regardless of what side of the House we‟re on — the reasons 

that we are here. It is to serve that individual in Perdue and to 

represent the interests of families back home. 

 

And on that note, Mr. Speaker, may I begin my address in reply 

to the Speech from the Throne with a thank you to my own 

family in Swift Current, to Tami and Megan and Colter and 

Faith for their ongoing support and perspective. And there is a 

lot of perspective at my home in Swift Current, and it‟s really a 

haven for me. And I just want to say again for the record how 

grateful I am for my family and how much I love them all. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I‟m talking a little bit about home, I 

also want to take this opportunity again to acknowledge the 

reason why I can be here in the first place, or any place, frankly, 

is the constituents. It‟s the community, the people of the Swift 

Current constituency that I have the great honour of 

representing and have had that honour since 1999. 

 

Again I want to thank all of them for the perspective I get pretty 

much every weekend when I‟m at home, especially at Safeway. 

I‟ve found Safeway to be a source of great perspective, where 

people seem to be very free in the produce section to tell you 

exactly what is right with the government and exactly what is 

wrong with the government. And I think the best advice that I 

have received to date in this new job has probably been right 

around the orange section at Safeway. And so I want to 

acknowledge the people of Swift Current and thank them again 

for the great honour I have of representing them. 

 

I want to acknowledge and welcome the new member for 

Cumberland who has been recently re-elected in a by-election. 

And I know he‟ll work hard to serve the interests of the people 

of that constituency, as well as provide a voice for people 

across the province in his duties as a critic for the official 

opposition. 

 

You know, much has been said about speeches from the throne, 

Mr. Speaker, in different legislatures across this land and in the 

House of Commons. Much has been said about the usefulness 

of speeches from the throne. Whether or not there‟s enough 

specificity in those speeches. Whether or not they clearly 

outline the plans of the government. Whether or not the debate 

that ensues after the speech is read, whether or not that debate 

highlights for the people of the province the proper choices: a 

choice between the opposition, a choice between the 

government, maybe a choice between the records — in the case 

of an opposition recently defeated and a government newly 

elected — and a choice between the visions of those two 

entities because of course people on both sides of the Assembly 

weigh into that debate. 

 

And if that is the measure, Mr. Speaker, of a good Speech from 

the Throne, that you are able to make that comparison from the 

debate that ensues, I think we have before us for our 

consideration an excellent Speech from the Throne. I think, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — . . . that this document is as much about 

very specific actions, many of which have already been 

implemented by the government, as it is about a broader vision 

— the vision that is really encapsulated in the title of the 

Speech from the Throne and its theme: “A Stronger 

Saskatchewan. A Better Life.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about those two things, 

about what is specifically in the Speech from the Throne, about 

the initiatives that are here, and maybe even the record of a 

relatively new government, and contrast that to a record of the 

previous government and some of the specific ideas we have 

heard or have not heard coming from the other side. 

 

And then I want to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by examining this 

question of vision, this question of which side in this debate . . . 

and there are clearly two sides. I think we defeated the 

amendment. Did we win? I think we won that vote. We were 

able to defeat the amendment to the Speech from the Throne, 

Mr. Speaker. And that amendment highlighted for all of us 

quite clearly that there are two sides in this debate on the 

Speech from the Throne. And I want to conclude how that 

reflects on the respective visions of the governing 

Saskatchewan Party and the opposition NDP. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Let‟s take a look though at some of the specifics, Mr. Speaker. 

Just the day before the Speech from the Throne was read, I had 



1572 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

the greatest honour of my relatively short public life when I got 

to . . . On behalf of a government, on behalf of a caucus that had 

deliberated and a cabinet that had deliberated and a Minister of 

Finance that had worked tirelessly, I had the great honour to be 

able to announce a four-part financial plan for the province of 

Saskatchewan that included, principally, number one, the 

biggest, largest historical tax cut in the history of our great 

province, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And the fact that 80,000 Saskatchewan 

people, as a result of that measure — 80,000 low-income 

Saskatchewan people who have every right to expect to benefit 

from the prosperity of their province — dropped from the tax 

rolls completely in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of 

that tax cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I had the great honour and the privilege to announce the second 

part of that financial plan which included an infrastructure 

build-out and a continuation of the government‟s 

ready-for-growth initiative. You will remember very clearly, 

Mr. Speaker, in our very first budget as a government, we 

signalled our determination to deal with the infrastructure 

facing the province. 

 

And I want to remind members in this Assembly — members 

on both sides of the Assembly — that $147 a barrel was not yet 

on the horizon, was not yet a surety in terms of a revenue 

stream for the government. I want to remind this House — all 

members in this Assembly — that potash prices, that the change 

in terms of that first quarter financial report we have received 

was not yet known when our government took a, I think a 

courageous decision to say, look, we believe this is part of a 

balanced budget. Because it‟s how we‟re hard-wired, to bring in 

those balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. But without the revenue 

assurances that became evident later on in that year, we went 

ahead with a $1 billion ready-for-growth initiative. That was the 

infrastructure investment we made for this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you will know that in the year 

prior to that, under the previous government, when you totalled 

all of the infrastructure spending, it was about $600 million. 

Not a small amount but consider the comparison. In the first 

budget of a Saskatchewan Party government, it moved to $1 

billion.  

 

So I was honoured a couple of weeks ago, as a part of this 

financial plan, to announce that the second component of that 

financial plan was not just the extension of a $1 billion 

ready-for-growth initiative or the $400 million increase we saw 

in our first year over the NDP budget, but $1.5 billion in that 

infrastructure ready-for-growth initiative — pre-approved, 

already announced by our government. You can expect it; you 

can bank on it; it‟ll be there in the budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it is worth deliberating, I think it‟s 

worth focusing a little bit on what that means to Saskatchewan 

because frankly a $1.5 billion ready-for-growth fund is a pretty 

abstract thing. And what does that mean really? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it means that roofs in schools that had been 

leaking for five years get fixed. It means, Mr. Speaker, that air 

conditioning units in our health care facilities that have been 

broken for too long, that have caused untold discomfort for 

patients in the province of Saskatchewan, get fixed. It means 

Highway 32, which has been a goat trail for too long, servicing 

the oil and gas sector of our province and delivering royalties to 

the coffers here in Regina, gets fixed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It means, Mr. Speaker, that Highway 368, 

which has begged for some attention because it serves one of 

the most impressive light manufacturing corridors in the 

continent, Mr. Speaker, it means that Highway 368, also a bit of 

a goat path under the NDP, gets fixed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to say as well that I was very proud 

to announce the third component of that financial plan on behalf 

of the government, and that included a debt payment of $1 

billion. And it will mean, Mr. Speaker, that we are on track as a 

government to have reduced the debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan for generation after generation. If nothing else is 

achieved in the next number of years on debt — and I think 

there will be — but if nothing else is achieved in one year, in a 

full budget year of this government, its first full budget year 

will have reduced the debt of the province of Saskatchewan by 

40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Five thousand dollars a minute, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s how much debt we‟re paying off. So at the end 

of my speech when . . . We are going to pay off a lot of debt 

this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Finally the fourth part of that financial plan 

I had the honour of announcing on behalf of my colleagues, 

who helped shape this plan at a caucus meeting we held in 

Yorkton and then at a number of cabinet meetings — I want to 

say that, Mr. Speaker — we have set aside as an insurance 

policy to weather the current economic and the market storm 

around the world, we‟ve set aside $1.914 billion for the people 

of the province. 

 

I‟ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker. This was a source of great 

deliberation. In fact just a week and a half or two weeks before 

we were going to make the announcement, I had a discussion 

with the Minister of Finance. I was just concerned. I was 

reading and watching all the same media that everyone else 

was, watching banks that had been around for 100 years fold 

over a weekend, watching the market slip 600 points and 800 

points and people wondering about what the future for their 

pensions was going to be, watching the largest and most 

significant correction that we have seen certainly in the modern 

time on the financial markets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I phoned the Minster of Finance, who is a 

wise and a prudent man himself, and talked about maybe the 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1573 

need for us to reduce the amount of debt we were going to pay 

down. We were going to originally be more aggressive on the 

debt to be about $1.6 billion as opposed to the billion dollars. 

We decided to hold back about 5 or 600 million, to put it in the 

savings account, to put it in the insurance, Mr. Speaker. And 

already we hear members opposite say, well you‟re sitting on a 

mountain of money. Well, Mr, Speaker, I‟ll tell you what that 

$1.9 billion is. It is a rock on which we will build the economic 

future of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And we‟ve heard the members all with their 

long list of expenditures they‟d like to see made, members on 

the other side, members of the NDP. They continue to criticize 

the fact that this fund exists, but I defy them to go to their 

constituents, not even constituents perhaps in some of our 

ridings in rural Saskatchewan but go down in downtown Regina 

and ask the people of this city. Go into Prince Albert, go to 

Saskatoon and ask the people of those communities at a time 

such as this, insecure as they are with the markets doing what 

they are, do you think it was a good idea that the brand new 

Saskatchewan Party government said we‟re going to keep our 

powder dry in about 1.9 billion? 

 

We will weather this storm. We will come out stronger on the 

other side and, when we do, we can pay off more debt and build 

more infrastructure. Those people in their constituencies will 

say, we are with the new government. That is exactly the right 

choice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, that was really the 

beginning of the Speech from the Throne for the session, and 

you will know this, that the heart of this document really is that 

financial plan. There‟s much more in the document in terms of 

initiatives, and we‟ve seen announcements from the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Minister of Social Services and earlier 

today from the Minister of Tourism and Culture, but the heart 

of it certainly was the financial plan I just talked about. 

 

I also want to be very clear with my colleagues in this 

Assembly on both sides of the House, that we are obviously 

benefiting as a government from strength in commodity prices. 

The revenues of the government certainly are benefiting from 

the strength in commodity prices. We understand that. We 

understand that the people of Saskatchewan know what‟s been 

happening in commodities and know that when they go up, the 

revenues of Saskatchewan go up, and so we don‟t debate that. 

We don‟t argue that. We accept it. I think all members of this 

Assembly do. 

 

But the question, Mr. Speaker, I think that people have of their 

governments, whoever they may be, is what is it that that 

government will do with that good fortune. What is it that the 

government will do with these resources because after all, they 

don‟t belong to the government. They belong to the people of 

the province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we have put together a financial plan that 

respects the fact that these are not resources . . . They don‟t 

belong to our government; they belong to the people. That tries 

to deal with some immediate needs in terms of increasing costs 

in Saskatchewan — that‟s the income tax cut, some of the other 

initiatives announced by the Minister of Social Services — but 

also takes the long view in terms of debt reduction and holding 

back some money in our Growth and Financial Security Fund. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the people of the province are 

supportive and in agreement with that kind of a plan that has a 

short-term and a long-term component. 

 

And so the measure then is not how the money occurred, where 

the money came from. The measure is, did the government have 

their priorities right? And you know, Mr. Speaker, we won‟t 

have an election in our province now until November 7, 2011, 

but I would say this, that were some strange act of someone to 

occur where that would precipitate a general election in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and this side of the House were 

going to run on that financial plan, that short-term 

understanding of the need for Saskatchewan people to 

permanently share in our prosperity and our vision for debt 

reduction and a growing economy and infrastructure investment 

and a savings fund, if this side ran on that and that side ran on 

what we‟ve heard from them, Mr. Speaker, in the first two 

weeks of this session, I like the chances on this side of the 

House in that kind of a situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think it‟s reasonable that a good measure 

of a jurisdiction that is enjoying some prosperity though is in 

how it treats the most vulnerable among it. First of all, perhaps 

on whether it plans to keep that momentum going — that‟s 

important — but also how are those who are most vulnerable in 

that society, perhaps not participating in the prosperity, doing. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to be associated 

with these women and men on this side of the House. I am very, 

very proud to be associated with the Speech from the Throne 

that outlines initiatives for those people who are most 

vulnerable among us, disadvantaged, as the member from 

Biggar has said earlier in his remarks, in how they are treated. 

And I think it‟s worth reviewing, Mr. Speaker, what this 

government has done in this regard with respect to both the 

Speech from the Throne and initiatives that have been 

announced already this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a waiting list in the province of 

Saskatchewan of some 400 people who have intellectual and 

physical disabilities, and they are waiting and have been 

waiting for a very, very long time for the right programs, 

sometimes for day programs. Parents have been acknowledging 

that they exist and they have wanted to be able to access them 

for the health of their kids and for their own health as well so 

that they can be the caregivers and the moms and dads they 

want to be. 

 

Four hundred people on a wait-list for those people who have 

physical and intellectual disabilities — not just waiting for 

programs but some waiting for that chance at independent 

living at a group home. And for years they would go to the 

government that existed prior to this, a former government that 

would seemingly have us to believe that they were broke, even 

though they sat on their own little mountain of money in the 

hundreds of millions of dollars — in the hundreds of millions of 



1574 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

dollars. In its last dying years, Mr. Speaker, that government 

was sitting on that kind of money. 

 

And these people, the families of those with these disabilities 

would come and knock on their door and say, the wait-list is 

400. How long is too long? We‟ve been waiting for these . . . 

And I can‟t imagine a group more vulnerable in Saskatchewan 

today than those who have these physical and intellectual 

disabilities. 

 

I have one brother. He has three sons. The youngest has 

Williams syndrome. And the answer was no. Every single time 

they came to that government to ask that question, the answer, 

Mr. Speaker, was no. From a government, from a social 

democratic government — a group, some self-described 

socialists — who say, boy, nobody cares like us. That‟s what 

they claim. Nobody is there for those who are vulnerable like us 

in the NDP. Nobody will be there for those who have 

disabilities or for those without a voice than us. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the truth of it is they weren‟t there for them — not for 

years and years and years. 

 

And I‟m proud to be associated with the men and women on 

this side of the House when we took the first opportunity we 

can to share some of the wealth in the province to say, a 

wait-list for these people in our province is unacceptable, and 

we are going to deal with it, and we will eliminate it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you can take a look at the 

increases to the rental housing supplements that this 

government has made to help people deal with the housing 

crisis. You can take a look at the training employment 

allowances that the Minister of Advanced Education has 

announced so that people can have an increase in allowance, 

continue to study so that they can get the education and the 

training to participate in the amazing economy that we see 

around us where 10,000 jobs are posted at saskjobs.ca. 

 

Mr. Speaker, initiative after initiative you could point to both in 

the Speech from the Throne, in the first budget of the 

government, in this particular document that we are debating 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s going to be more of this, not less — 

because I can tell you, as we saw with the senior income 

assistance plan, there‟s a lot of neglect that we‟re dealing with 

as a brand new government. 

 

And I want to tell you, members on this side of the House — 

each of us — I think we‟re a little surprised because maybe 

some of us even started to believe some of the speeches from 

members opposite that we‟ve heard for years. Some never 

believed, Mr. Speaker. Some never believed. Some who have 

been here for a whole lot of years never believed. 

 

But maybe some did, started to believe some of the speeches we 

heard from members opposite about how much they care, about 

how much they‟re going to act on behalf of people who are 

vulnerable, who are disadvantaged, and who have no voice. 

And then in file after file, as the Minister of Social Services and 

the Minister of Health and the Minister of Advanced Education 

have reported to our government, file after file there is a theme 

that we have inherited from that government, former 

government opposite, and the theme is neglect. 

 

[15:30] 

 

It is true of the senior income assistance plan, which hadn‟t 

received an increase since 1992, Mr. Speaker, also changed this 

week by this government and referenced in the Speech from the 

Throne. It speaks to the wait-list I talked about a little bit 

earlier. It speaks to the fact that it was a Saskatchewan Party 

government that introduced the largest ever, the largest ever 

one-time increase in the employment supplement program for 

people who needed a little bit of help right now. 

 

They‟re facing higher housing costs, and many of the people 

that are applying for that program, have applied, are single 

moms, Mr. Speaker. Single moms. And they too were waiting 

for a government I think that would do more than talk, that 

would do more than just give speeches in the legislature, that 

would do more than just publish manifestos, that would actually 

take a little action, Mr. Speaker, to build that stronger 

Saskatchewan and a better life. 

 

And that‟s exactly what happened in the case of the 

employment supplement as well, Mr. Speaker, that increased 

actually before we could get to the Speech from the Throne 

debate. That was because of the immediate action this 

government took as a result of the housing task force that we 

implemented in the spring, an action that we took immediately, 

Mr. Speaker. And people should be able to expect more of that 

kind of thing in affordable and balanced budgets. 

 

But they should be able to expect, from their government, 

action in these areas which are clearly priorities for all of us, 

which are really about common sense and about ensuring 

people are participating. And I want to tell those folks that 

might be watching or listening right now, Mr. Speaker, that 

that‟s a reasonable expectation that they would have of a 

government. And they can expect that from this government. 

And we‟ll already put our record after one year up as evidence 

of the fact that we are dedicated to these common sense 

solutions, that people should expect to benefit from the 

prosperity in the province, and they will, Mr. Speaker. And they 

will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday there was a really 

common sense announcement from the Minister of Agriculture 

that also speaks to the kinds of priorities that our government 

has. The Government of Saskatchewan owns a lot of land — a 

lot of agricultural lands, cultivated acres and pasture land. Some 

of it has some environmental caveats, some wildlife habitat 

issues, and so it needs to remain in the public domain. We 

certainly need to at least ensure the stewardship of that land. 

But much of it does not. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s our view, crazy as it is, it‟s 

our notion that if there is producers out there currently leasing 

that land that they ought to have a chance to buy it. And maybe 

even we could provide an incentive for them to purchase that 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1575 

land. Because you know what, Mr. Speaker, 10 times out of 10, 

ranchers and farmers are better stewards of the land than any 

government of any stripe. It‟s common sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — It‟s common sense. And today in question 

period on that same issue, the member from Nutana — who‟s 

understandably off her game a little bit here in the last number 

of days — the member from Nutana, perhaps thinking about 

other things . . . And I would encourage her that she should 

think about some other things and action she could take. And 

more on that in a moment, because it relates directly to 

priorities that we‟re debating in this Speech from the Throne. 

 

The member from Nutana asks today, or derides the 

announcement saying, well nobody‟s going to be able to afford 

to purchase any of this land. And then she goes on to criticize 

what the minister had to say about what the proceeds would be 

used for. 

 

And we don‟t know what the uptake will be, but the minister 

was asked, quite rightly, by the media — I think it was CBC 

radio — well what will you use the money that you raise from 

the land sales for? And you know what the Minister of 

Agriculture said? Here‟s some more crazy thought for you, Mr. 

Speaker. The minister . . . And we‟re used to it coming from the 

member for Saltcoats. Here‟s what he said. Here‟s what he said. 

We‟re going to take the proceeds and invest it back into 

agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — That‟s what he said. And for that there was 

actually a series of questions in the legislature today. That these 

would be his priorities, that we would take this money and 

strengthen crop insurance that has been neglected for a decade 

or more by members opposite, who‟ve been pretty good at 

increasing premiums but not very good at increasing the 

coverage, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Agriculture said, it 

makes some common sense, if you sell some agricultural land, 

to use part of it to help with the changes that we want to make 

to crop insurance, that we want to strengthen agricultural 

programs in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact that this would be even a question in 

question period speaks to how out of touch that side still is. The 

election was a year ago and they remain out of touch with the 

people of the province, and they are strangers even to common 

sense, Mr. Speaker. Strangers to other things as well that aren‟t 

parliamentary for me to get into at this point, but I‟ll get there 

eventually, Mr. Speaker, in a way that will not upset the Chair 

at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can take a look at a Speech from the Throne 

debate, I guess if you wanted to read it in its totality, and 

understand a lot about both sides — about how the government 

side is operating based on its speeches and how the opposition 

side is operating based on its speeches and its actions. 

 

And I want to say this, Mr. Speaker — I‟ve said it before in the 

Assembly — that our government, our new government has 

made mistakes, and we will make other mistakes to be sure, Mr. 

Speaker. And when we do, as I‟ve said over and over again, we 

will readily admit of them and seek to fix them and also seek to 

eliminate them. That‟s one approach to the humanity of 

government or of any human endeavour, of any vocation or 

avocation. That‟s one approach where you say, well we‟re 

going to make some mistakes. We‟ve got goals and we expect 

excellence and we‟re working towards it. But when mistakes 

happen — as they will — here‟s how we‟re going to react. That 

is one approach you could take. 

 

And I think you could see in the words of my colleagues here 

on this side of the House that that‟s the approach in terms of 

this debate. That‟s the approach that our government‟s going to 

take. Again I think it‟s reflective of the values of Saskatchewan 

people. I think that‟s how they also conduct themselves. 

 

Compare that to what we‟ve heard, maybe in the course . . . no, 

it‟s not so much of this debate, but in the course of the last 

number of days from members opposite about how they will 

conduct themselves, about what they are prepared to do in terms 

of what are clear and obvious mistakes that have been made by 

them either in opposition or government. Mr. Speaker, it is like 

November 7, 2007, never happened for them. 

 

You know, I have never heard once in this House a speech from 

any of them. The Leader of the Opposition came closest, to his 

credit, but none of the others who sat in a government, Mr. 

Speaker, for a very long time and who lost an election quite 

decisively, I haven‟t heard from one of them any kind of 

contrition, any kind of admission that maybe they didn‟t get it 

all right. Maybe there were a lot of things that they got wrong. 

I‟ve never heard it once, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact in their response to this Speech from the Throne and the 

action of this government that we‟ve taken, it basically can be 

summed up, the theme of their response is basically, well 

you‟re not doing it fast enough. You‟re not doing it fast enough. 

Which is an incredible response considering we have not yet sat 

on the government side of the House for one year, this new 

government. And we have done more in that one year than it 

did, in the case of Social Services issues, than that government 

did in 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But it‟s not fast enough. 

 

We gave you all these problems. Here‟s an infrastructure deficit 

16 years in the making. Here‟s an infrastructure deficit in your 

health care facilities 16 years in the making. Here‟s an 

infrastructure deficit in the school facilities 16 years in the 

making. Here‟s a billion dollar pothole in your highway system 

16 years in the making. Here‟s an income assistance plan for 

seniors 16 years neglected by us. Here‟s a 400-person wait-list 

of people with disabilities. We haven‟t done anything about 

that. Why haven‟t you fixed it all in a year, Mr. Speaker? 

 

That‟s the position of the opposition right today that we‟ve 

heard in the Assembly. It‟s why, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

credibility gap that they suffered on November 7, 2007, it‟s 

why the gap isn‟t any narrower. But it is wider today, 

November 2008, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . the people of 

this province. 



1576 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think you should be able to measure a 

government and an opposition by what they do and what they 

say. And that‟s true of debates in this Assembly, and it‟s also 

true of actions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s true in the case of Murdoch Carriere and his victims, I 

would say, Mr. Speaker. I think that‟s a reasonable measure for 

us to look at in terms of how an opposition acts, how a 

government acts, Mr. Speaker. In that particular case, we know 

exactly what this government chose to do. We know, Mr. 

Speaker, what this government chose to do when faced with the 

potential embarrassment of this, of this Carriere victimization of 

the women in the civil service becoming public. They chose, 

Mr. Speaker, to not disclose it. They chose, Mr. Speaker, to not 

be transparent. They chose, Mr. Speaker, to say that what was 

clearly a buy off — a $275,000 payoff and then a subsequent 

resignation — they chose to say that that was a firing when it 

clearly, when it clearly, Mr. Speaker, was not a firing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers read some 

words into the record that is a quotation from some of the 

victims of Mr. Carriere that I think bear some repeating today, 

again as a measure in terms of the efficacy and the leadership 

ability of the two sides in this House — the government side 

and the opposition side. Quote: 

 

It was . . . painful to hear that Carriere received such a 

large amount of money to compensate him for . . . HIS 

pain and suffering. 

 

Those words are unbelievable to us — that the man 

responsible for assaulting us for years received 

compensation for „pain and suffering‟. 

 

Murdoch Carriere [this is a quote, Mr. Speaker, of these 

women] was a friend to many politicians in office at the 

time, and it‟s clear our feelings as victims were secondary 

in the former government‟s battle to keep their friend 

Murdoch from hard times. 

 

That‟s how the women feel today about this particular issue, 

Mr. Speaker. And again, the government failed to do the right 

thing when they sat over here and they dealt with this Carriere 

mess. They failed to do the right thing by those women and by 

the people of the province. 

 

But at any time during this debate, in terms of the Throne 

Speech, at any time since the revelations have come out that 

clearly this was a resignation and not a firing — and they 

clearly had not been accurate in their depiction of this to the 

people of the province — at any time to demonstrate that they 

have understood now their new role and the importance of 

admission and contrition, they could have stood up and said, we 

were wrong. What we did was wrong. It was wrong for those 

women. It sent the wrong signal to the civil service. And not 

making sure the people of the province had all the information 

was wrong because we were asked questions, and time after 

time — 29 times we‟ve counted — members of the former 

government stood up and did not accurately characterize what 

happened here, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m trying to be generous and 

careful with my words. 

So at any time since, Mr. Speaker, in the last 48 hours, in the 

last two days, if there is just an ounce of leadership left over 

there and integrity on this issue, someone could stand up in 

their seat, could stand up in the benches and say, we were 

wrong, and to these women, chiefly, and also to the people of 

the province, we apologize. That‟s what they should be doing, 

Mr. Speaker. They should take that chance to stand up and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But they won‟t. They won‟t. You can count 

on this, Mr. Speaker, that in the course of this session, either in 

this place or outside in the rotunda, you will not hear one of 

them with the courage of their convictions to stand up and offer 

that apology. And I think that‟s an interesting contrast on the 

two sides. Not that one is perfect. We are far from it. But one 

side, Mr. Speaker, is fully understanding and prepared to admit 

when there has been a mistake and then to provide redress to 

those who may have been affected by that mistake. 

 

And whatever happens with this side, with our government, 

however long the people of the province give us the great 

honour of serving, I make this pledge to you, Mr. Speaker: that 

is how we will conduct ourself, not in perfection, Mr. Speaker, 

but in respect to those that we serve and to the principles this 

place is founded on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the second 

part of my address in reply is to focus on the difference in the 

visions on both sides of the House that we‟ve heard prior to, 

and then since, the general election and then the vision that‟s 

reflected here in this Throne Speech document. 

 

Consider, Mr. Speaker, if you will, the vision for Saskatchewan 

for members opposite. And again, most of this comes from 

before the election. But none of them have stood up to correct 

themselves and say, you know, we were wrong about 

Saskatchewan, about its future, and our vision wasn‟t worthy of 

the province with its great potential, and so we want to correct it 

for the record. Nobody has done that. So I can only assume, and 

we can only assume that these things that were said prior to the 

election are the things that they believe still about 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Consider then, Mr. Speaker, what has been said by the former 

premier and my predecessor, for whom I have a personal 

respect and regard, but with whom I disagree vehemently on 

this point about Saskatchewan‟s potential. I think he was 

coming back from some sort of a first ministers‟ meeting, and it 

was recently after the province had gained have status, and he 

was clearly asked about it. 

 

I remember reading an editorial in the Leader-Post. The 

editorial was referencing the then premier‟s remarks — the 

current member for Riversdale — about our recent have status. 

And they were quoting him in the third person and then directly 

as having said that we will — and this is the quote part —will 

always “be in and out” of equalization. That‟s what he said 

then. 

 

His view then, his vision, was for the province to downplay the 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1577 

fact we had achieved have status. He said we‟re always going to 

be bouncing, don‟t get too excited Saskatchewan. This is not 

the norm. That was his view then, and it is their view today — 

this is not the norm for us. All of this talk of success and 

prosperity, in leading the country, don‟t get too excited because 

we‟ll always be in and out of equalization. Mr. Speaker, that is 

one example of the vision that we have, the competing vision, 

and I‟ll get to how it contrasts with this Speech from the 

Throne, and our vision for the province‟s future. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of population growth. I remember — 

you know, and I don‟t think we can talk about this enough — I 

remember the then minister of Economic Development and the 

member for P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote, when he was the 

minister of Economic Development and was faced with a recent 

spate of out-migration statistics, people leaving the province of 

Saskatchewan. And by the way, that is also the record of the 

NDP. Notwithstanding a year or so of some improvement, they 

presided over out-migration and the getting smaller of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They asked the minister then, Mr. Lautermilch, what he thought 

about the fact that people were leaving the province and he 

made some analysis. He said, well you know, when people 

leave Saskatchewan and the GDP[gross domestic product] stays 

the same, it means, you know, there‟s a greater sort of personal 

wealth for the people that are still here. Of course the translation 

of that, Mr. Speaker, is that, don‟t worry when people leave 

because when they leave, there‟s more left for the rest of us. 

When people leave, there is more left for the rest of us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know we‟ve talked about this many times in 

this House, but it goes to the heart of the difference and the 

vision that we have for our respective provinces. Because 

members on this side of the House understand that when people 

leave Saskatchewan, they take their ties with them and their 

charity and take their kids from our school system and they take 

their taxes that would help us pay for programs that we want to 

provide to the province, and they take it elsewhere and someone 

else benefits. And when they leave, there‟s not more left for the 

rest of us; there is less. 

 

Further we understand, we understand as well, Mr. Speaker, 

that actually when we get people moving into the province — 

and the NDP didn‟t believe this was possible either, and more 

on that in a moment — but when we see people moving into 

Saskatchewan, as we‟ve seen in record numbers, we‟ve seen 

this population grow at a faster rate than it has in five decades 

since this party formed the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — But we understand when those families 

move to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they do bring their taxes 

with them and they bring their charity with them and they bring 

their ties with them and they bring their own energy that they 

have. And soon it doesn‟t take them very long after they moved 

here, they bring their own love for Saskatchewan with them — 

an enthusiasm for the province. And we‟re all better, we‟re all 

stronger for it, Mr. Speaker.  

That‟s why we seek growth on this side of the House. It isn‟t 

for the reasons of statistics and pie charts. It‟s because growth is 

represented in that one family that moves from Medicine Hat to 

Swift Current, that one family that moves from Red Deer to 

Saskatoon, that one family that buys a farm in rural 

Saskatchewan and contributes to rural life in our province. Mr. 

Speaker, our vision is one that when people leave 

Saskatchewan, there is not more left for the rest of us. We need 

to attract people to the province. 

 

I would also point this out in terms of the difference between 

both sides of the House and the Throne Speech and what we‟ve 

heard from the NDP, that it wasn‟t very long ago when an 

actual, elected member of this Assembly — supported I would 

assume by her leader because again it was never corrected — 

said that in her view it was impossible for the province to grow 

at the national average, that is was quote “statistically 

impossible for the province to grow at the national average.” 

Well, Mr. Speaker, just for record we agree that Saskatchewan 

cannot grow at the . . . Well is not growing at the national 

average. We are exceeding the national average, Mr. Speaker, 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And so, Mr. Speaker, the difference in the 

vision‟s pretty clear. This Speech from the Throne speaks to a 

stronger Saskatchewan and a better life, a province that is bent 

on leading the country, a province that‟s going to really lead in 

terms of the innovation agenda for North America. A province 

that‟s going to continue to grow in terms of population and 

create jobs for people versus what I just detailed, this litany of 

woe that we hear from members opposite including when the 

former leader — again never corrected or challenged by 

anybody on that side — called Saskatchewan the wee province. 

I think it was in the tradition of Tommy Douglas. But you 

know, for as much as we can talk about the traditions of 

Tommy Douglas that need to be continued and remembered, if 

that is a tradition of his that we would be referred to as a wee 

province, that‟s a tradition that we should stop and will stop in 

terms of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what have they learned, Mr. Speaker? What have the NDP 

learned? Well it was very, very, interesting post-election to read 

in the August 30 edition of the Regina Leader-Post, it was an 

article about the pending NDP leadership and renewal, and it 

talked about how some sources in the NDP were heartened, 

were encouraged by the chances for their own political success 

down the road because they had really thought Saskatchewan 

had reached its limit. And let me read to you the quote: 

 

[NDP] Party members often express a belief there is no 

way for the Saskatchewan Party to go but down, 

victimized by high expectations and . . . 

 

And here it is: 

 

. . . a financial picture that will never be as good in the 

future as it is now. 

 

And there you have it. And there you have it, Mr. Speaker, 

there is the sum and the total of the vision of the NDP today. 

 



1578 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2008 

When faced with the reality that this province is leading every 

other province in the Dominion of Canada, that this province 

was just recently featured in Fortune magazine for all of its 

potential and all of the opportunity, that every chartered bank in 

the country is tripping over each other to say Saskatchewan is 

the number one place in the country, Saskatchewan‟s the place 

to be, when all the people in the province are feeling pretty 

jacked about their future here in the province and optimistic 

about all the opportunity that is here — when all of that is going 

on, the NDP say, the financial picture will never be as good in 

the future as it is right now. 

 

That‟s it, Mr. Speaker. The Riders, they have too many injuries. 

They‟ll never make the playoffs. This is as good as it gets and 

we‟re just the wee province and we‟ll always be in and out of 

equalization. It always will be next-year country. Well maybe 

next year things will be better. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan we have a message, from Saskatchewan people 

actually — not from us — to those members opposite that they 

need to get with the times a little bit, because the people of this 

province are feeling pretty good about their future. They know 

they‟re not immune to what‟s going on in the world right now, 

but they feel very good about the future, and they do not believe 

for a moment that this is good as it gets. They believe that our 

best days are ahead of us, and thus it will ever be in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan, our 

Saskatchewan — not the government‟s, but our Saskatchewan 

— it doesn‟t subscribe to a vision of mediocrity. Mr. Speaker, 

the new Saskatchewan doesn‟t have time for those who think 

that our best days are behind us. The new Saskatchewan doesn‟t 

have time for an NDP that says it‟ll never get any better than 

this. The new Saskatchewan doesn‟t have time for a party, I 

would suggest, that has to reach back to, well to 1978 for its 

renewal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The new Saskatchewan, the new Saskatchewan is realistic and 

humble in our confidence. There‟s a humble self-assuredness 

that‟s out there to be sure. But the new Saskatchewan is feeling 

pretty good about our chances to continue to lead this province. 

The new Saskatchewan is out there thinking, man, I don‟t even 

know why the NDP are saying the word have-not because we‟re 

a have province today — one of only three in the Dominion of 

Canada — and we intend to stay that way. That‟s what the new 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The new Saskatchewan is saying you can 

break our fibula and our tibula and separate our shoulder, and 

we‟re going to be there on Sunday, and we‟re going to win the 

game, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And this Throne Speech represents that, 

Mr. Speaker, and it is the intent of our government to follow 

through on these commitments, as we have on the election 

platform, commitments we made in the campaign. We are going 

to keep those promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will keep the commitments of the Speech from the Throne. 

We will honour the people of this province we serve with a 

vision for their province that is worthy of the potential of their 

province, Mr. Speaker. We will, with their help and with their 

support and with their patience, create a strong Saskatchewan 

and a better life for Saskatchewan people, and I will be very 

happy to support, Mr. Speaker, the motion supporting the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy and 

seconded by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty‟s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 

Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 

gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 

address to us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour please say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:55 until 16:00.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 36] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Heppner 

Tell Gantefoer Harpauer 

Norris Morgan Hutchinson 

Huyghebaert Brkich Hart 

Kirsch Schriemer Allchurch 

Weekes Chisholm Wilson 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 



November 4, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1579 

Ottenbreit Ross Reiter 

Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 19] 

 

Calvert Harper Junor 

Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Nilson Yates Higgins 

Belanger Furber Iwanchuk 

Forbes Taylor Quennell 

Broten McCall Wotherspoon 

Vermette   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 36; those 

opposed, 19. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — I‟m standing so that I could move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:04.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1555 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1555 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1555 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1555 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1555 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1556 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1556 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1556 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1556 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1556 

   Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1557 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Delisle Chiefs Remember Terry Rak 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1557 

 Prince Albert Celebrates First Nations Culture 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1557 

 Positive Reaction to Funding for Technology Infrastructure 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1558 

 The 100-Mile Journey 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1558 

 Moose Jaw Food Drive 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1558 

 Sports Hall of Fame Induction Dinner 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1559 

 Comments Regarding Settlement 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1559 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 SaskEnergy’s Investment Strategy 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1559 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1559 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1561 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1561 

 Public Notification Policy 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1562 

 Seniors’ Income Plan 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1563 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1563 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatoon’s Credit Union Centre Expansion 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1564 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1565 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1565 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1565 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1566 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1570 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1571 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1578 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


