




















































Hansard: November 24, 2008


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 17A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1795 

 November 24, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and . . . Seated in your gallery is a young gentleman by the 

name of Jordan Crawford. Jordan — just give us a wave, Jordan 

— Jordan is a grade 11 student at Vanier Collegiate in Moose 

Jaw. And for his work experience he asked to work for the 

member for Moose Jaw North as part of the work experience. 

And I was more than honoured that he would request that. 

Please make him feel welcome. And although he‟s sitting in 

your gallery at this point for his first time ever in the House, 

someday he will probably be sitting on the government side in 

this government. So I‟ll ask everyone to make him feel 

welcome today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have one of these beautiful pink sheets which can 

only mean there‟s probably a school group in your gallery, and 

there is. From Bert Fox Community High School out in Fort 

Qu‟Appelle there are eight grade 11 and 12 students that are 

taking Law 30. Accompanying them are Valerie Brooks and 

Ron Dong, who are also in the gallery. For those of you that 

aren‟t familiar with where the beautiful Fort Qu‟Appelle is, it‟s 

in the Qu‟Appelle Valley, a great spot for tourism. Oh I guess I 

shouldn‟t do a tourism ad for the valley here right now. 

 

Anyway I‟d like all members to welcome them here. I‟ll be 

meeting with them, I think after the question period, to kind of 

answer maybe some of the questions as to how this place 

works. So welcome to your Assembly, and we‟ll look forward 

to meeting you after. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan families 

who are struggling to find or be able to afford adequate child 

care. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately add at least 1,000 new child 

care spaces in Saskatchewan. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of constituents in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in 

support of expanding options for student housing. And I‟ll read 

the petition as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to aggressively working with 

partners to expand on-campus and off-campus housing 

options for Saskatchewan students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s signed by folks from Prince Albert, Holbein, 

Duck Lake. And I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition concerning the high cost of post-secondary education. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to increase funding for post-secondary 

students and help to alleviate the large financial burden 

placed on students for pursuing a post-secondary 

education at a Saskatchewan institution. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was circulated by the Canadian 

Federation of Students, the University of Regina Students‟ 

Union, the University of Saskatchewan Students‟ Union, and 

First Nations University of Canada Student Association. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Masonic Lodge 125th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Recently, 

Mr. Speaker, the Masonic Lodge of Moose Jaw No. 3 

celebrated its 125th anniversary. It was in 1883 that a group of 

men applied for the privilege to institute a lodge, and that 



1796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

privilege was granted in September of that year, making the 

Moose Jaw chapter the third oldest in the province. 

 

The Masonic Lodge has been described as a worldwide 

fraternity that strives to do good works in our society and 

strengthen the people who serve. Moose Jaw‟s Masons apply 

their service in countless ways, including the community 

roadside cleanups most of us are familiar with. 

 

At a banquet to honour the 125th anniversary, a 

commemorative plaque was unveiled by the longest serving 

former worship brother, Les Timar, along with Moose Jaw‟s 

mayor, Dale McBain. 

 

Also honoured at the event was Vern Traill, a lodge member for 

more than 50 years, who was awarded the first ever 

Saskatchewan Mason of the Year Award for his community 

service and leadership within the Masons. 

 

Vern is well known in our community of Moose Jaw, a very 

active member of the Masons. And one of his distinguishing 

features that was spoke of that night was his ability to attract 

new members to the lodge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the Masonic Lodge of Moose Jaw No. 3 for reaching this 

tremendous milestone. And best wishes for many more years of 

service to our community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Prince Albert Student Housing Project 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saturday was 

National Housing Day. As the Hon. Diane Finley, federal 

Minister Responsible for Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation stated: 

 

. . . [this day] is not only an opportunity to learn about 

new approaches to housing, but also a day to recognize 

the progress that is being made to implement affordable 

housing solutions . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, an example of such a solution would be the recent 

sod-turning for a student housing project in Prince Albert. This 

project will house 36 low-income families who have a member 

attending SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] Woodland Campus. The students and their 

families, many who are Aboriginal, will be provided a safe, 

affordable, and good quality rental option while they pursue 

their studies. This not only benefits the people of Prince Albert 

by providing affordable housing, but it assists SIAST in 

meeting the demand for skilled workers in this province. 

 

This project also supports northern students in accessing 

post-secondary education and achieving their academic goals. 

This government recognizes that growing economies bring 

other growth-related issues. Early in this government‟s 

mandate, it developed a task force on housing affordability and 

has already implemented many of its recommendations. 

Last Friday, many community members such as Eddy Head, 

Gary Merasty, and I attended the Prince Albert student housing 

announcement to show our support. Mr. Speaker, problems can 

always be resolved when we work together to find a solution. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

YMCA Peace Medallion Recipient 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week YMCAs 

[Young Men‟s Christian Association] across Canada celebrated 

YMCA World Peace Week. A highlight of the celebration in 

Saskatoon was the presentation of the YMCA Peace Medallion 

to Maureen Strawson, community school coordinator at 

Bedford Road Collegiate. Terry Gibson, president of the 

Saskatoon YMCA says: 

 

The Peace Medallion recipients have led the way in 

showing how any one of us has the power to create 

positive social change without special resources. They are 

a tremendous inspiration and role model for improving the 

quality of life in the community, either at home or abroad. 

 

Terry goes on to say that: 

 

Through Maureen‟s work in schools and through her 

broad range of community connections, she has 

contributed immeasurably to some of the best things that 

happen for young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us will know Maureen for her leadership 

in the community schools in Saskatoon, and in fact throughout 

Saskatchewan where she has contributed immensely to the 

education of young people for over 30 years. Most recently 

she‟s been involved in the restorative action program at 

Bedford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Maureen Strawson is a constituent of mine. I am 

delighted to represent Maureen in this legislature. And I invite 

all members to join me in congratulating Maureen Strawson on 

being awarded the YMCA Peace Medallion 2008. It is truly 

well-deserved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Investment in Disability Programming 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to rise 

today to inform the House about an exciting new investment in 

Outlook involving people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

In October our government announced the largest investment in 

the history of the province in support of people with intellectual 

disabilities. This $76.9 million initiative was to ensure 440 

people waiting for help lead supported and fulfilling lives. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to announce the first of many 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1797 

investments that will reduce the existing wait-list. 

 

This new investment in Outlook will see additional individuals 

from the community being served through residential and day 

programming. Two new six-space group homes will be built, 

and renovations to an existing home will be completed to 

provide 18 individuals with a place to call home. In addition 15 

new spaces will expand the current day programming offered 

by the Variety Place Association, day programming that is 

increasingly effective in supporting people with disabilities to 

lead better lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Outlook is a wonderful Saskatchewan community. 

With this support, the community will be able to ensure that 

these 18 individuals can live a better life. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased and excited to support this program and its beginning in 

Outlook. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Stem Cell Transplants 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Stem Cell Transplant Advocacy Group, or STEM, recently 

celebrated the 50th anniversary of the first Canadian bone 

marrow transplant done here in Regina. At the reception held to 

celebrate the occasion and raise public awareness, the 

Saskatoon Health Region and the Saskatoon cancer clinic spoke 

about the new proposal for a state-of-the-art stem cell transplant 

program in Saskatoon at Royal University Hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my 46-year-old cousin died following a stem cell 

transplant three years ago in Saskatoon. The program was 

discontinued shortly thereafter, and a major review was done. 

Now there‟s a proposal with the Saskatoon Health Region and 

the cancer clinic to put a world-class stem cell transplant 

program into Saskatoon. 

 

A touching and very personal account of one family‟s 

experience with the stem cell transplant done out of the country 

had many audience members in tears. Mr. Speaker, we need to 

make sure that families are not torn apart at this most 

frightening time. We need the program in Saskatoon to serve all 

of Saskatchewan citizens in Saskatchewan. 

 

Congratulations to STEM and the survivors of stem cell 

transplants and their families, for their ongoing commitment to 

excellence and support. In memory of those who did not 

survive, let‟s make sure this new program happens as soon as 

possible. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Palo Mine 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, a recent announcement of a 

10-year agreement between Otish Energy, a resource 

exploration company who is focused on an exploration and 

development of uranium properties and ZEOX Corporation, an 

operating partner of Nanostructured Minerals Corporation, 

owner of the Palo operation near Landis, is welcome news. 

 

Palo mine will supply sodium sulphate to Canada‟s largest 

producer of potassium sulphate, effectively keeping the mine 

site near Landis open for the next 10 years. 

 

NMC [Nanostructured Minerals Corporation] has upgraded the 

Palo facility since it took ownership in September 2007 and 

plans to increase its workforce as necessary to meet the supply 

obligations. Currently production capacity is estimated at 

100,000 tonnes per annum, and there is land to expand facilities 

and capacity. 

 

The sodium sulphate at Palo is produced at purities of 98 to 99 

per cent. The Palo facility has several strategic advantages. It is 

located adjacent to a national rail line, enabling the company to 

service large volumes of material year round. In addition, there 

are heavy mobile handling equipment, rail lines, mining permits 

and bonds granted by the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The deal is also a joint venture between ZEOX, NMC, and 

Otish to acquire mineral rights for prospective potash 

development at the Palo site. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Dairy Farmers of Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On Tuesday evening November 18th, I was 

privileged to attend the Dairy Farmers of Saskatchewan dinner 

in Saskatoon. The dinner was part of a two-day conference and 

AGM [annual general meeting] for members of the association. 

 

The Dairy Farmers of Saskatchewan is a non-profit 

organization which advocates and promotes policies, programs, 

and services in the best interest of Saskatchewan‟s dairy 

farmers. The dairy industry began in our province in 1895 when 

a co-operative butter creamery located at Saltcoats. Over the 

last century, dairy production and processing has grown into the 

successful industry we have today. 

 

Dairy Farmers of Saskatchewan liaises with their sister 

organizations and collaborates on recommendations for industry 

policies at the regional, provincial, and national levels. Their 

concerns include agricultural and nutritional education, media 

promotion, public relations, and the school milk program. 

 

During last Tuesday‟s dinner, members paid tribute to the 

former Milk Control Board and its Chair, Leonard Blocka. They 

also gave accolades to directors Alvin Schultz and Emile 

Marquette for their dedicated past service to the dairy 

producers. 

 

A highlight of the evening was the announcement of the 2009 

Dairy Youth Ambassador, Mary Fink, daughter of Barb and 

Kim Fink of Vibank. Mary was selected after an interview and 

presentation. Other applicants were Erin Klassen of Herbert and 

Jessica McLeod of Caronport. I want to congratulate all of these 



1798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

young people for their commitment to a significant industry 

contributing to Saskatchewan‟s healthy economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Schools Under Review 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there are currently six 

schools in this province under review. Abbey, Morse, Wishart, 

Nokomis, and Landis are looking at closure; Lyndale is being 

considered for discontinuance of grades. The Sask Party once 

campaigned on keeping schools open. This has turned into 

empty rhetoric and broken promises. 

 

To the minister: how many of these schools will pursue a school 

of opportunity designation? And more importantly, when will 

the minister level with them as to what this designation will 

actually provide? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite is correct in identifying the schools that have 

enrolment numbers as of September 30 that do not meet the 

guidelines as printed in the handbook. That handbook was 

circulated throughout the entire province. All the stakeholders, 

including directors of education, school community councils, 

understand the numbers that are in those documents. 

 

Those schools that do not have sufficient enrolment, as the 

member would know, have the ability through the school 

review process which was initiated on October 15, they will 

now have the opportunity to consider whether or not they will 

become a community, and subsequent to that, a school of 

opportunity. Those are the criteria. They‟re very well explained 

in the document, and the member knows that. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the process of pursuing a 

school of opportunity application puts a huge strain on a 

community‟s resources. They need to know the facts about 

what this designation provides. When pressed on this issue by 

his own members amidst the glory of the Sask Party 

convention, the Premier suggested a review of the policy, the 

new policy, is needed — so soon. The communities facing 

closure need some clarity, and they need it now. 

 

To the minister: is he reviewing the schools of opportunity 

policy, and when will these communities know what‟s on the 

table? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, page 35 of the document, 

section 6, deals with schools of opportunity. It is an extensive 

document that talks about what the community needs to do in 

order to achieve a school of opportunity status. Mr. Speaker, if 

that community is able to look at its development and look at its 

influx of students, Mr. Speaker — because after all it is 

enrolment that will dictate whether or not a school meets the 

current criteria — if they look at all of that information and 

believe that there is development within this area, Mr. Speaker, 

unlike the former government who was in power for 16 years 

when literally hundreds of schools closed, this will be an 

opportunity for the community, through a process of additional 

funding by this government, to in fact allow that school to 

prove to itself and to the ministry that they are a school of 

opportunity and will attract the students that they need to 

achieve the status as required. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that doesn‟t answer the 

fact that the Premier is saying that the minister‟s policy needs to 

be reviewed. 

 

This government spends $8 million a year for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan to make recommendations on issues important to 

our provincial economy. In their September 30 report, the board 

of Enterprise Saskatchewan recommended that in light of the 

changing Saskatchewan economy, any decision on rural and 

northern schools be suspended for a three-year period. 

 

So to the Minister of Education: does he consider Enterprise 

Saskatchewan an education stakeholder? And will he accept 

Enterprise Saskatchewan‟s recommendation and impose a 

three-year moratorium on rural and northern school closures? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my ministry values input from people right across this province. 

I get dozens and dozens of letters from individuals. I get letters 

from town councils. I get letters from RM [rural municipality] 

councils. In fact we have a recommendation from the Enterprise 

and Innovation board to put in place a moratorium. The answer 

to that, Mr. Speaker, is no. We will not be putting in place a 

moratorium. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are considering, though, in light of some 

good suggestions from the Enterprise and Innovation, is that a 

two-year period for a community to prove itself regarding the 

influx of some businesses that‟s going to bring in some young 

families with children, we‟re looking at that two-year period of 

maybe that is not quite enough, Mr. Speaker, and we may want 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1799 

to change that to three years. Mr. Speaker, we are considering 

that. For the benefit of the member opposite, we are considering 

whether or not two years is adequate, and maybe we need to 

look at a three-year plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is how we are going to deal with growth in 

rural Saskatchewan. That‟s how we are going to ensure that 

communities who believe that they are growing have the 

opportunity to prove themselves and maintain a school — 

unlike the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister better get his 

facts straight before he sends communities on a wild goose 

chase that drains their resources. The school is at the very heart 

of the community. As we speak, communities are trying to plan 

for the future. Mixed signals, endless backroom discussions, 

and prolonged review are not fair to these communities. 

 

The Sask Party touted Enterprise Saskatchewan, and now 

they‟re calling for a moratorium. The Premier has told his own 

party that there‟s likely a better plan available and there will be 

a review. 

 

To the minister: when will he provide these communities the 

certainty they deserve? When will he share with Saskatchewan 

communities the Premier‟s new plan for school closures? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I have indicated in this 

Assembly today and the Premier has indicated before, there 

isn‟t a change to the process. The process is there. The dates are 

there. Everything is still going to be the same. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, clearly next spring when the first 

opportunity will be there if indeed a board of education decides 

that it is in fact going to close a school, Mr. Speaker . . . Just 

because a school has been placed under review doesn‟t mean 

it‟s going to close. 

 

But if it does, Mr. Speaker, and that motion has been put on the 

books, the community has the ability to put in place its game 

plan to explain to all of its residents why it will be able to meet 

the criteria for enrolment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we‟re looking at it and saying that two years might not be 

quite enough, and maybe we need to move to a three-year 

ability for that community to achieve those goals. Nothing has 

changed for the community. And I dare say that the member 

opposite needs to understand that himself first of all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Clean Coal Project 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

continues to put a lot of its environmental eggs in the carbon 

capture and storage basket. It‟s counting on clean coal to help it 

meet its greenhouse gas reduction targets. But the real story 

here, Mr. Speaker, is of clean coal and its cost. 

 

The Sask Party claims the project is going to cost $1.4 billion. 

They claim the province‟s share is 750 million, and we know 

Ottawa has put up $240 million, and they‟re saying not a penny 

more. And we‟re told the rest will come from private sector 

investments. That‟s what they‟re saying. 

 

To the minister: how‟s the search for private sector investors 

going so far? How many investors, nine months after the 

announcement, are banging down the door for the chance to 

share in this clean coal project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s always a pleasure to speak in this House regarding 

clean coal and the leading-edge demonstration project that the 

federal government has the confidence in the Government of 

Saskatchewan in, and that we are taking that responsibility very 

seriously, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The hon. member and I had a chance to discuss this in 

committee just a couple of nights ago, and I provided that 

information to him at that time. And I‟ll do so again. It‟s a $1.4 

billion project that we‟re looking to the private sector for in the 

neighbourhood of $400 million for ancillary costs regarding the 

distribution and other facets. 

 

The Saskatchewan government, through SaskPower, will have a 

budget in the neighbourhood of $750 million. As all members 

know, SaskPower has a capital budget in the neighbourhood of 

4 to $500 million over the past number of years. That will 

continue into the future. That will actually increase, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the increased economic activity and the 

increased need for safe, reliable power, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I didn‟t hear a single company, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s lining up. Mr. Speaker, like Saskatchewan, Alberta is 

pursuing carbon capture and storage. And there are lessons to 

be learned from what‟s happening in Alberta. The Alberta 

government‟s Carbon Capture Council says the cost of 

developing the technology could be as high as $200 per tonne. 

 

There are also liability issues to consider if the CO2 ever leaks 

after being stored, including damage to water wells. Given all 

of that, private sector investors here in Saskatchewan will want 

to know how much they will have to pay, and who‟s 

responsible for cost overruns. 



1800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

To the minister: will SaskPower customers end up paying the 

bill for cost overruns and other liabilities? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the operative 

question here is, are members opposite in favour of CO2 

sequestration? They put money into it; I suspect they are. But 

maybe with questions like that it‟s time that they put that on the 

record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had a plan for a $4 billion greenfield clean 

coal plant in southern Saskatchewan. They abandoned that. Did 

they have a plan B, Mr. Speaker? No, none whatsoever. We 

take this responsibility seriously. We are putting the plans in 

place. 

 

It‟s a $1.4 billion project. It‟s on schedule right now. To answer 

the member‟s earlier question, we are accepting requests for 

proposals. There‟s about 10 companies that we were hoping 

would bid in that regard. They are bringing information 

forward. It‟s on track. It‟s on schedule. 

 

To pre-empt the next question from the member, there is some 

risk involved. We‟re very responsible with that risk, and we‟re 

moving forward in a responsible way. That‟s why the federal 

government had the confidence in us, and that‟s why we have 

the responsibility to move forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party‟s 

Ottawa cousins have made it crystal clear that cost overruns are 

not their responsibilities. And private sectors will not give this 

government a blank cheque for any cost overruns or other 

liabilities. So that leaves SaskPower customers holding the bag, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: how much will SaskPower rates rise to pay for 

the cost overruns on this clean coal project? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said before in 

this House, it‟s a $1.4 billion project. Boundary dam 3 is in 

need of refurbishing anyway. That‟s why the fit was a very 

good fit. It would cost about $260 million to retrofit Boundary 

dam 3. In this regard we‟re able to do both things at once. 

 

When the previous government left the greenfield clean coal 

technology project and didn‟t have a second option, it was 

incumbent upon this government and incumbent upon this 

minister to act very quickly to ensure that we did have a project 

in place to ensure that our commitment to reduce greenhouse 

gases is intact. That‟s indeed what we‟ve done. We‟ve got a 

plan going forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no guarantee 

there‟ll be any significant reduction in greenhouse gas 

emissions. We know that the government is spending a lot of 

money on this clean coal project, and we know that the 

government is putting carbon capture and storage strategy that 

is similar in many ways to that of Alberta‟s. Well the Calgary 

Herald reported last week that the Alberta provincial auditor 

has said, quote, “„Alberta could spend a lot of money, but not 

achieve emissions targets.‟” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is this government putting so 

many of its eggs in the costly clean coal basket with absolutely 

no guarantee of reduced greenhouse gas emissions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I answered these 

questions as well in committee a couple of days ago but I‟ll, for 

the benefit of all members of the House, go through the 

information again. 

 

We will reduce the carbon footprint of SaskPower by some 1 

million tonnes per year in the 2011-2012 process. Again this is 

a demonstration project. When it does work, when it does go 

forward, we will be able to use this. 

 

The member talks about what‟s happening in Alberta. For the 

member‟s information, TransAlta and other companies in 

Alberta and across Western Canada and across North America 

are interested in what we are doing with this. We are leading the 

way, and we take that responsibility seriously. The member 

opposite talks about eggs in . . . Well I‟d rather have all the eggs 

in one basket than none of the eggs in any basket, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — That being said, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re in favour of hydro development. Is it going to be more 

costly? Yes. We‟re in favour of wind power development. Is it 

going to be more costly? Probably. Are we in favour of nuclear 

power? Yes, we want to hear, we want companies like . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Response to Deputy Minister’s Report 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Moen report on the Sask 

Party‟s mishandling of the improper release of a prisoner from 

the Regina Court of Queen‟s Bench was released on Friday. 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1801 

The report recommends that the deputy minister of Corrections 

be reinstated. Also on Friday, the government announced that 

Terry Coleman would be shuffled to Municipal Affairs. I guess 

someone with this minister‟s talents doesn‟t need any . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Allow the member to place his question. 

 

Mr. Yates: — I guess someone with this minister‟s talents 

doesn‟t need advice from someone with Terry Coleman‟s 

credentials. After all he‟s only a former chief of police. 

 

To the minister: if Terry Coleman was cleared of any 

wrongdoing, why is he no longer the deputy minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

the member opposite for his question. In the case of this review 

being done by the deputy minister of Justice, Mr. Moen, a very 

senior civil servant, we took his advice. We heeded his motions 

and his advice on this one. And in this case no wrongdoing 

happened. No one was terminated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it was at the time of the report review being done, it was 

decided that at the time I have an interim deputy minister, it was 

a time to make a shuffle in executive government — the deputy 

ministers in three areas, Mr. Speaker. No one was terminated. 

No one did anything wrong, Mr. Speaker. It‟s just fine to make 

a shuffle. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, according to the Moen report, the 

deputy minister was in this building when he was informed of 

the mistaken release by email just before 10:30 on Thursday, 

October 23. Presumably he knew that the minister was in the 

Assembly. It seems very strange that he didn‟t at least give the 

minister a heads-up. But what‟s more curious is that the Moen 

report has blacked out the names of other recipients of that 

email in question. 

 

Just to clear things up, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: did either 

he or one of his ministerial staff receive that email? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again thank 

you to the member opposite for the question. It was very clearly 

stated in the report, the review, that the former deputy minister 

in Corrections, Public Safety and Policing would have been 

wiser to advise me of his notification of the incident, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the question, no one else in my office was made aware of 

that, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s why we asked Mr. Moen to 

broaden his scope of his review not just to the Justice area but 

to this ministry as well. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has been very 

clear in his belief that he knows everything. When asked last 

week in this Assembly why he thinks he knows more than 

front-line workers at the Regina Correctional Centre, he did not 

hide behind false modesty. Instead he gave us his resumé. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Moen report describes the two front-line 

workers in this instance as well-intentioned and hard-working 

and notes that they have received commendations for their past 

service. To the minister: will he give the benefit of the doubt to 

the front-line staff in this incident given that, unlike him, they 

are ordinary people prone to human error? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the member opposite for his question. As clearly stated a few 

weeks back, I too am prone to human error, Mr. Speaker, and 

I‟m okay with that. It‟s okay for me to say that in this House. I 

have no problem apologizing for things I‟ve done. 

 

To recognize the hard-working staff involved in this case, no 

one was terminated. The deputy minister did discipline, and the 

discipline was meted out in such a fashion that was equal to the 

level of irresponsibility that happened that day. 

 

As we stand now, Mr. Speaker, the situation was handled. It‟s 

over. We‟re moving forward. We‟re taking the advice of Mr. 

Moen with some policy procedures for internal working to 

make sure this does not happen again. And we now have a 

minister who has assumed responsibility for a ministry, has put 

in policy direction. Procedures are now instated, Mr. Speaker, 

unlike the former member opposite who was a minister of this 

portfolio, union leader, and a corrections worker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we are asked to believe that the 

events of last Friday are just a coincidence. The Moen report 

recommends that the suspension against Mr. Coleman be lifted 

and that he continue in his role as a deputy minister. At the 

same time, the Premier‟s office announces a mini-shuffle and 

sends Mr. Coleman over to Municipal Affairs. Fair enough, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re not suspicious people over here on the 

opposition benches. So if the Premier chooses to characterize 

this as a coincidence, we‟ll believe him. 

 

While we‟re on the subject of coincidences though, Mr. 



1802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

Speaker, to the Premier: when can we expect the equally 

coincidental cabinet shuffle? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan have high expectations of whoever their 

government happens to be. I think the people of the province 

expect their government to react when there is a mistake made. 

They want their government to admit readily of it and then to 

correct the mistake, Mr. Speaker. They also, I think, want this 

current government to fix some of the problems that exist 

because of mistakes made by the previous administration, 

though you never hear any of those mistakes from them. And so 

in this case, Mr. Speaker, this government and this minister 

have implemented a policy of notification for the public when 

someone who is clearly dangerous is at large. 

 

Mr. Speaker, amazingly, that policy did not exist when that 

member who asked a question was the minister responsible. 

Those issues have been addressed. The Moen report has been 

received. The recommendations, Mr. Speaker, have been 

implemented. And that, Mr. Speaker, I believe is the kind of 

government that the people of the province want and they will 

get from this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

livestock producers in our province are receiving about half of 

what their parents and their grandparents used to receive from 

feedlots and packing plants decades ago. We have a livestock 

industry, Mr. Speaker, in crisis. And I‟m sorry, Mr. Speaker, 

postponing debt isn‟t the answer. 

 

Now on Wednesday the Minister of Agriculture indicated that 

he would be talking to the federal Minister of Agriculture later 

that day. And I believe Thursday the Premier indicated the 

Minister of Agriculture would be speaking to the federal 

minister on Thursday. I‟m not sure if he had one or two 

conversations. But can the Minister of Agriculture today report 

to this House the response he‟s received from the federal 

Minister of Agriculture? And can producers in this province 

expect some federal support payments soon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition, I did have the 

opportunity to talk to the federal minister on Friday and 

highlighted the problems and the stresses in the livestock 

industry in Saskatchewan. The other issue we talked about was 

COOL [country of origin labelling] and what‟s that doing to us 

from the United States and protectionism coming out of the US 

[United States]. 

 

We talked a number of issues and I highlighted the need for . . . 

Whether we improve the programs or we deal with an ad hoc, 

whatever it was, I was wondering whether there will help 

coming from the federal government. And he took notice and he 

will be getting back to us. At this point I have no commitment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, taking notice and getting back to 

us isn‟t helping the producer of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister apparently has had one conversation with the federal 

minister, and if I read in the press correctly, he‟s quoted as 

saying, “He [the federal minister] was non-committal in the area 

right now but at least we have it on the table . . .” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re happy that there‟s something on the 

table because there‟s clearly nothing on the table from this 

federal government or this provincial government for the cattle 

producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

So my question to the Minister of Agriculture: if the federal 

minister is saying he‟s noncommittal or intends not to act on 

this, will he reconsider his own decision? And will he provide, 

from his treasury, support for the cattle industry in the 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, I think we‟ve done a 

number of things. We‟ve talked about the water program. 

We‟ve talked about the education tax rebate that we are 

increasing up. So we‟re putting money back in their pockets, 

not taking it from them because we know they know better how 

to spend those dollars than we do as government — something 

the former government never did. 

 

One thing I want to remind the member opposite though — and 

I‟m sure he checks cattle prices and the member for Nutana 

checks cattle prices every morning because I know they‟re very 

interested — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to remind them that cattle 

prices as of October 1, ‟08 are actually higher than they were 

October 1, ‟07, right before the last election. 

 

And what did that NDP government or NDP opposition now 

have to say in that election? What was in their campaign 

literature? Absolutely nothing dealing with what was going on 

in agriculture, dealing with what was happening in the livestock 

sector. And, Mr. Speaker, things were actually even worse at 

this time last year than they are as of today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, one year later with a Sask 

Party . . . 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1803 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, one year later with a Sask 

Party government and a Sask Party Minister of Agriculture, 

absolutely nothing for the producers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in 2005 the current Minister of Agriculture 

called for an emergency debate in this legislature to deal with 

the crisis. Following question period later this day, Mr. Speaker, 

I intend to introduce an emergency resolution calling upon this 

government and the federal government to in fact put 

substantive effort in dealing with this crisis. Now interestingly, 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that I will introduce is very, very 

similar to the very same motion that the now Minister of 

Agriculture introduced in 2005. 

 

My question is to the Minister of Agriculture: will he support 

that motion, virtually the same motion that he made in 2005? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to 

the member opposite, I would look forward to a debate on 

agriculture with the members opposite any day, any time of any 

week. I would appreciate having the opportunity. Because you 

know, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure if one of the members actually 

took a wrong turn leaving Regina and realized that rural 

Saskatchewan is still out there because for 16 years, they didn‟t 

seem to know . . . or whether they didn‟t know or they didn‟t 

care, agriculture was not on the list. 

 

I look forward to debate the issue because we really care about 

rural Saskatchewan and we care about the livestock producers 

in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 70 —The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 70, 

The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 70, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Apology 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — What‟s the member from The Battlefords 

point of order? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of order 

dealing with the motion that‟s just been called by the Clerk, and 

it stands in the name of the government today. 

 

In my opinion, Mr. Speaker, this motion as it is currently 

worded is not in order for the following reasons. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to draw your attention to citation 565 of Beauchesne's 

Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th Edition and I quote: 

 

A motion should be neither argumentative, nor in the style 

of a speech, nor contain unnecessary provisions or 

objectionable words. 

 

I would also draw your attention to citation 566 of 

Beauchesne's, and again I quote: 

 

Any irregularity of any part of a motion shall render the 

whole motion irregular. 

 

So the rules are clear I think, Mr. Speaker — if part of the 

motion is irregular, then the entirety of the motion is irregular. 

A motion is irregular if it contains unnecessary provisions or 

objectionable words. 

 

So let me draw your attention to the part of the motion that is 

objectionable. It is the phrase, Mr. Speaker, that, and I quote 

from the motion: “. . . inaccurate description they were provided 

regarding . . .”, etc. That is the issue at hand here, Mr. Speaker. 

If this motion were to pass, it would create a situation where 

this Assembly stated as a matter of fact that an inaccurate 

description was provided by either this Assembly or members 

of this Assembly to the general public. And perhaps comments 

from the government in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, might lead 

you to understand the point of my point of order. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is clearly reflecting on the conduct or motives 

of present or former members and an attempt to use the weight 

of government via a motion for political reasons. 

 

Now the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, will possibly argue 

that since this motion does not name individual members, that 

the motion is in order. The precedents would not support that 

assertion, and I will demonstrate. 

 

In point of fact, the precedents I believe are clear in the opposite 

direction. Merely calling into disrepute the actions of members 



1804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

named or unnamed or reflecting on the integrity or honesty of 

those members is not in order. 

 

First, dealing with the issue of having named or not named 

specific members in the motion, I draw the Speaker‟s attention 

to Erskine May‟s Parliamentary Practice, 19th Edition, page 

144, 145, and I quote: 

 

Reflections upon Members, the particular . . . [member] 

not being named or otherwise indicated, are equivalent to 

reflections on the House. 

 

I would also add to that from Joseph Maingot‟s Parliamentary 

Privilege in Canada, second Edition, page 253: 

 

To reflect improperly on a vote in the House and the 

motives of some members is a breach of privilege. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from May and Maingot‟s, we have that to 

reflect poorly on a group of members, named or otherwise, is 

the same as a reflection on the motives or actions of an 

individual member on the House as a whole. 

 

So is this phrase in the motion in order, Mr. Speaker? I think 

you have to agree the answer is no. 

 

Now I quote from Marleau and Montpetit‟s House of Commons 

Procedure and Practice, page 522: 

 

Remarks directed specifically at another Member which 

question that Member‟s integrity, honesty or character are 

not in order. 

 

And further I would add Joseph Maingot‟s Parliamentary 

Privilege in Canada, edition no. 2, page 251: 

 

Contemptuous references hold the Member in disrespect 

of his parliamentary conduct and thus the House . . . in 

disrespect. 

 

And again from Maingot‟s, page 253, “To reflect improperly on 

. . . the motives of some members is a breach of privilege.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, from Erskine May, page 152 and 153: 

 

As examples of speeches and writings which have been 

held to constitute breaches of privilege or contempts [the 

following] may be mentioned . . . 

 

Reflections on the motives of a Member or a group of 

Members . . . 

 

Even though the motion as written does not specifically name 

individual members, the precedent on this is clear. Particular 

members need not be named in order for this motion to not be 

in order. And the motion as written is clearly reflecting on the 

motives of current or former members of the House and is 

calling them into disrespect. 

 

The offensive section . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask members to allow the 

member to place his point of order. 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The offensive section 

of the motion reflects poorly on members and calls their 

motives into question. This section is therefore not in order. If a 

section of a motion is not in order or is objectionable, then the 

entire motion is objectionable. If the motion is objectionable, it 

is irregular and should not be put in front of the House in its 

present form. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw the attention of 

yourself to the Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 

citation 565: 

 

It is the Speaker‟s duty to call the attention of the mover 

and of the House to the irregularity of a motion; 

whereupon the motion is usually withdrawn or so 

modified as to be no longer objectionable. 

 

And citation 566: “The Speaker has the unquestioned authority 

to modify motions with respect to form.” 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is proposing that the 

Speaker rule the offending part of the motion to be not in order 

and use the unquestioned authority that you have to amend the 

motion to change the government motion, perhaps to read as 

follows: 

 

That this Assembly apologize to the victims of Murdoch 

Carriere for the years of harassment they were forced to 

endure while in the employ of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The opposition has no problem with the apology portion of the 

motion, and that motion would indeed be in order. But the rest 

of the motion, we argue, is out of order, and should be stricken 

from the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s with the 

pleasure that I rise to speak to the point of order. Mr. Speaker, 

we were very careful to ensure that the wording of this motion 

was done indeed very deliberately and very appropriately. 

Certainly we believed that the victims of this harassment 

deserve an apology by the Government of Saskatchewan, and 

the opposition has just articulated that they support that as well. 

 

And so an apology is a very important part of this motion, but it 

is important as well, Mr. Speaker, to also recognize that 

inaccuracies about the employment status of Mr. Carriere were 

also misleading to the victims of this harassment and to the 

people of the province in general. And as such, we believe that 

it‟s important that that be owned up to and apologized for as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were very careful that we didn‟t name names. 

We didn‟t imply any members in this Assembly. We just said 

simply that these facts that were transmitted were inaccurate 

and should be apologized for. It doesn‟t speak to intent. It just 

speaks to the inaccuracies of the information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we believe, if you review this, we trust that you‟ll 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1805 

find this motion to be completely in order. And we would urge 

that that ruling happen presently so that we can proceed with 

the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — I thank the members for their points, the 

member for his point of order, and for the Government House 

Leader for his comments. And having just had this point of 

order brought to my attention, I would like to also inform the 

House that I was aware of the motion. And I took the time to 

look at the motion even before even entering the House, going 

over it this morning. 

 

I would like to reflect that while the basis of the member‟s 

position is that the motion is out of order on the grounds that it 

improperly reflects in the conduct of motives of present and 

former members, rule 50 and (f) does stipulate that: 

 

When a motion is under discussion, no Member shall: 

 

make a personal charge or accusation against a Member 

. . . 

 

And this rule is based upon established parliamentary practices 

as outlined in the procedural authorities of the House of 

Commons in Ottawa and in London. 

 

And as I reviewed the motion, I looked at the motion very 

carefully, and I would suggest that the text of the motion does 

not make a personal charge, as the member stated, or accusation 

against any other member. Nevertheless even if it was drafted to 

identify specific individuals, this in itself would not render the 

motion out of order. 

 

This Chamber is a place where members have the opportunity 

of debating many motions. And many motions brought before 

the Chamber can become and constitute emotional or 

argumentative debate. And I ask the members, do we want to 

stop total opportunity for members to debate very specific 

motions? When we look at the qualifier to the subsection 50(f) 

it states “. . . except by way of substantive motion with notice.” 

 

This phrase clearly acknowledges that our members are not 

prohibited from questioning or challenging the conduct of their 

colleagues, but that if they choose to do so it must be done 

directly with notice by way of substantive motion which we 

have before us. 

 

And the Opposition House Leader did cite several references. I 

find however that the references are not applicable to the 

present circumstances and that they were made in regards to 

persons outside of parliamentary publishing or making 

offensive remarks. 

 

As I reviewed the motion, as I‟ve listened to the arguments, I 

find that the motion before us properly processes the question to 

the Assembly, which I would suggest to you is a motion that is 

in order. And debate will proceed on the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Usually when 

I rise to speak in this House, I begin by saying it‟s a pleasure to 

rise. I cannot say that today. I don‟t take any particular pleasure 

in speaking to this motion today. We shouldn‟t be here today, 

Mr. Speaker. The NDP should have voluntarily apologized to 

Murdoch Carriere‟s nine victims a long time ago. 

 

And I know that some of the nine women are watching us 

today. And, Mr. Speaker, through you to them I would like to 

say, thank you. Thank you for your tenacity and determination. 

Thank you for entrusting your story to us. It has been our 

honour to be your voice in this Assembly. 

 

We‟ve been raising questions about the NDP‟s payoff to 

Murdoch Carriere for almost two years. For almost two years 

the NDP have given incorrect information. They have dodged 

questions and deflected. Had they been forthright from the 

beginning, I would not be standing here today. But far more 

importantly than that, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Carriere‟s victims could 

have started the healing process. 

 

One of the women said, and I quote, “If they [the NDP] were 

honest with us right at the beginning I think we could have got 

over it.” That has not been able to happen. Carriere‟s nine 

victims, nine brave women who came forward to tell their 

stories, deserve to be defended by their government, and the 

NDP failed them. And so we stand here today. 

 

In February 2007, we were told by the NDP that they had fired 

Murdoch Carriere and then offered him a financial settlement. 

They had given him a $275,000 golden handshake. Obviously 

that begged a few questions, not the least of which being, why? 

Why would a man who was apparently fired for harassment and 

convicted in a court of law be given such a sweet deal? Why did 

the NDP give him such a sweet deal after a former NDP Justice 

minister vowed to fight this in the courts? And why weren‟t 

Murdoch Carriere‟s victims defended by their government? 

Why were these nine women given only a fraction of what the 

NDP eagerly handed Carriere? What was the real story? 

 

Sadly, the more questions we asked, the more questions we had. 

Carriere was clearly guilty of harassment. No one was denying 

that, not even the NDP. And his actions were vile and 

disgusting. We know that from what the women have told us. 

And while we attempted to get answers for these women, the 

NDP chose to bury their heads and hope that this all went away. 

The NDP were slow to act when these women needed 

protection, but they were quick to offer up excuses — excuses 

that we now know are not necessarily correct. 

 

Last year when the Saskatchewan Party was in opposition, we 

made a freedom of information request for the NDP‟s 

settlement with Carriere. The NDP responded that for legal 

reasons they could not release it. We know that to be absolutely 

incorrect, Mr. Speaker. When a reporter from the Leader-Post 

made the same freedom of information request this year, we 

were told that we could release it. 

 

[14:30] 

 

This obviously made me ask why the NDP chose not to, so we 

did a little digging. The information that came back was that 

both the Justice officials and Environment officials all told the 

NDP that the settlement could be released. It was the member 

for Regina Lakeview, when he was Environment minister, who 



1806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

interfered and for pure political reasons blocked the release of 

the settlement. 

 

We also know that the member for Saskatoon Nutana was to be 

in on this denial of our request so that there would be the 

appearance of cabinet, and I quote, “solidarity.” And then this 

decision was supposed to be signed off by the member for 

Riversdale, the then premier. 

 

Hiding the settlement was a political choice for the NDP as the 

settlement clearly showed that Carriere had not been fired. He 

had resigned. The member for Saskatoon Nutana, the member 

for Regina Dewdney, and the now opposition leader stood in 

this Assembly 29 times and told us that Carriere had been fired. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Nutana said, and I quote, “We did 

not want him in our employment. He was fired.” The member 

for Regina Dewdney said, and I quote, “Mr. Carriere was fired.” 

The member for Riversdale when he was premier said, and I 

quote, “Mr. Murdoch Carriere was terminated.” 

 

Releasing that settlement would prove that these statements 

were not correct. Twenty-nine times they stood, Mr. Speaker. 

They had ample opportunity to tell us exactly what had 

happened and chose not to. 

 

What is most disturbing about this information was that 

Carriere‟s victims initially felt some relief, knowing or 

believing that Carriere had actually been fired. It was with this 

belief that they agreed to sign the settlement agreement with the 

NDP when they offered it to them. 

 

Once the reality of the situation was revealed this fall, that the 

NDP never had fired Carriere, they said that they never would 

have signed that agreement. And this is how they felt when they 

found out, and I quote: “You know the disbelief you feel when 

you first hear that a friend dies? That‟s the disbelief we feel. We 

feel like fools.” The NDP fooled them into signing. And after 

all they had been through at the hands of Carriere, this is 

reprehensible. 

 

The NDP settlement agreement gave Carriere $275,000. This is 

an extraordinary amount of money for a man with Carriere‟s 

record. And why so much? Well the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana maintained that settling would be cheaper than going to 

court, even though the NDP had previously said they would 

fight this in court. She maintained that going to court would be 

far more expensive, and the NDP were just being prudent. She 

said that she had a legal opinion that said so. 

 

On March 15, 2007, she told this Assembly, and I quote, “On 

the best legal advice, we were told to settle or it . . . [would] 

cost considerably more to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan . . .” 

 

On March 19, 2007, she said, and I quote, “The Government of 

Saskatchewan compensated Mr. Carriere because we were 

advised by legal counsel we were going to lose the case.” Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve read that exact same legal opinion, and it says 

no such thing. That very legal opinion actually says that there 

was no way that Carriere would have received anywhere near 

$275,000 if he had pursued this in court. 

 

The NDP could have done the right thing and pursued this in 

court, an action that would not have resulted in a $275,000 

payoff. They chose not to. They chose instead to make sure that 

Carriere was well taken care of. 

 

Not only did the NDP pay off Carriere with a ton of cash, they 

paid him for his pain and suffering. That is pretty hard to 

fathom, Mr. Speaker. How could a man who sexually harassed 

female employees have encountered any pain and suffering? 

We are still waiting for an explanation from the NDP on this. 

But considering the information or lack thereof that we‟ve 

received on this issue, I do not expect a reasonable answer. 

 

The women involved certainly want answers. Upon hearing that 

the NDP paid Carriere for his pain and suffering, one woman 

had this to say, and I quote, “We want to know what pain and 

suffering that man had.” And another woman said this, and I 

quote, “Carriere‟s pain and suffering surely can‟t be the same as 

ours.” 

 

And the terms of the settlement were misrepresented as well. 

While we were in opposition, the member for Canora-Pelly 

wrote to the member for Saskatoon Nutana with a list of 

questions regarding Carriere‟s settlement. We had asked in a 

letter dated March 1, 2007, on a list of questions, question no. 2 

is, and I quote, “Has the government paid any of Mr. Carriere‟s 

legal costs, and if so, how much?” 

 

On March 7 we received in reply to our question no. 2, and I 

quote. This is from the NDP, “The government has not paid any 

of Carriere‟s legal expenses.” 

 

Now let me quote from the NDP settlement agreement with 

Carriere, and I quote: 

 

The settlers shall pay to the Plaintiff Carriere the amount 

of $275,000. The parties agree that the settlement amount 

is inclusive of damages, costs, interest, and legal costs. 

 

Rules concerning parliamentary language do not allow me to 

use the words that I would like to, Mr. Speaker. But at the very 

least, the information that the NDP provided about paying 

Carriere‟s legal costs is absolutely incorrect. 

 

Carriere‟s victims have legitimate questions. We asked 

legitimate questions. The NDP responded repeatedly with 

incorrect answers. At the end of the day, the NDP‟s decision to 

settle out of court was an effort to make sure that their political 

friend was taken care of, pure and simple. They protected him 

by transferring him from one office to another. They protected 

him by ignoring the women‟s complaints. They protected him 

by allowing him to resign. And they protected him by making 

sure he resigned with a full pension and a huge settlement. 

 

And what about the women, Mr. Speaker? Did the NDP protect 

them? No. Have the NDP showed any remorse for what 

happened to them? No. Have the NDP once shown any empathy 

for these women? No. Was there any indication that the NDP 

were choosing the women‟s safety and well-being over 

Carriere? No. In fact, Mr. Speaker, they haven‟t learned a thing 

from this very sad situation, and their comments and attitude 

over the past few days in particular show that they have learned 

nothing. 

 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1807 

I‟ve been in and around politics long enough that there are very 

few things in this business that shock me, Mr. Speaker. 

However I was stunned last week by comments from the 

opposition. Last Thursday my colleague, the member for 

Saskatchewan Rivers, delivered her statement that highlighted 

the motion that is before us today. She was urging the NDP to 

do the right thing and join our government in an apology to 

these brave women. And what was the NDP‟s response? They 

heckled her from their seats. The member for Prince Albert 

Northcote told us to stop flogging a dead horse. That‟s their 

view apparently, Mr. Speaker, of these women: that they are a 

dead horse that we should simply be walking away from. The 

member for Athabasca said that we were revictimizing these 

women. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if standing up for these women is flogging a 

dead horse, we are gladly guilty of that charge. If making sure 

that their voices are heard is flogging a dead horse, we are 

gladly guilty of that charge. If showing the NDP‟s abject failure 

of these women is flogging a dead horse, we are gladly guilty of 

that charge. And if offering these women an apology is flogging 

a dead horse, then we are gladly guilty of that charge. 

 

And as for revictimizing these women, the only party in this 

Chamber who has done that is the NDP. They were 

revictimized when the NDP failed to take them seriously. They 

were revictimized when the NDP paid off Carriere with 

$275,000. They were revictimized when they found out that 

contrary to what the NDP had claimed, Murdoch Carriere was 

never fired but he was allowed to resign. They were 

revictimized when the NDP gave Carriere $275,000 and just a 

fraction of that to these women. 

 

And while we understand that no amount of money can undo 

the hurt, the shame, and the pain that these women have 

suffered, our government today has offered these brave nine 

women an additional compensation payment. We cannot undo 

what Carriere did to them. We cannot undo actions over the 

past few years. We cannot take back the money that was paid to 

Carriere. What we can do is acknowledge that they suffered 

once at the hands of Carriere and once again by the disinterest 

of their government at the time. And we hope that this 

acknowledgement with the additional payment and the apology 

that we are offering today, that these women have a sense of 

closure so that they can begin to heal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also last Thursday, the Opposition House Leader 

scoffed at this motion and questioned why it was a priority for 

us. It absolutely is a priority for us. I am proud to be a member 

of a party and a government who has dedicated so much time 

and effort over almost two years to make sure that the voices of 

these women are heard. We have done so because it is the right 

thing to do. These nine brave women wanted and deserve 

answers. We have not received accurate answers. 

 

The NDP told us that the settlement agreement could not be 

released. That is not correct. The NDP told us that the legal 

opinion said that going to court would cost more than settling 

with Carriere. That is not correct. The NDP told us that 

Carriere‟s settlement did not pay for legal costs. That is not 

correct. The NDP told us they had fired Carriere. That is not 

correct. 

 

The NDP had the chance to do the right thing years ago by 

protecting these women, and they chose not to. The NDP have 

the opportunity to do the right thing today — accurately answer 

our questions, stand in this House and apologize to these 

women. They can do the right thing today, Mr. Speaker. And 

after all that these women have been through, it is the very least 

that they can do. The very least that we can all do. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP would stop and 

consider this for a moment. If these women were their wives, 

their sisters, their mothers, their daughters, their friends, would 

they hold so tightly to their callous attitudes? If these nine 

women had faces and names, would the NDP continue to scoff 

and ridicule? Because, Mr. Speaker, while their names are not 

public, they are not nameless. Their names are mother, 

daughter, wife, sister, friend. They may not be sitting in front of 

us today, but they are not faceless. And while most of us do not 

know them personally, they deserve our respect. 

 

I will close by repeating what my colleague said last week: the 

time is always right to do the right thing. Mr. Speaker, today is 

the right time. And I move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly apologize to the victims of Murdoch 

Carriere for the years of harassment they were forced to 

endure while in the employ of the Government of 

Saskatchewan and for the inaccurate description they were 

provided regarding Carriere‟s employment status and 

severance settlement with the government. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Martensville has moved: 

 

That this Assembly apologize to the victims of Murdoch 

Carriere for the years of harassment they were forced to 

endure while in the employ of the Government of 

Saskatchewan and for the inaccurate description they were 

provided regarding Carriere‟s employment status and 

severance settlement with the government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP was the government 

of the day when Murdoch Carriere was an employee of the 

provincial government. As the government of the day, it was 

ultimately our responsibility for what happened in the civil 

service at that time. 

 

And let me be very clear. What Murdoch Carriere did was 

wrong. What happened to his victims was wrong and should not 

have happened. And it certainly should not ever happen to an 

employee of any workplace. It certainly should not happen to 

the employees of the people‟s government. 

 

Our party and the members of our caucus have always believed 

that people should not only have the right to come forward if 

they feel a workplace is not respectful or harassment-free, but 

they should be protected once they do so. Our party and our 

caucus have always believed that it is a fundamental human 



1808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

right to have a harassment-free workplace. The Government of 

Saskatchewan should lead by example and should be 

harassment free. 

 

Unfortunately the government of the day did not achieve that 

goal. Unfortunately there were victims of harassment in that 

workplace. We regret that we did not achieve an 

harassment-free workplace. We also regret that we did not do a 

better job of communicating with the women involved in this 

matter as it developed. This is an area in which we certainly 

could have done better. 

 

This has been said before and, if need be, it will be said again. 

In fact I would like to quote from an article in the Regina 

Leader-Post from March 22 of last year. Quote, “Public Service 

. . . [commissioner] Pat Atkinson apologized Wednesday for 

there not being „a respectful workplace‟ at a Prince Albert 

office four years ago when a number of women made claims of 

harassment.” 

 

The article goes on to quote the member from Nutana. Quote, “I 

think what‟s clear is that we had a workplace that was not 

harassment-free and we are truly, genuinely apologetic and 

sorry that that workplace was not harassment-free.” The 

member from Nutana is quoted again later in the article as 

saying quote “There‟s no doubt that these women are 

continuing to bear the brunt of what happened several years ago 

and for that we‟re truly sorry.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of our caucus and our former 

government have apologized before. But, Mr. Speaker, if 

there‟s anyone who thinks that the NDP or the members of this 

caucus have not sufficiently apologized for what happened, fair 

enough. So once again, on behalf of my colleagues, on behalf of 

the entire NDP caucus now and of the time, and on behalf of the 

government and the premier of the day — we are sorry. What 

happened to the victims of Murdoch Carriere is inexcusable and 

unacceptable. 

 

And if this motion was about apologizing to the women again, 

then all of our members would gladly stand in their places and 

vote for that apology. But, Mr. Speaker, this motion is not just 

about apologizing to the women. It is not just about apologizing 

to the victims. If it was, we would gladly vote for it. As you 

heard my colleague, the Opposition House Leader, point out, 

there is an offending clause in the motion which reflects poorly 

on members of this House and calls their motives into question. 

This clause is unacceptable to us. It is factually incorrect, and it 

demeans members of this caucus and by extension the entire 

House. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Not to reargue the point made by the Opposition House Leader, 

but the precedent is clear. Reflections on the motives of a 

member or a group of members is not allowed, and this motion 

does indirectly what the members across the way know full well 

they could not do directly. The clause is about politics, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so I rise today, not only once again to offer apologies to 

the victims of Murdoch Carriere; I rise to propose an 

amendment. Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Opposition 

House Leader: 

 

That the words after “while in the employ of the 

Government of Saskatchewan” be removed from the 

motion. 

 

And what would be the result of the amendment, Mr. Speaker? 

Very simply it would make the motion of an apology to the 

women who were the victims of harassment. And as I said 

earlier, if this motion is about apologizing to those women 

again, then all of our members will gladly stand in their places 

and again vote for that apology. 

 

Now it will be interesting to see what the government does with 

this amendment, Mr. Speaker. If they truly believe that the 

members of our caucus should stand in their places and vote for 

an apology, then they will support the amendment, and that will 

be the result. They will support this amendment, and then we 

will stand and support the motion. 

 

But if this motion is more about politics than it is about an 

apology, then the members across the way will vote against the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. If they vote against this amendment, 

they are saying that this . . . [inaudible] . . . really about an 

apology. This is really about trying to do through the back door 

what you cannot do through the front door. This is about 

playing politics. 

 

I hope that is not the case, Mr. Speaker. I want to believe that 

the members of the government really want a unanimous 

apology to go to these women. I want to believe that this is not 

about politics, but this is about a principle. 

 

If the government defeats the amendment, then it is our opinion 

that it is an invalid motion and that the motion reflects poorly 

on members of the House and calls their motives into question. 

If the government uses their majority in this House to push 

through a motion calling into question the motives of the 

minority, then that is quite simply unprecedented, 

unparliamentary, and unfair. And we will not participate. If this 

amendment is defeated, then we will be left with no choice but 

to abstain from the motion at hand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members across the way will no doubt try to use this fact 

against us. They will claim we were unwilling to vote for an 

apology when nothing could be further from the truth. That will 

prove once and for all that this is about politics, not about an 

apology. The choice is entirely in the hands of the majority, Mr. 

Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party today gets to choose how the 

NDP will vote today. Will they choose an apology or will they 

choose politics. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move my 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved an amendment to the motion which reads: 

 

That all the words after “while in the employment of the 

Government of Saskatchewan” be removed from the 

motion. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1809 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, 

please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it was interesting listening to the member from Meewasin speak 

to the motion and then bring forward amendment because the 

NDP obviously want to strike out the second half of the 

amendment. 

 

And the member talked about choices, Mr. Speaker. And they 

too, when they were government, when the NDP were 

government, they had choices. They had choices over a long 

period of time as these women brought forward their concerns 

and their complaints. There were nine women that were 

victimized, nine women that brought forward what was 

happening to them. And the NDP government had choices at 

that time, and they chose time and time and time again, the 

perpetrator. They chose to support Murdoch Carriere instead of 

supporting the women. 

 

The reason why it‟s important to keep the motion in its entirety, 

Mr. Speaker, is because it speaks to not just the victimization by 

Murdoch Carriere, but also the revictimization by their 

government of the day. The NDP revictimized these women by 

not giving them the entire truth. They did not give them all the 

information. They told them time and time again that Murdoch 

Carriere was fired, and that was not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to read back into the record what my colleague, the 

member from Martensville spoke into the record earlier, saying 

with all the information, that the NDP failed to give the correct 

information to those women. The NDP told us the settlement 

agreement would not be released. That is not correct. The NDP 

told us that their legal opinion said going to court would have 

cost more than settling with Carriere. That is not correct. The 

NDP told us that Carriere‟s settlement did not pay for legal 

costs. That is not correct. The NDP told us that they had fired 

Carriere, and that is not correct. 

 

The NDP had the chance to do the right thing years ago by 

protecting these women, and they chose not to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Meewasin talked about choices 

and so is the government of the day, so is the Saskatchewan 

Party. We are choosing to do the right thing today by not only 

apologizing to these women but recognizing that the previous 

government, the NDP, did not give them the correct information 

time and time and time again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not support the amendment. I do support the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is the 

amendment to the original motion brought forward by the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin: 

 

That all the words after “while in the employment of the 

Government of Saskatchewan” be removed from the 

motion. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the amendment? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 14:52 until 14:53.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment to the original motion: 

 

That all the words after “while in employment of the 

Government of Saskatchewan” be removed from the 

motion. 

 

Those in favour of the amendment, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 19] 

 

Calvert Harper Junor 

Trew Van Mulligen Atkinson 

Nilson Yates Higgins 

Furber Iwanchuk Forbes 

Morin Taylor Quennell 

Broten McCall Wotherspoon 

Vermette   

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 

 

[Nays — 37] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Cheveldayoff 

Heppner Tell Gantefoer 

Harpauer Norris Morgan 

Hutchinson Huyghebaert Brkich 

Hart Kirsch Schriemer 

Allchurch Weekes Chisholm 

Wilson Duncan Michelson 

LeClerc Ottenbreit Ross 

Reiter Bradshaw Harrison 

McMillan   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 19; those 

opposed, 37. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment is defeated. The motion 

before the Assembly is the original motion: 

 

That this Assembly apologize to the victims of Murdoch 

Carriere for the years of harassment they were forced to 

endure while in the employment of the Government of 

Saskatchewan and for the inaccurate description they were 



1810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

provided regarding Carriere‟s employment status and 

severance settlement with the Government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. Call in the members. 

Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 37] 

 

Wall Stewart Elhard 

Bjornerud Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

D‟Autremont Hickie Cheveldayoff 

Heppner Tell Gantefoer 

Harpauer Norris Morgan 

Hutchinson Huyghebaert Brkich 

Hart Kirsch Schriemer 

Allchurch Weekes Chisholm 

Wilson Duncan Michelson 

LeClerc Ottenbreit Ross 

Reiter Bradshaw Harrison 

McMillan   

 

Mr. Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — nil] 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 37; those 

opposed, nil. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we 

move into orders of the day, I would ask leave of the Assembly 

to move an emergency debate under standing order 59 of our 

Rules and Procedures of this Assembly. The motion that I will 

be presenting is clearly of a pressing and urgent necessity for 

the cattle producers of our province and, I would argue, for we 

their representatives here in the Assembly today. 

 

I hope that the government will allow this motion to be put 

forward in front of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I can really 

think of no other issue that is as urgent in terms of 

Saskatchewan people and our economy, Mr. Speaker, and made 

even more urgent by the non-response of the federal 

government in the Throne Speech last week. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today I rise to put forward this emergency 

debate. Interestingly enough, the exact wording of the debate is 

taken from a very, very similar motion made by the current 

Minister of Agriculture on November 15, 2005. And therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I would propose to move: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 

completely ignoring the current agricultural crisis in its 

Throne Speech; and that this Assembly condemn the 

provincial government for its failure to raise the 

importance of the current agriculture crisis with the 

federal government . . . 

 

Now again, Mr. Speaker, that‟s almost word for word from 

the Minister of Agriculture‟s motion in 2005, but we would 

add one further clause: 

 

and furthermore that the provincial government take 

immediate action to deal with the crisis in the cattle 

industry. 

 

And I would so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition has asked for leave to move a motion of emergency 

debate regarding the livestock industry. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Livestock Industry in Jeopardy 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I think we can agree, all of us in 

this House, that our livestock industry in Saskatchewan is 

facing some very, very difficult times. 

 

I think we can all agree that to date, the Minister of Agriculture 

has indicated that he is not willing to respond to the request 

from the cattle industry for some very direct financial, cash 

support. And it would appear that our federal government is 

unwilling, and perhaps now unlikely to offer support from the 

federal treasury. 

 

I think we can all agree and observe that our neighbours to the 

west, the Alberta government, has recently provided their 

producers with a cash support program of over $300 million. 

They have made the decision to stand behind their cattle 

industry. 

 

On August 1 of this year, the Saskatchewan livestock producers 

wrote to Saskatchewan Party MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] asking for a similar support package as to that 

provided to the producers in Alberta, and I quote from their 

request. Quote, “Without similar and immediate support for 

Saskatchewan‟s cattle producers, a significant reduction in 

forage acreage and cattle numbers within the province will 

occur.” 

 

These, Mr. Speaker, are the leaders of the industry indicating 

unless there is immediate support for the industry in our 

province, support not dissimilar from what‟s happening for 

producers in Alberta, that there may well be a significant 

reduction in forage acreage and cattle numbers in this province. 

And the letter, Mr. Speaker, to the government MLAs, from the 

leadership of the cattle industry in our province, indicated that 

$148 million was required — $148 million to provide parity 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1811 

with the producers in Alberta. And now I understand the 

Minister of Agriculture has said that he would not accede to that 

request. 

 

Now we know that the minister‟s acted in recent days to 

provide some deferral in terms of the loan program but, Mr. 

Speaker, in my view and I think in view of many of the 

producers, postponing or extending debt is not, is not the 

solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had some opportunity this past weekend to be in 

the Southwest, to be in Shaunavon, and I talked to some who 

had been in the cattle business for a lifetime. They believe that 

the future of the industry is today in some very significant 

jeopardy. They believe that even a year from now we could 

almost see the elimination of the industry in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I well recall May 2003, May 2003 when we 

received word of that one infected cow, the BSE [bovine 

spongiform encephalopathy] infected cow, and how at that time 

it threatened the industry. And how well I recall working with 

the federal government at that time to put a BSE recovery 

program in place. 

 

Now it took a little pulling in Ottawa to get them to come on 

board, but they came on board. And we had a national program 

I believe at that time worth $460 million. I know in 2004, in the 

provincial budget of 2004 we included $55 million in the 

provincial budget for that program alone, Mr. Speaker, that very 

direct program to the cattle industry, to the livestock industry as 

affected by BSE. 

 

Well we‟re in the circumstance today, Mr. Speaker, where I‟m 

told the prices of cattle are lower than they were at the time of 

the BSE issue. Mr. Speaker, we need this provincial 

government to stand behind our cattle producers. The industry 

requires it. 

 

And I think we‟ve all read the commentary of Kevin Hursh 

when he talked about how this government has been less 

responsive to the needs of the cattle industry than the former 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this political party in government enjoys a great 

deal of support in rural Saskatchewan. They‟ve had a great deal 

of support from the cattle producers and livestock producers. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s time that they stepped up to the plate to 

support those producers. 

 

Now we know that the Minister of Agriculture has had at least 

one conversation with the federal minister. And he volunteers 

that as a result of that conversation, well the minister is 

noncommittal but now at least it‟s on the table. Well I hope this 

wasn‟t the first time our federal minister heard about a situation 

facing producers in this province. I hope this isn‟t the first time 

that somebody put it on the table. 

 

Again, we have a federal minister from Saskatchewan who 

ought to go to Ottawa fully cognizant of this issue. And one 

would have expected to see something at least in the Throne 

Speech. We saw nothing. And now we have conversations 

between our Minister of Agriculture and the federal minister 

and we find out that, well it‟s only now getting on the table. 

Well I had a brief chance this morning, Mr. Speaker, just a brief 

chance to speak to some of the producers that are over at 

Agribition. They are saying there is a requirement for the 

governments of Canada and Saskatchewan to step up to the 

plate, as the Government of Alberta has for their producers. 

 

I reflect back again, Mr. Speaker, into 2003 when we faced the 

BSE crisis, and when we as a province and the federal 

government came together. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, when 

we came with that support in 2003, the price of oil and the 

surplus wasn‟t anything like what it is today. 

 

This government has some resources. They can stand behind 

the industry. And this motion, which again I repeat, is virtually 

the same motion that the current Minister of Agriculture made 

back in 2005. This motion should enjoy the support of this 

legislature. 

 

And perhaps through this motion we can begin a process of 

moving the federal government, and perhaps through this 

motion we can begin a process of moving the Executive 

Council, the cabinet, the Minister of Agriculture, and the 

Premier into taking some very concrete steps here in the 

province with their treasury to support this industry. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that government has allowed 

this motion to go ahead and look forward to the support of 

government members and opposition members for this motion. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as a relatively new member here, 

I‟m still learning some of the procedures. I will, Mr. Speaker, 

be very pleased to move this into the record: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 

completely ignoring the current agricultural crisis in its 

Throne Speech; and that this Assembly condemn the 

provincial government for its failure to raise the 

importance of the current agricultural crisis with the 

federal government; and furthermore that the provincial 

government take immediate action to deal with the crisis 

in the cattle industry. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of Her 

Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the federal government for 

completely ignoring the current agricultural crisis in its 

Throne Speech; and that this Assembly condemn the 

provincial government for its failure to raise the 

importance of the current agricultural crisis with the 

federal government; and furthermore that the provincial 

government take immediate action to deal with the crisis 

in the cattle industry. 

 



1812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

appreciate having the opportunity to debate the livestock issue 

that‟s going on in Saskatchewan. Any time we can debate 

agriculture, I think, is important to this legislature, but 

important to producers out there. 

 

I just want to talk about some of the comments that the Leader 

of the Opposition had talked about in his presentation today. 

And one of the things he said was that cattle prices are lower 

today than they were when the BSE struck. 

 

I remind the member opposite that actually — and I use cull 

cows as an example — but I think everyone would know that 

there was times where 10 or $20 was all you could get right 

after BSE hit for a cull cow, Mr. Speaker. And today possibly 

that number would be in the range of 4, 5, $600 which is not 

great — don‟t get me wrong — but it‟s a far cry from where we 

were with the BSE. 

 

One thing, Mr. Speaker, that also the member talked about was 

the hog and cattle loan, and that doesn‟t . . . He said, if I 

remember exactly what he said, that won‟t solve any problems 

out there. I find that an amazing comment when that‟s exactly 

what the previous government did at one point, a few years ago, 

was put out a hog and cattle loan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was on the record to say we know this will not 

solve all the problems out there, but I remind the members 

opposite that it was the cattle and hog industry that requested 

this very shortly after we formed government last fall, and 

that‟s why we came out with the hog and cattle loan. And one 

of the issues at that time was why they asked for a loan and not 

an ad hoc was because of countervail. And after the BSE 

experience, they certainly didn‟t want the US border and other 

borders to close, and cut off our cattle markets to that country, 

to the US [United States]. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I find some of his comments somewhat 

amazing when really when you think about it, and in the case of 

the hog and cattle loan, it was something that they had done. If 

that program is not worthwhile now and won‟t solve any 

problems, I wonder what their reasoning was at that point and 

why they did it at that point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the members opposite about this, 

and I touched on this in question period, and I did some 

checking. October 2007 cattle prices, compared to cattle prices 

in October 2008, are slightly higher now than they were one 

year ago. And yet I find that amazing because I checked in the 

platform of the NDP in the last election, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. 

Speaker, where once do they talk about the crisis in the 

livestock industry when prices were actually slightly lower then 

than they are now? I mean, Mr. Speaker, if there‟s a crisis there 

now, and we know there‟s stresses in the livestock industry, but 

they‟re calling it the crisis, well how come it wasn‟t a crisis last 

year in the election? 

 

You know how serious they were about really dealing with 

what was going on in the agriculture industry, Mr. Speaker? 

And the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, would 

know this very well because two years in running he said at 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention that the status quo was not on when addressing the 

education property tax issue. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what did we see in the NDP campaign 

literature last year in the election? Absolutely totally contrary to 

the previous premier‟s from the NDP government‟s days to 

what he is actually talking about. Mr. Speaker, in their 

propaganda or their — well I guess you could call it that — but 

in their literature from the NDP campaign last year, they didn‟t 

once say they were going to put any additional dollars into the 

education property tax rebate, so really what he was saying is, 

status quo is on. We‟re not going to help farmers in rural 

Saskatchewan. We‟re not going to do one thing more for you 

when it comes to education property tax. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not where we‟re going. We‟ve gone 

from 38 per cent rebate to 47 to 56. In the next year we will 

follow up and higher, Mr. Speaker. But we also have the 

member for Rosetown, Biggar that‟s looking into the education 

tax and seeing if we can actually do something quicker, Mr. 

Speaker, or more long-lasting, but at worst we‟ll honour our 

commitment, Mr. Speaker, as we‟ve done in many occasions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s so many issues that I think the 

previous government neglected over 16 years, I find it almost 

amazing. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, in question period, I think 

one of the members over there took a wrong turn when they left 

Regina heading to Saskatoon or somewhere else and actually 

realized rural Saskatchewan still exists out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of us on this side of the House represent 

rural ridings, but I can say I think with pretty good credibility 

that there‟s very few on that side of the House that have more 

than just a small part of their constituency actually is in rural 

Saskatchewan. And that didn‟t happen, Mr. Speaker, for no 

reason. That happened for a good reason because rural 

Saskatchewan just completely saw them for what they were on 

that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. They totally ignored rural 

Saskatchewan. In fact if they ignored agriculture, we would 

have been better off, Mr. Speaker, because what did we see 

them do with crop insurance? 

 

Let‟s go through the crop insurance program. 2002 was a heavy 

drain on crop insurance. We understand that. But after 2002, 

what we saw was higher premiums for producers and less 

coverage, and what we saw was probably a number of 

producers that dropped crop insurance and weren‟t into the 

program and didn‟t have that coverage they needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are we doing with crop insurance? Well 

number one, our commitment in the election campaign was to 

do a crop insurance review. We‟ve done that, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟re costing out the opinions of producers out there and what 

they‟d like to see included in them. And one thing, Mr. Speaker 

— I might add loud and clear — one of the main things that 

came out of the crop insurance review was reinstate spot loss 

hail. 

 

Well do we remember, Mr. Speaker, who actually cut spot loss 

hail from the crop insurance program? It was the caring 

members opposite. And for the Leader of the Opposition to 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1813 

stand up now all of a sudden, be the saviour for the livestock 

industry, I find that more than just a little hypocritical. For 16 

years they didn‟t know we existed in rural Saskatchewan, and 

now all of a sudden in the last couple of weeks it‟s come to 

light that all of a sudden we need to do a cash payment for the 

livestock industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would be the first to agree. There is stress 

in the livestock industry, and there‟s tough times out there. But, 

Mr. Speaker, to compare it to be worse than the BSE, I find that 

almost unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, funding for AgriStability was always a bone of 

contention when I was in opposition, Mr. Speaker. And the 

minister of the day on the NDP side would never get to the table 

and fully fund the program upfront, but at the same time never 

had input into any changes that might have helped producers in 

this province. And that‟s why we‟ve got a program that doesn‟t 

fully deal with times like this when the livestock industry is 

stressed and trying to . . . a hard time making ends meet, and 

now we‟re trying to improve that part of the programming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, bringing AgriStability administration back to 

Saskatchewan I think is something that will help all producers 

out there, not just on the livestock but I believe on the grain side 

— all of agriculture out there, Mr. Speaker. And again it was 

something the producers were asking us to do — find a way to 

improve the programming but find a way to make these 

programs reliable and bankable, Mr. Speaker. And bankable is 

the key word there because the lending institutions cannot rely 

on the programming as they are and has been since actually the 

GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] program was then 

cancelled in 1992 by the then Romanow government when they 

started to really show their neglect for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe by bringing ag stability back to 

Saskatchewan will not fix all the problems in the program, and 

we‟re going to work with the federal government on that. But at 

the present time, I think it‟s one of the things we can do to 

speed up the process, get the files processed quicker, and if 

there‟s dollars owed to producers, get those dollars in their 

hands in a timely manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we brought in the farm and ranch water 

infrastructure program — something for the Southwest. And I 

want to really talk about the Southwest right now, Mr. Speaker, 

because when the Leader of the Opposition was premier, again 

for four years there was a drought in the southwest part of this 

province, totally ignored by the NDP. In fact the previous Ag 

minister did not even take the time to go down and just see how 

bad it was, Mr. Speaker, and they were totally ignored. And 

there‟s a lot of livestock producers down there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for 16 years, especially the last four in the Southwest, what 

did they do for livestock producers in the Southwest? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, absolutely nothing. And again today all of a sudden 

it‟s a crisis. It wasn‟t a crisis last fall when prices were actually 

lower than they are now. All of a sudden it‟s a crisis, Mr. 

Speaker. Very hypocritical of the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the farm and ranch water program, we are 

assisting 65 per cent, and we‟ve just enhanced that, Mr. 

Speaker, for wells, pipelines, dugouts, power into these 

facilities, generators. And we‟re going to cover 85 per cent of 

cost of community wells. Mr. Speaker, is this going to solve all 

the problems in the Southwest, especially in the livestock 

industry? I‟d be the last one to commit that this is going to solve 

all their problems. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a long-term solution I believe. The 

next time a drought comes along — and we know it will 

because it‟s cyclical — that the wells that we‟re drilling today 

will be there to provide water in those times of the next drought. 

And again, there‟ll be hard times when that happens, but the 

situation where these wells are drilled, at least they will have 

the option of having adequate water supplies to help them 

through hard times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, gopher control. And you know, many I think in 

the province, especially in urban Saskatchewan, would say, well 

this is not a big issue out there. Mr. Speaker, in the southwest 

part of this province and actually other areas in the province, 

it‟s a tremendous problem. You have to see it to believe it, but 

you actually have to go out to rural Saskatchewan to understand 

what I‟m talking about. So that‟s why we come out with the 

gopher rebate program where we‟re going to rebate 50 per cent 

of gopher control costs for bait for producers that have spent, in 

some cases, thousands upon thousands of dollars to try and 

control the gopher population in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, producers out there, whether it be RMs, First 

Nations, or individual producers, are all eligible for this 

program. We‟re getting many, many forms coming in, and 

we‟re responding to them as quickly as they come in. And we 

would encourage all producers that have spent more than $100 

on gopher bait control out there to apply through your local RM 

and put in, and we‟ll reimburse you for half of that cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, extension services is something that I think is 

pertinent to the conversation today because the debate we‟re 

having is about agriculture. And we remember the NDP‟s 

record back — I‟m not sure if, Mr. Speaker, it was like three or 

four or five years ago — where the then NDP government cut 

22 rural service centres. Now that‟s really caring about rural 

Saskatchewan. I believe all it is is nothing more than a cost 

saving and really do we care, because we don‟t have any votes 

in rural Saskatchewan, so go ahead and make those cuts. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what are we doing? We‟re not cutting rural 

service centres. We‟re going to expand extension services in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I believe that‟s something that 

people within our Ag offices around this province were not 

allowed to do the last number of years. I think the previous 

government thought if they sat there quietly, that everybody 

would just go away and not bother them. Oh, and what they did 

do, Mr. Speaker, is they put a 1-800 number in place, and that 

was supposed to solve the problems that producers had. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, it didn‟t even come close. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute on an . . . especially 

related to the cattle industry, but the country of origin labelling 

that the US has brought in. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe this is 

nothing more than a protectionist measure by groups in the US, 

and it has nothing to do with food safety. 



1814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, I will be on the record, and I think many of our 

members on this side would be on the record, in saying that 

Saskatchewan and Canada produces the safest and best beef of 

anybody in the world. Right here in Saskatchewan at Agribition 

today, all you have to do is take a walk through the barns and 

you can see the quality of the livestock that the producers in this 

province raise. And I would put our cattle industry — in fact 

our entire livestock industry — up against any of that, anywhere 

in the world, and I think we will come out on top. So country of 

origin labelling is really nothing more than a protectionist 

measure to keep our cattle out of the US. 

 

I think what‟s interesting to this though, Mr. Speaker, I believe 

there‟s a number of slaughter plants, packing plants, and actual 

feedlots in the US that actually want our cattle. And they also 

really aren‟t all that enthused about COOL or the country of 

origin labelling. I believe it doesn‟t agree with NAFTA [North 

American Free Trade Agreement] or it also is almost close to a 

WTO [World Trade Organization] challenge. I spoke to the 

federal minister on this issue, Mr. Speaker, and passed on our 

concerns of how important the country of origin labelling 

regulations are going to affect us — and in fact I believe are 

already starting to affect us — and please lead the charge with 

the US to try and find a way to soften these regulations or, even 

better yet, remove all of them from dealing with our cattle when 

they go to be exported into the United States. 

 

One of the things that the members opposite have talked about, 

that producers are asking for, Mr. Speaker, is that we wanted 

parity with Alberta. Well let‟s talk about that for a minute, Mr. 

Speaker. The ad hoc payment that Alberta came out with was 

much appreciated, I‟m sure, in Alberta by their cattle producers. 

And that‟s what our cattle producers are talking about. 

 

But I think some of the burdensome regulations that Alberta is 

bringing in along with that ad hoc, none of our producers that 

I‟ve heard from today are really that interested in us making it 

mandatory for age verification, premise ID [identification], and 

everything that goes along with the payment in Alberta. So I 

guess it‟s one of those things, Mr. Speaker: be careful what we 

ask for because we certainly don‟t want, I don‟t believe, want to 

go down that road. And I as Ag minister am not going down 

that road until I hear from our industry saying, this is where we 

want to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to whole traceability — and that‟s 

part of the Alberta plan — and reporting of cattle movements 

on a database, submit farm records to the government, breeding 

records, vaccination records, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Alberta 

program down the road is going to add millions of dollars in 

costs to the cow-calf sector, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that every time costs are passed down 

in the livestock industry, it‟s the cow-calf guys that are going to 

pick up that cost, whether it‟s through lower prices for their 

calves or however it is, the cost of setting up a computer system 

to do all this registry that they‟re bringing in in Alberta. 

 

And in most cases, Mr. Speaker, we get along very well with 

Alberta. But in this one issue, we have come to agree to 

disagree. And I think many of our producers agree with my 

position at this point. If producers in general and a large 

majority of producers come to me, Mr. Speaker, and say a year 

from now or in the next six months that we feel this is where we 

have to go, Mr. Speaker, we will assist them with that. But I 

need their direction and their leadership. And we won‟t be 

forcing them into anything that they don‟t want to go, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I could talk for probably hours here 

about what‟s happening in rural Saskatchewan, what has 

happened in the past 16 years before we got to be government, 

but, Mr. Speaker, I want to pass an amendment to the motion 

today. But I would like to say before I do that, that I think in our 

one short year in government, I would put that record against 

the members of the opposition for the last 16 years. I would put 

that record against theirs any time of day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, at this time I‟d like to 

pass an amendment to the original motion. And why I‟m doing 

this, Mr. Speaker, is because once again “that this Assembly 

condemn the federal government.” 

 

I‟m not here to stick up for the federal government, but that did 

not get us any results in 16 years of NDP government where all 

they did was condemn the federal government, be at . . . And 

it‟s not just the Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. I go 

back to when the Liberals were in power federally, and they had 

that same opinion on the other side of the House — it‟s better to 

be confrontational because you know you‟re going to get 

nothing out of the federal government, so therefore we don‟t 

have to cost-share it in the province of Saskatchewan because 

remembering we ignore rural Saskatchewan and we don‟t care 

about the agriculture sector in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not where we are coming in because we 

represent rural ridings on this side of House, and we‟ll represent 

the whole Ag industry and the livestock sector. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I move: 

 

That all of the words after “this Assembly” be removed 

and replaced with the following: 

 

“urge the federal government to address the current crisis 

in the livestock industry and that this Assembly urge the 

provincial government to continue raising this important 

issue with the federal government and continue provincial 

efforts to assist the livestock industry.” 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture, an amendment to the motion: 

 

That all the words after “this Assembly” be removed and 

replaced with the following: 

 

“urge the federal government to address the current crisis 

in the livestock industry and that this Assembly urge the 

provincial government to continue raising this important 

issue with the federal government and continue provincial 

efforts to assist the livestock industry.” 

 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1815 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 

not a great deal of reassurance to hear the now Minister of 

Agriculture saying that he‟ll stand up and represent livestock 

producers like my daughter and son-in-law, my cousins, and 

other people that I hold very near and dear to my heart around 

the whole issue of livestock production. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out that livestock prices 

have gone down. We‟ve got a BSE crisis. We got all kinds of 

problems compounding in around livestock producers. And 

what‟s changed since the last time when we had a emergency 

debate on livestock? I‟ll tell you this, what‟s changed is that the 

price that farmers have to pay and ranchers have to pay for a 

litre of diesel fuel is just about double what it was then in 2005 

to 2008 — three short years later. 

 

Another thing that has changed is the price of fertilizer where 

this year we saw phosphate fertilizers approaching $1,200 a 

tonne. We saw fertilizer prices double and nearly triple what 

they were in 2005. And yet, and yet the return for producers — 

be it for livestock or be it for crop — has not gone up 

commensurately. Yes, we had a nice little blip and we . . . I 

hope it‟s not a blip, but it seems like it is because the price of 

commodities was going clearly in an upward trend. And then 

the world seemed to fall apart, and the prices are clearly 

trending down and trending down fairly fast. We‟ve got a crisis. 

 

We‟ve got now the Minister of Agriculture saying, oh but don‟t 

worry, I‟m the defender of agricultural producers in 

Saskatchewan. That‟s what he says. Well just last week what he 

said is, oh but I‟ve got a very important call with my federal 

counterpart, my federal cousin, the Minister of Agriculture. I‟m 

going to be talking to him and we‟re going to get action. That 

was what he said just a few days ago. Left us with a clear view 

that livestock producers and farmers could expect, well you‟d 

almost think a cheque in the mail. Of course it doesn‟t work that 

quickly. But at least we expected an acknowledgement that 

there‟s a very, very serious crisis that seems to be getting worse 

not better. A serious crisis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s getting 

worse instead of better. 

 

And while that‟s going on, now we have the Sask Party 

Minister of Agriculture saying, oh but let‟s amend this 

opposition motion because after all the opposition wants to 

condemn the federal government for its inaction. 

 

Well imagine that, Mr. Speaker. We want to condemn a federal 

government, a federal government that claims its got a solid 

base in Western Canada — in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and 

British Columbia — a solid western base they claim. And yet 

not one word about cattle operations in the Throne Speech that 

they gave just last week. Not one word, not one peep. No 

mention at all about the crisis. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is small 

wonder that on this side of the legislature we‟re condemning 

Stephen Harper, Gerry Ritz, and the whole gang down in 

Ottawa because they are being silent while our Saskatchewan 

livestock producers and farmers are heading into a crisis. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And I know we‟ve talked about the cost price squeeze since I 

was a little boy growing up on a farm. We‟ve talked about that 

all these years. But my goodness, when you‟ve got diesel, 

which is a major fuel for farmers and livestock producers, 

having nearly doubled in three years, nearly doubled in price, 

that virtually doubles just the cost of fuel which is a major, 

major cost of farming. 

 

And you‟ve got fertilizer doubling and almost tripling in that 

same time frame, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is small wonder that 

members on this side of the House say there‟s a crisis. 

 

What we have is a quote . . . I have a quote here from the Sask 

Party Minister of Agriculture on November 15 in Hansard, this 

legislature‟s Hansard. He says quote, “. . . we‟ll actually get the 

message through to the federal government.” He was explaining 

how they‟d get the message about the ag crisis through. 

 

And I heard a question directed to the Sask Party Minister of 

Agriculture by the Leader of the Opposition in question period. 

And what the Agriculture minister said essentially boils down 

to this: Ottawa said to us, don‟t call us; we‟ll call you. And then 

the Sask Party Minister of Agriculture went on and said, as he 

did just in his speech just now, for livestock producers and 

farmers of Saskatchewan, don‟t call us; we‟ll call you. 

 

Everything flows downhill. And I can tell you that having 

grown up in a farm and having had livestock, I know what 

flows downhill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it‟s clearly flowing 

downhill from that side of the legislature. And what a shame 

because we‟ve got livestock producers and farmers that are in a 

real crisis right now. They need not just words. They don‟t need 

to hear from the provincial government that, oh trust us, we‟re 

your friends. They need much more than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have . . . I want to, just before I leave the 

fertilizer prices and things like that, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

quote from the now Minister of Agriculture what he said in 

November 15, 2005 when he was proposing an emergency 

debate on agriculture. And what he said is producers have, 

quote: 

 

. . . no money to pay their fertilizer bill, no money to pay 

their chemical bill. 

 

We get an increase in SaskEnergy costs for farmers along 

with everybody else. SaskPower now has asked for an 

increase which, when it comes out, it shakes out, usually 

farmers are asked to pay a little [more] . . . 

 

That‟s what he said November 15, 2005, three years ago when 

fertilizer prices were half to a third of what they are today, 

when diesel costs were just about half of what they are today, 

when livestock prices were very similar to what they are today, 

very similar, and grain commodity prices were not strong then 

and most commodity prices are not that strong right now. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got this interesting situation. The 

Minister of Agriculture was talking about SaskEnergy and 

SaskPower rates going up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well one of the 

things that‟s different . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. There‟s a little more 



1816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

conversation going on. I‟m having trouble hearing the member 

that has the floor. I recognize the member for Regina — order 

— Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of the 

things that‟s happened just this fall, October 1, SaskEnergy 

rates went up 20 per cent for the fuel — 20 per cent. And you 

bet, livestock producers and farmers that have natural gas on 

their farms and ranches, and virtually all do, are going to pay 

the 20 per cent increase. 

 

Then on top of that, what they did is they snuck an additional 

$2 delivery fee a month after the 20 per cent, an extra $2 a 

month which doesn‟t sound like a lot. It‟s $24 a year this year 

and next year and the year after and the year after. And it‟s $24 

that this SaskParty is picking out of the pockets of farmers and 

ranchers, cattle producers, throughout Saskatchewan. They‟re 

picking it out of everyone‟s pockets, but that area as well and at 

a time of unprecedented crisis. 

 

We‟ve already got the Saskatchewan . . . the Saskatchewan 

Farmers Union has done research and have shown that the 

return on livestock, if you adjust for inflation, is half what it 

was for my parents and my grandparents. It‟s half what it was a 

decade ago. It‟s at an unprecedented low, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and that‟s why we‟re standing up on behalf of cattle producers. 

 

Government members are of course free to heckle. Government 

members are of course free to get up and speak to this debate, 

this issue to this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I look 

forward to perhaps that happening. 

 

We have got a situation where . . . I know I talked about 

fertilizer prices and fuel prices. And we don‟t often, 

non-farmers don‟t often think of fertilizer as a problem for 

livestock producers. But I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that land in Saskatchewan is suitable for . . . Typically 

throughout the agricultural prairie area the land is suitable for 

two things and mostly it‟s one or the other — sometimes a bit 

of both — that is for livestock production or crop production. 

And of course if it‟s crop production, then it‟s dependent on the 

vagaries of weather. And we have a history of canola being 

grown traditionally more further in the north than in the south; 

that sort of thing is going on. And the use of fertilizers varies 

depending on the farm and the needs of that farm. But no matter 

how you slice it, there is a problem for agriculture producers. I 

don‟t care how you slice it, there is an imminent crisis. 

 

We see prices going down for commodities, and we see costs 

going up for the inputs. And we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

government that has never been more flush with cash than they 

are today. Never more money, never more resources at the beck 

and call of an administration than what this administration has 

at its beck and call. Close to $3 billion could be meted out for 

anything and still not hit a deficit. 

 

And how does this . . . Why I raise that, Mr. Speaker, is simply 

for this reason. I want it absolutely to be crystal clear that this 

Sask Party has got the resources. They‟ve got the finances. 

They‟ve got the ability to deal with this crisis today. They could 

deal with the crisis right now if they wanted to, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I want to point out that in — again I go to 

November 15, 2005 and I‟m going to again quote from the now 

Minister of Agriculture who said, quote, talking about the New 

Democratic Party government of the day, quote: 

 

. . . that government has money falling out of all their 

pockets but only that government has money, they see fit 

to neglect our farmers and rural Saskatchewan. 

 

That‟s what the member for Saltcoats, today‟s Minister of 

Agriculture, had to say in 2005. Now the reality in 2005 was a 

lot less buoyant than it was as late as 2007 and certainly 

through 2008. 

 

In 2007 we saw the economy, it took off almost like a 

spaceship. It took off. Saskatchewan‟s economy took off. We 

were delighted and elated with it and we continue to be 

delighted and elated that after all those years of dealing with 

getting the financial picture in order, all those years of trying to 

help improve the situation for Saskatchewan‟s producers and 

businesses, that the economy was going to take right off, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and we‟re pleased that it continues to take off. 

 

But I point out the fiscal situation, the financial situation 

because this Sask Party cannot hide behind empty cupboards. 

This Sask Party has got the resources. They could do anything 

they want, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Our livestock producers clearly do not need to be held back 

because of this government dithering, this government that 

wants to be an apologist for the federal government, this 

government that is a do-nothing government, the very 

government, the Sask Party government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that had all the answers 13 months ago before the last general 

election in Saskatchewan. They had all the answers 13 months 

ago and I submit to you that today they‟ve got much to answer 

for. They had all the answers before the election; none of the 

answers subsequent to the election. 

 

What have they done? What have they done of their own 

volition? Well to hear the Minister of Agriculture, you know 

what one of the things they did is? They did a study and they‟ve 

costed some of the options for crop insurance. Well gee, here 

we are 13 months post-election and they‟ve costed some of the 

options in crop insurance. 

 

I want to again point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that wasn‟t 

what they were saying, that now Minister of Agriculture, wasn‟t 

saying oh, we have to cost out options, or oh gee. He was a lot 

more definitive than that in opposition. And he was clearly 

saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we had the fix, they knew 

what was wrong with crop insurance. And if they knew it then, 

tell me what‟s changed. 

 

Well I can, again I tell you what‟s changed, is they got about 

$2.5 billion more now that what they thought they might have. 

Two and a half billion dollars seems to me is not an argument to 

slow walk changes that they might want to make in crop 

insurance. It seems to me it‟s not an argument that would leave 

our livestock producers and our crop producers hanging out in 

the field, hoping, hoping that somehow or other their bankers 

will help them get through the winter, which is cold — a cold, 

cold winter with high, high natural gas costs. 

 

And the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, the Minister 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1817 

Responsible for CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] has said, and we can expect SaskPower rate 

increases soon. All of that‟s going to happen, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It‟s funny how they can make a rate increase happen 

for SaskEnergy or SaskPower really quickly, but ask for a little 

bit of help for a livestock producer or a farmer — help that they 

had all the answers for 13 months ago — but today the silence 

is absolutely deafening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, I keep picking up on some of the 

things he said because I want to refute a little bit of it or at least 

have a discussion. He talks about the gopher control program, 

and like we don‟t have a clue what that is, is what he would 

have livestock and crop producers believe. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell you that I‟ve spent . . . 

I grew up on a farm. I‟ve worked on a ranch. And I want to tell 

you that I was the gopher control expert — maybe not expert — 

but I was certainly the one that was sent around with the, much 

as I may regret, the strychnine, which causes a very painful 

death for gophers. But I was the one that was sent out, took care 

of a quarter section one day. 

 

And it‟s a very effective way of eliminating the gopher 

population. The rancher I was working for said, normally I 

don‟t do this, don‟t like to. Normally Mother Nature takes care 

of it. We‟ll have wildlife that will feed off of the gophers, but 

every once and a while there is just this huge imbalance, and the 

gophers just take right over. 

 

And I know that‟s what the Minister of Agriculture was talking 

about in the Southwest. How do I know that? Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I know that because I‟ve talked to my nephew who‟s 

gone out on to a farmer‟s land to try and help control gophers 

there. That was their notion, they would invite people out for a 

little bit of target practice. And I have a nephew who‟s a pretty 

avid hunter, and he went out and made a weekend of it. I don‟t 

think he made much of a dent in the gophers, although he 

claimed to have a great shoot. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The point is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, gophers are not something 

that is brand new. Gophers will cause a problem. Rabbits will 

cause a problem. I can remember the rabbit population going up 

and down like a yo-yo. And I can‟t just recall whether it‟s a 7- 

or 8- or 9-year cycle — something like that. It seemed to just go 

in cycles, and we‟d be overrun with rabbits. And then the next 

year you could hardly find one. And then they‟d build their 

population up again slowly, and the same thing would happen. 

 

With respect to drought proofing rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is something that the CCF-NDP 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 

Party] championed. We have a long history — a lot longer 

history than the Sask Party ever could dream of — in terms of 

drought proofing rural Saskatchewan. We introduced the largest 

irrigation projects in Saskatchewan‟s history, being in around 

the Lake Diefenbaker-Outlook area, Riverhurst, and so on. It 

was expanded under Grant Devine‟s Conservative 

administration; there‟s no question about that. But I want to say 

that the notion of drought proofing rural Saskatchewan has been 

around longer than any of us in the Chamber have been alive. 

That‟s the simplest way I can put that. 

 

And it is important that we have dugouts and wells and as much 

resources as we can so that we can get through a drought. But 

the problem with a severe drought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is you 

simply — like the drought that southwestern Saskatchewan had 

a few years back — you simply can‟t grow the bales to feed the 

livestock. So then you need to implement a program to move 

bales in. 

 

But we‟re not in that situation today. What we‟re in is a 

cost-price squeeze and a situation that the federal government 

and the provincial government, the Conservatives in Ottawa and 

the Sask Party in Saskatchewan, could fix. They, both 

governments, have the ability to fix it. And I‟ve got to ask, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, how it is that the member for Saltcoats, the 

Minister of Agriculture, will say, oh we shouldn‟t say anything 

untoward about our cousins in Ottawa. He says we shouldn‟t be 

adversarial. We should just go cap in hand, and maybe we‟ll get 

some of the oats that drops. 

 

You know, Conservatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have always 

believed in the trickle-down theory. Always they‟ve believed in 

the trickle-down theory. The problem for Saskatchewan‟s 

ranchers and grain producers is they‟re getting awful tired of 

following the elephant around just to get some of the oats. 

 

How is it that the federal government could come up with 

something like 35 billion — that‟s with a b — billion dollars, to 

help out the banking industry. We‟ve got a worldwide 

economic crisis right now, so they‟d have everyone believe. But 

how is it that the federal government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

could come up with 35 billion roughly, for banks and nothing 

for livestock and farmers — livestock producers and farmers. 

How does that work? Where are the priorities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Clearly, we‟ve got an abrogation of responsibility at the 

provincial level. The Sask Party Minister of Agriculture and the 

Sask Party government are just turning a blind eye and turning 

their backs and saying oh well, it‟ll get better. And if it doesn‟t 

— and they‟re right about this — if it doesn‟t, well at least 

there‟ll be fewer livestock producers and fewer farmers left for 

them to deal with, ergo less noise. 

 

How does that affect any of the livestock producers or the 

farmers that are potentially going to lose or in the process of 

losing their livelihood? How does it affect a producer that may 

have been raising livestock for 35 years, 40 years, to see their 

herd disappear? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell you that, unlike to my 

knowledge, anyone in this Assembly, I‟ve seen it. I‟ve seen two 

of my cousins who had a herd that had been a beautiful herd of 

livestock, beautiful herd that had been growing for — I‟m 

trying to think — it would be something more than 40 years 

because they took it over from my uncle. A beautiful herd. Sold 

it all last year, every single animal. Sold it all. There was a 

crisis then. Now they‟re relying on canola and other crops.  

 

But what a pain that was. What a hurt, what an emptiness in the 

heart to see a cow-calf herd that had been growing and culled 

. . . And many people understand how it is that you improve 



1818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

your herd from year to year. And they had been doing that for 

40 years — improving their herd, improving their herd — and 

then to have to just simply sell it all, that‟s a hard blow. And 

I‟ve seen it first-hand. 

 

So I don‟t want any Sask Party MLA to try and say, oh 

somehow New Democrats don‟t understand the pain. That‟s just 

nonsense. Nothing could be further from the truth than to say 

that New Democrats don‟t witness, don‟t live, don‟t see the 

pain that our agriculture producers are experiencing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have all kinds of reasons why the government 

should be stepping up to the plate. We have all kinds of reasons 

why this administration, the Sask Party, should be opening up 

the chequebook and helping out our livestock producers and our 

crop producers. Not one of them is related to hardship by the 

provincial government. If anything‟s changed in the last three 

years — other than your input costs for livestock and grain 

producers has gone up and livestock and crop receipts have not 

— if anything else has changed, it‟s the treasury of the 

provincial government which is just huge by comparison. 

Today it is just huge. Again I say this Sask Party could do 

whatever it is they wanted to do for our livestock and our grain 

producers. 

 

I want to thank the hon. member opposite who said, we‟ve got 

canola in the bin. And I can think of no better analogy. And 

honestly I thank the member for that because the canola‟s in the 

bin, and they can sell it. The canola‟s in the bin. This 

government‟s got the cash. It‟s even better than the canola in 

the bin. They‟re already selling the canola, and they have the 

cash in hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I‟m about to wrap up but I just wanted to . . . I think I have 

covered the territory that I want to. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 

that I have colleagues that are right ready to take up the cause. 

 

I just want to close by saying the governments of Ottawa and 

the Government of Saskatchewan should both step up to the 

plate. How is it the federal government‟s got $25 billion or 

more for banks, and they‟re not done. And they‟re talking about 

having billions of dollars for the auto industry, and I‟m not 

lacking in support for that. But how is it that they can see those 

problems so clearly, and yet they can‟t see the crisis for 

livestock producers. How does that work? 

 

And then I have to ask, where are our federal MPs [Member of 

Parliament], our Conservative MPs? What on earth are they 

doing about it? What are they saying? Are they going to Ottawa 

and saying, hey Billy, we got the good times now. Because 

that‟s about what we‟re getting. 

 

They‟re apologists. Before they were elected they used to say, 

oh we need an energy equalization accord that should be worth 

something over $800 million a year for Saskatchewan. And 

then now they‟re saying, oh well forget that. Well they gave up 

on $800 million a year, but for heaven‟s sakes, how can they 

give up on our livestock producers and our grain producers? 

How could they turn their backs on the very people that helped 

elect them? How could it happen so quickly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? How could the federal Conservatives in Ottawa react 

so much like the Sask Party in Saskatchewan? How is that 

possible? 

Mr. Speaker, I am very much in support of our motion. I will be 

opposing the amendment put forward by the Minister of 

Agriculture, but I‟m very, very proud to stand up and speak on 

behalf of Saskatchewan farmers, Saskatchewan ranchers, cattle, 

livestock-of-all-kinds producers, and crop growers throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a crisis. I say for heaven‟s sakes, take the 

blinders off, open up the wallets, and talk to your Uncle 

Stephen in Ottawa. Get some cash flowing to rural 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

want to say I welcome this opportunity today to speak in favour 

of the amendment put forth by the Agriculture minister, the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats. I want to speak to this motion 

simply because my constituency, the constituency of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, is basically an ag constituency. It‟s 

fuelled by farmers which are grain farmers and cattle producers. 

And not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amount of cattle 

that my constituency produced — or my area, not just my 

constituency, my area that produces cattle — is the highest 

number of cattle in the province. I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

heard lots about the crisis in cattle. 

 

The point I want to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it didn‟t start 

last year, November 7. This problem with the cattle started 

years back. And I can guarantee you for 16 years the previous 

administration, the NDP, had no darn plan, no darn plan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And they still don‟t. 

 

They feel that we should be going to the federal government 

and giving them a cheque. Well I can guarantee you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of Ag has been talking to the 

minister, the federal Minister of Ag in Ottawa. And, yes, there 

are crises out there. But I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this government here in one year has done more for ag 

in the province of Saskatchewan than they have for 16 years. 

 

It‟s ironic to listen to the member previous stand and talk about 

ag. Well I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all members 

on this side of the House are affiliated with rural Saskatchewan 

and ag problems. Many of us on this side of the House are cattle 

producers. I am for one. So I know the problems out there. But I 

can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Ag is 

doing a great job of working with the federal government and 

colleagues here to come up with plans that will suffice the 

problem, and help our cattle producers. It‟s not going to solve 

all the problems, but we are at least working on it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the former member that was talking 

about the cattle producers and his cousin that has a herd, a huge 

herd, and for 40 years he‟s had this herd and he‟s built this herd 

— well that‟s how farming in cattle goes. 

 

Once you get a good line of cattle, you keep breeding them to 

get the best that they can produce. But that member, in talking, 

that said he kept this herd for 40 years and had to sell it last year 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1819 

because he couldn‟t make ends meet, well where was the NDP 

to help him? They weren‟t there. 

 

But I can guarantee you, in one year‟s time we have come up 

with programs to help that member if he would have stayed in 

cattle. But he choose not to. But that‟s his prerogative. We on 

this side of the House are coming up with programs to help the 

farmers and the cattle producers. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my talks at home . . . And I have 

many people come in and talk to me about the cattle crisis and 

the prices of cattle. And, you know, when you sit down with 

each and every one of them and you explain the programs that 

we have implemented or are implementing, they look at us and 

they say, well at least you‟re helping, which is more than the 

previous administration, the NDP. And I can guarantee you, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, after talking to each one of the farmers on the 

phone or in my office or wherever, once I explain to them the 

programs that we have in place, they are relieved at the fact that 

we‟re helping. 

 

And that‟s what our job is. Our job as MLAs is to transfer the 

information from our minister to our citizens that are 

concerned, and explain to them what we‟re doing. And it is 

working. 

 

Is there work to be done? I can guarantee you the Minister of 

Ag, the member from Melville-Saltcoats, will be the first one to 

say there‟s more to be done. But at least we‟re working on it. In 

fact, I believe it was on Friday he talked with the federal Ag 

minister, Gerry Ritz. And I know Gerry Ritz personally myself, 

and I‟ve talked to him about farm issues — not only just cattle, 

but other farm issues. 

 

But he is with the federal government, and he is working on 

issues there in a bigger scale than what we are here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And with the co-operation, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of our Ag minister and the federal Ag minister 

together, hopefully they will come up with some programs that 

will help stimulate the growth in our cattle industry and keep it 

to where it is. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regards to the cattle and the hogs, 

and I do have hog producers in my constituency, and they are 

also saying that the price of hogs is low. But if you look at the 

cattle and the hogs, it‟s an up and down swing. When grain 

prices are high, cattle and hogs are low. It‟s a known fact. Right 

now grain prices are high, so it‟s naturally going to be low for 

cattle. There is a problem, though, because with the cattle 

industry it didn‟t just start last year. The cattle industry has been 

suffering ever since BSE. 

 

And who was in power when BSE hit? It was the NDP. And 

what did they do for those number of years from 2003? 

Absolutely nothing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And yet they stand 

here today and they say, we should just write them a cheque. 

Well I can guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, when they were in 

power and they started talking about ag problems, what did they 

do? They blamed the federal government. Whether it was the 

Liberal government or whether it was the Conservative 

government, they blamed the federal government. So why don‟t 

they get out the blame thrower? That seems to be their number 

one instrument they use when it comes to issues in the province 

is blame the federal government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are looking at that and taking it into 

hands. And we‟re working with the federal government to solve 

some of the issues and the problems we have. Just alone, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, regarding the cattle industry, the problem with 

countervail — and that is one of the major problems when it 

comes out to an ad hoc situation. The cattle industry in the 

province of Saskatchewan does not want an ad hoc program 

because it raises problems with countervail. 

 

Now on the other hand, you look at Alberta and they went forth 

and they‟ve come out with $300 million to give to the cattle 

producers. $150 million was given in the springtime which, 

according to my information, there was little or no strings 

attached to that 150 million. But the last 150 million that was 

given to the Alberta cattle producers, there was strings attached 

and the strings attached to that was age verification. And that‟s 

why many of the farmers, the producers in Alberta, are upset 

with that. They thought that they would just get another cheque 

like they did in the springtime to utilize for whatever they want. 

 

Is that what the producers of Saskatchewan want? Is it for us to 

come out with an ad hoc program with ties to it like age 

verification or maybe COOL or whatever? I don‟t think so, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They don‟t want that. 

 

Our Ag minister is working with the players in the province of 

Saskatchewan to come up with solutions that will fit both all the 

ag producers, the cattle producers, but work within the system 

that we‟ve got so that we‟re not affected by countervail. 

 

I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by talking to some of 

the ranchers that have bought land in Saskatchewan — and my 

area has a lot of land that Alberta farmers are either renting 

pasture or utilizing that pasture to fuel their livelihood with 

cattle — they‟re not happy with the Alberta government, not 

one bit. Yes, the money came. but when you have ties to it, at 

the end of the day they‟re not happy with the system and 

they‟re not happy with it. And we don‟t want to go there and 

we‟re not going there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So for the members opposite to come out, because we‟re sitting 

on a mountain of money, let‟s just write them a cheque, well 

that isn‟t going to happen, Mr. Speaker. We are a responsible 

government, responsible to the people of this province in all 

sectors. And before we come out and just writing a cheque, 

we‟re going to make sure that we do our homework and make 

sure that there‟s plans in place that this money is going to the 

right places for the right reasons. 

 

Just alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to speak a little bit about 

the education, the increase to the education tax rebate. Well 

we‟ve increased ag land rebate from 38 per cent to 47 per cent. 

That‟s a huge increase, Mr. Speaker. Does it help the farmers, 

the producers? Well it‟s going to help all of them. Yes, does it 

turn dollars and cents into the cattle producer? In a roundabout 

way, yes it will. The problem is it cuts down on their overhead, 

so it offsets some of what the cattle prices being low. 

 

But just on that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the cattle 



1820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

prices being somewhat low, I know on Monday of last week the 

cattle prices took a huge increase. They were probably up 

anywhere from 8 to 11 cents. Again on Tuesday, the following 

Tuesday they dropped that. It used to see it where cattle prices 

would go up one week and then fall maybe the next week. Now 

we‟re seeing with the markets right now, the cattle prices are 

going up one day and they‟re falling the very next day. So it‟s 

hard to predict when the prices are going to be high. But that‟s 

how the business is operating right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I know the cattle producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, when it comes down to it, they definitely are 

supporting our government on the plans that we have to 

implement, to help them far more that what that government, 

the previous NDP did in 16 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also want to talk a little bit about just what the previous 

administration did for rural Saskatchewan and the cattle 

producers and the farming producers over the last 16 years. 

Well first of all they closed 22 rural offices in 2004. They also 

closed hospitals. They also shut down the 1-800 line. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that has hurt the rural people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It‟s hurt my constituents, and it has hurt all 

constituents in the province of Saskatchewan. It‟s one more stab 

in the back to the rural area of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about three weeks ago I had the 

opportunity to go down to North Dakota and speak to people 

down in North Dakota. And at that time I brought up the whole 

issue of cattle and the pricing and why our cattle is not going 

across the border. And one of the main reasons that the farmers 

are having a crisis in cattle is it‟s tough to get the cattle across 

the border. The United States people down there also know that, 

but they want our cattle. 

 

I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that our cattle in 

Western Canada rank probably as high as you can get. In fact 

they rank number one in the world. Everybody wants our beef. 

We have to come up with plans how to sell our export to 

markets around but not just using our southern border, United 

States. There‟s other markets in this world that would like our 

beef, and we have to use our expertise in getting that export out. 

But that falls under the jurisdiction of the federal government. 

 

Our Ag minister, our provincial Ag minister is helping in that to 

get the members from the federal government to look at that. 

But when it comes to cross-border shopping and the problem 

with getting our cattle across the borders, that‟s a federal 

jurisdiction. And I know if we could somehow eliminate some 

of that, our price of our cattle would jump. 

 

I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I was down in 

the United States, North Dakota, talking, they were saying what 

they were getting for cattle versus what we were getting for 

cattle up here. And there was probably a 20 cents difference 

between a steer there and a steer that we produce here. That is 

hurting us. But they want our cattle. So we need to curb some of 

them problems with the border to let the United States purchase 

our cattle, and our price of our cattle would climb to what they 

were years ago. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, well when I was also down in North 

Dakota, I talked about the age verification and COOL. And it‟s 

ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that talking to producers down 

there, they don‟t want it. They don‟t want COOL. They say it‟s 

going to hurt them as it is going to hurt us. I‟ve also had 

members in the cattle industry saying that maybe we have to go 

this route, not because we want to but because we‟re forced into 

it. This also hurts our cattle producers because they‟ve got to 

change their ways in order to work with the age verification and 

the COOL process. 

 

But I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there‟s any 

costs because of age verification and COOL, it will be borne by 

the cattle producers. And that is going to be a huge cost to them. 

And when you have the price of cattle being somewhat lower, it 

adds to the expense side and they don‟t get as much. 

 

Also in my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my producers 

that are cattle producers, well they‟re getting up there in age. 

There‟s very few young farmers, ranchers that are taking on 

working with cattle. So when the older generation of cattle 

producers look at what it‟s costing them, they just say, well 

maybe it‟s time to get out. Maybe it‟s time; I‟ll just sell my 

cattle and get out. 

 

The markets will change. Given time, the cattle markets will 

come back. But right now, they‟re somewhat lower. But I can 

assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this side of the House, this 

government who was represented by rural Saskatchewan, 

represented by farmers, ranchers, they are happier that we‟re in 

government because we are there to help them, not like the 

previous administration. 

 

It‟s ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this motion came to the 

forefront just in front of when the exhibition is on. And the 

motion put forth basically condemns us as the provincial 

government and condemns the federal government. Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I can guarantee you both levels of government 

are working hard to solve some of the problems. I guarantee 

you that the constituents of mine, after talking with them, 

maybe don‟t like what‟s happening, but they are sure happy that 

the fact that we are at least looking after them. 

 

And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of my colleagues who 

are farmers, cattle producers, would also like to speak to this 

motion and to the amendment. But I‟m so happy that I had the 

opportunity to stand and speak on behalf of the constituents of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, and we support the amendment put forth 

by our Ag minister. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

I‟m pleased to enter into this debate as the opposition 

Agriculture critic, and I want to say that the livestock industry 

in this province represents over a $1 billion contribution to our 

GDP [gross domestic product]. And if people don‟t understand 

this, the reality for the livestock industry in our province is it is 

facing its biggest crisis in the history of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the Sask Party government and the federal government in 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1821 

Ottawa have done very little, Mr. Speaker, in order to aid those 

producers with any kind of emergency payment. Without some 

form of payment, Mr. Speaker, I will predict this: the size of our 

herd will seriously decline, not only in our province but across 

the country. And in fact this sector will be at its lowest level 

ever. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live next door to a province that has basically 

bought the beef industry in this country, and they have put in 

billions of dollars in order to support their beef industry. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, the cattle industry in this province in August of 

this year, 2008, wrote to all Sask Party MLAs asking for a 

similar amount of money to go into the Saskatchewan livestock 

industry. 

 

Now the members opposite understand that there is a problem 

with one-half of the Alberta program. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

would make this observation. If it is the view of the 

Government of Saskatchewan that they don‟t like the terms and 

conditions of one-half of the Alberta program — it‟s very 

simple — don‟t implement it, Mr. Speaker. They are using the 

difficulties with one-half of the Alberta program to say to our 

livestock producers there will be nothing for you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry, through the stock 

growers and the cattle feeders and the Saskatchewan cattle 

association, have asked for money from the Government of 

Saskatchewan. And they‟ve indicated that if that money is not 

forthcoming, there‟ll be a significant reduction in forage 

acreage, and the cattle numbers in our province will decline. 

 

The letter calls upon the Government of Saskatchewan as 

represented by the Sask Party . . . And I do note, Mr. Speaker, 

that there is member after member after member over there that 

represents a rural Saskatchewan where there are thousands of 

livestock producers that are their constituents. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that letter calls upon the Sask Party to put $148 

million into the livestock industry in our province. 

 

Now what has been the response from the Sask Party MLAs 

that represent rural Saskatchewan and thousands of livestock 

producers? The response, Mr. Speaker, has been zero, Mr. 

Speaker. It has been zero other than to say, you don‟t have to 

pay back the principal of the loans we gave you a year ago and 

the accompanying interest costs. Now, Mr. Speaker, talk is 

cheap. Talk is cheap. And we know that this loan program is a 

very big deal when you have negative margins. 

 

Now the members opposite have talked about moving ag 

stability to the province from the federal government. I do note 

that the majority of those jobs are here in Regina. And they‟re 

talking about moving those jobs out to Melville and that this 

somehow is going to mean a better service for those producers 

that require AgriStability, but I‟ll make this observation. And 

I‟ve had livestock producer after livestock producer contact my 

office in Saskatoon to tell me that ag stability means absolutely 

zero for them because they‟ve had negative margins since 2003, 

Mr. Speaker. They‟ve had negative margins, so ag stability does 

nothing. 

 

Now we have a federal Conservative government in Ottawa. 

We have a conservative government here in Saskatchewan. We 

have 13 members of parliament that represent the Conservative 

Party, and we have a Conservative Party that represents every 

rural constituency where those over 10,000 livestock producers 

live. 

 

This is a government that has over $2 billion in the insurance 

fund. This is a government that says it‟s going to reduce the 

provincial debt by over $2 billion because we‟ve had 

unprecedented commodity prices, but what does this 

government do? This government does absolutely nothing for 

an industry that contributes over $1 billion to our GDP and 

represents over 10,000 livestock producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now livestock producers have said that they need some form of 

assistance. AgriStability doesn‟t do it because they‟ve had 

negative margins for several years. And what can they rely 

upon in terms of the government? The government has said, 

well in the southwest part of Saskatchewan we‟ve been able to 

bring in a program to help with water distribution, Mr. Speaker. 

Well let me say this. It is very little in comparison to the kinds 

of prices and the kinds of hurt and kinds of crises that the 

livestock industry is presently facing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the members opposite don‟t 

think much of the National Farmers Union, but I really would 

urge them to read a piece of research that has been done by the 

National Farmers Union that looks at the livestock industry in 

this country since 1989. It is a very good piece of academic 

research, Mr. Speaker. And what it shows clearly is that the 

livestock industry is facing a crisis of a monumental proportion, 

and in fact, Mr. Speaker, they are facing crises that they did not 

experience in the ‟40s, the ‟50s, the ‟60s, the ‟70s, and the ‟80s. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there has been a consolidation of the 

meat-packing industry in this country, and with that 

consolidation we have had the meat-packing industry starting to 

own their own herds. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, there have been 

times over the last several years where cows or cattle owned by 

the meat-packing industry represented two-thirds of the animals 

that were going into those packing plants. And what they‟ve 

been able to do as a result of this integration of cow to basically 

retail sales, Mr. Speaker, is they‟ve been able to keep the prices 

for these cattle artificially depressed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the NFU [National Farmers Union] is 

calling for this notion of getting rid of captive supply on the 

part of the meat-packing industry. And, Mr. Speaker, it makes 

some sense that if you are in the packing house industry and if 

you control the animals that can go in and out of that packing 

plant, Mr. Speaker, you can, by the very force of your 

involvement in the cattle industry, you can keep those prices 

artificially low. And, Mr. Speaker, what we see in the cattle 

industry in this country and in this province is a group of 

producers that have been absolutely devastated by these 

artificially low prices. And what I note, Mr. Speaker, is at the 

height of BSE in 2003, producers were getting more for their 

steers than they are today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I represent an urban constituency, and I can tell 

the members opposite that day in and day out I have people 

who come from their constituencies contacting my office about 



1822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

the hurt and devastation that that‟s being wreaked out there, Mr. 

Speaker. And what are the members opposite doing? Absolutely 

nothing. And I hear the Deputy Premier chirping from his seat. 

And he represents, Mr. Speaker, those very livestock producers. 

They‟re contacting his office. And what are they doing, Mr. 

Speaker? They‟re doing nothing, Mr. Speaker, absolutely 

nothing. And they‟re sitting on $2 billion of money. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And here‟s the 

other thing. He says, ask what‟s happening at auction. Well I‟ll 

tell you what they‟re telling me. They take animals to auction. 

They‟re not interested in heifers, Mr. Speaker; they‟re interested 

in steers. That‟s what happening at auction. And they‟re getting 

prices that are below their cost of production. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well they say 

nationalize them. Well that is ridiculous. 

 

And the member from Wood River, chirping from his seat, well 

his constituents are contacting me, Mr. Speaker, and they‟ve 

contacted that member, and does he phone them back? No. 

Does he talk to them about what‟s happening on the farm? No. 

Has he said he‟ll do anything on their behalf to squeeze some 

money out this government to get a program in place to help 

them get through this crisis? The answer is no. 

 

There are constituents after constituents of the members 

opposite that are contacting our constituency offices. They send 

information to them, and they do absolutely nothing. Their CAs 

[constituency assistant] say well, I‟ll talk to the guys; they‟re in 

Regina right now. And they never hear back, Mr. Speaker. And 

this is happening time and time again. 

 

Now the members opposite can laugh and joke all they want. 

But producer after producer after producer, they know what‟s 

happening on the farm, and, Mr. Speaker, they can‟t keep at this 

much longer. And what we‟re going to see is a serious 

significant decline of the cattle industry in our province. 

 

We live next door to Alberta. Alberta has supported their cattle 

people. Mr. Speaker, I believe that it‟s incumbent upon the 

members opposite to do something similar. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

they can laugh and joke all they want, but the reality is that 

someone in this province that is an observer of cattle policy and 

agricultural policy has this to say about the members opposite. 

And I want to quote him, and this is regarding the Sask Party‟s 

sincerity on this issue, and I quote: 

 

The Sask. Party government has been largely ineffectual 

in stemming the downturn in the cattle and hog industries. 

The new government has actually been less supportive 

than the previous administration. 

 

Now Kevin Hursh is not a member of the NDP. Kevin Hursh is 

an observer of agricultural policy in this province. He is the 

consultant, and this is what he had to say about the members 

opposite. And then he says, and I quote, “Now that he‟s [and 

he‟s referring to the Minister of Agriculture] in power, he has 

no response to the hundreds of millions of new dollars Alberta 

is handing its livestock sector.” 

 

Now what the member‟s response is, is we don‟t want to get 

involved in countervail. Well the Alberta government has been 

putting billions into the industry for decades, Mr. Speaker, and 

there has been no countervail offered by the US government in 

terms of what Alberta is doing. It‟s a ruse, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then he says that: 

 

While . . . [the Minister of Agriculture‟s] candor is 

appreciated, it doesn‟t change [and I‟m quoting here] the 

dishonesty as a Saskatchewan Party catering to the farm 

vote when it was in opposition. 

 

The Sask Party seems content to watch the industry wither 

away [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And then it says, and I quote, “Politically, the lack of leadership 

for the livestock sector is unlikely to hurt the Sask. Party. But 

that isn‟t an excuse for ineffectual policy.” Well, Mr. Speaker, 

whenever this issue is raised in the press, in this House, what do 

the members opposite have to say? They talk about their water 

policy and help for farmers in the Southwest, which I note, I 

note, it‟s not helping all of the farmers in the Southwest . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh it‟s not helping the ones that 

need water in the Southwest. 

 

And they talk about their gopher policy. Now they are prepared 

to have a gopher policy that is retroactive, but they are not 

prepared to help farmers retroactively deal with the drought and 

water conditions. 

 

Now these are members opposite that called people into 

legislature and said that the farmers that were dealing with 

drought in the southwest part of the province needed help. They 

had them up in the gallery. And the Minister of Agriculture 

said, well let‟s wait and see if there‟s going to be any rain. And 

they waited and waited and waited down in the Southwest. And 

you know he said he‟d be there after the session and before the 

beginning of summer. He came on the long weekend in July. 

And what did he offer them? Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely nothing. The people in the Southwest are still dealing 

with drought. What he came up with was a gopher rebate 

program. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if you‟re in crises — if cattle prices are 

collapsing, you‟ve dealt with drought for the last seven years, 

you‟ve dealt with gophers, you‟ve dealt with all of these things 

— and all your member of the legislature in the Sask Party can 

offer you is a water program that‟s not retroactive for the guys 

that had to deal with it last year, and a gopher program that 

doesn‟t apply to all people in the southwest part of the province, 

but they are prepared to go retroactive on gophers, that‟s it, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s it. 

 

The cattle people in this province are asking for a program. 

They haven‟t been able to get any kind of help out of this 

government, even though they‟re sitting on all of this money. 

 

Now they have money for many other programs, Mr. Speaker. 

They have money for disabled people; they have money for 

senior citizens — these are good programs, Mr. Speaker — they 

have money to deal with infrastructure; they have money to 

deal with the arts. They have money to deal with all of these 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1823 

other areas of public policy endeavour, but they don‟t have 

money to help an industry that contributes over $1 billion to our 

GDP. They have nothing for them. 

 

They say they‟re talking to their federal cousins. Well you‟d 

think, Mr. Speaker, that their federal cousin who is a 

Conservative . . . They have these great relationships now 

apparently, but they haven‟t been able to get anything out of the 

federal government. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And in fact we have our own Member of Parliament here for 

Regina on Throne Speech day, what is he talking about? And he 

represents the cattle industry. He represents people out in that 

Craik area and Aylesbury area. What‟s he saying? He‟s talking 

about the car industry, Mr. Speaker. He‟s talking about the car 

and the automobile industry and the aerospace industry. Was he 

talking about the livestock industry and the hurt that has been 

wreaked in this province? Not at all. 

 

And that member apparently says that the Premier contacted the 

Prime Minister. Well this is the Prime Minister‟s Throne 

Speech. He‟s talking about Ontario — vote-rich Ontario — and 

he‟s taking Saskatchewan for granted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They‟ve got 13 MPs representing the Conservative Party, and 

they don‟t think they have to do anything for the cattle industry 

in this province or the hog industry because they‟re looking out 

for the Oshawas in Ontario where they hope to form a majority 

government, Mr. Speaker, while the people of this province 

have supported Stephen Harper and his brethren in Ottawa for 

several elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Don‟t take us for granted, Mr. Speaker, because when you take 

people for granted they can sometime turn against you, Mr. 

Speaker. And one of the things I know is that there are people 

in their constituencies that are beginning to turn against them 

because they believe that they are being taken for granted. 

 

People in the cattle industry who have worked for decades in 

this industry, that are helping their young people get involved in 

the cattle industry, Mr. Speaker, are waiting for some response, 

some response from the federal government and the provincial 

government. And so far, Mr. Speaker, there has been no 

response. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the government believes that by 

giving peace a chance that this is somehow going to lead to 

some form of changes in the agricultural programs that we have 

in this country. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have to say, how is it 

working for you? This government‟s been in office for a year. 

This government‟s been in office for a year. They have 

Conservatives in Ottawa. They said they were going to give 

peace a chance and work with their federal counterparts that are 

Conservatives. Many of them are members of the conservative 

family in Ottawa. And how‟s it working? Well it seems to me 

no one in Ottawa is listening to the Premier of this province and 

obviously no one in Ottawa is listening to the Minister of 

Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, livestock producers are 

receiving half of what their parents and grandparents were 

getting for their cattle, and seed prices have gone up and the 

cost of production has gone up. The Sask Party savour 

themselves as champions of rural Saskatchewan and the 

agriculture sector. Well, Mr. Speaker, they have done nothing in 

the last year to support the livestock industry. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I would suggest to the public that they have turned 

their backs on the livestock sector in our province. And this is 

just another example of saying one thing in opposition, and day 

after day calling upon the government to do something to assist 

the livestock industry, and when they get in power, and they 

have 5 billion extra dollars, Mr. Speaker — because we left 

them 1.8 billion — they do nothing. 

 

And so my question is: what are the rural MLAs doing over 

there? What are they doing on behalf of their livestock 

producers? Are they talking to the Minister of Agriculture? Are 

they talking to the Premier? Are they talking to Executive 

Council? Are they talking to the Minister of Finance? Are they 

talking to anybody? And if they are, obviously no one is 

listening, if they are truly representing their constituents, Mr. 

Speaker. Because their constituents are telling us that this is a 

crisis. It‟s a crisis never before seen in the history of our 

province; that the price of cattle have collapsed. And people, if 

they don‟t get help soon, are going out of business. 

 

Now they groan when I say it‟s a crisis. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟re not listening to their own constituents — day after day 

people phoning, emailing, writing letters about what‟s 

happening in the livestock industry. 

 

Now maybe they don‟t spend time in their constituencies any 

more. Maybe they‟re spending time travelling around the world. 

I know that there‟s been several trips to China and the 

Philippines and, you know, Germany and wherever else. Maybe 

no one goes home to talk to their constituents each weekend 

after the session. We‟re supposed to go back into our ridings on 

Friday and talk. 

 

I know this: they‟re phoning my office. I‟m talking to them 

when I‟m back in my riding on Fridays. And in fact they‟re 

phoning my house on Saturdays and Sundays, Mr. Speaker. 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they‟re stopping me in the street to 

say, keep up the fight. Do you think they‟re going to do 

anything? And my answer is, I don‟t know; you‟ve got to phone 

them too. 

 

Now they say oh, no one‟s phoning Saskatoon Nutana. Well I‟ll 

tell you this, Mr. Speaker. They are phoning. They‟re phoning 

daily into my constituency office, and they‟re phoning from all 

across the province. They‟re phoning from the North. They‟re 

phoning from the Southwest. They‟re phoning from the 

Southeast. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they‟re phoning from your 

constituency. They are phoning from every part of this 

province. 

 

They‟re phoning from around Yorkton. They‟re phoning from 

the Deputy Premier‟s riding. They‟re phoning from the Health 

minister‟s riding. They‟re phoning from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan‟s riding. They‟re phoning from the Minister of 

Agriculture‟s riding. They‟re phoning from Weyburn. They‟re 

phoning from Biggar. 

 

Oh and they say, no they‟re not. And they‟re certainly phoning 



1824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

for the member from Wood River. The phone is ringing off the 

hook from those producers in the southwest part of the province 

where they have faced drought for years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Anybody from Kindersley? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — As a matter of fact they‟re phoning from 

Kindersley too. And they‟re phoning from Rosetown and Carrot 

River . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Pardon me? The member 

from Regina Northwest, I don‟t think I‟ve received any . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Saskatoon Northwest. I don‟t think 

I‟ve gotten any calls from his riding, but I certainly have gotten 

calls from many, many members of the opposition including 

Lloydminster, Turtleford. They are phoning from all across the 

province. 

 

And I would say, keep phoning, keep phoning from all across 

the province. Ring those phones because we‟re keeping track, 

Mr. Speaker, of the numbers of people that have contacted my 

constituency office and others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, I know, I know, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite 

think that they‟ve done a good deed by decreasing the education 

tax on farm land. And, Mr. Speaker, we do have to get the 

education tax off of not only farm land and pasture land, 

cultivated acres, but also, Mr. Speaker, for those of us that live 

in small towns, villages, and cities, Mr. Speaker. But I can say 

this, that you can reduce the taxes on pasture land and 

cultivated land, but if you‟re not getting anything for what 

you‟re selling at auction, Mr. Speaker, you‟re hooped. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they can talk about changes to crop 

insurance. Well I can‟t remember the last time crop insurance 

insured a cow, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, AgriStability is 

supposed to be there to assist farmers, but unless you‟ve had a 

couple of positive years, it doesn‟t work for you. 

 

And I have had several people contact me with their forms, fax 

me their forms, Mr. Speaker, and you know what I‟ve learned? 

Zero per cent of zero is zero. And so you have people who have 

negative margins that aren‟t going to get a thin dime. 

 

Now these are the people that say that they‟re going to fix the 

program so that it works for people. Well we‟ve got Gerry Ritz 

in Ottawa; he‟s been the Ag minister for a couple of years. 

We‟ve got a conservative here in Saskatchewan. Now it seems 

to me that it shouldn‟t take you more than a year to fix the 

program if you really wanted to fix the program, but they 

haven‟t been able to fix the program. 

 

And you know what? Livestock guys are catching on. They‟re 

catching on. The spin of, we don‟t want to have, you know, any 

kind of countervail. The spin about, well we put some money 

into gophers. The spin about, well we‟ve helped you a little bit 

with your cultivated and pasture land, and we helped those guys 

in the Southwest with water. That‟s not cutting it. 

 

They need a program that deals with the reality of what‟s 

happening in the livestock industry. And the reality is prices 

have collapsed, Mr. Speaker. They‟re still feeding cows. They 

still have all of their input cost. They still believe that, you 

know, there is some future here in this industry, but they need a 

government that‟s going to support them get them through this 

downturn, Mr. Speaker. And the response from the members 

opposite has been nothing. Absolutely nothing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are talking about 

leadership. What the livestock industry wants in this province is 

for the people opposite to stand up and provide leadership on 

this fundamental hurt that‟s taking place in rural Saskatchewan. 

And has there been any leadership? Well there‟s been a couple 

of phone calls. Oh they say there has. Well you know what? It‟s 

not being felt out there. No one will say that they provided 

leadership in the crisis of livestock industry. Not . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Everybody will have 

their turn in this debate. I recognize the member of Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, not one person will 

believe that there‟s been any leadership provided by the 

members opposite. I was over at the branding event over at 

Agribition and listened to the minister. And the minister said, 

there is hurt in the cattle industry. Well you know, yes, we all 

know that. Everybody in the place knows that. The question is, 

what is he doing about it? 

 

Now he‟s had a couple of phone calls with Gerry Ritz. But 

there‟s no activity, no movement to date, no change to 

AgriStability, no emergency program, no nothing coming from 

this Minister of Agriculture that had a whole bunch to say in the 

past about the previous government. Well he‟s been in office 

for a year. Stand up and provide some leadership on behalf of 

those producers that are facing a crisis. And all the minister can 

do is offer platitudes. 

 

Well you know if it‟s not working, the telephone calls aren‟t 

working, maybe take a little delegation of all their backbenchers 

and some cabinet ministers, and go down to Ottawa and camp 

on the steps of the Parliament building and see if you can wring 

some money out of Stephen Harper and company. They‟ll have 

billions for the auto industry, Mr. Speaker. They‟ll have billions 

for the aerospace industry, but they‟re not going to have one 

thin dime for the producers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not 

one thin dime. 

 

And you know what? They have the horses over there to do it. 

They have enough rural MLAs that they could get on a plane, 

go to Ottawa and lobby those Conservatives in Ottawa to part 

with a few shekels, Mr. Speaker, because they‟re going to part 

with a few shekels for the auto industry. They‟re going to do 

something for the aerospace industry. Well let‟s see what these 

guys can do because you know they‟ve been giving peace a 

chance for the last year, and we‟re supposed to have all of these 

great things coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know what‟s come to Saskatchewan. 

We‟re going to have a clean coal project that‟s going to cost us 

billions of dollars, and my kilowatt hour of electricity is going 

to go through the roof. That‟s what Ottawa has given us. 

 

But have they given us anything for the livestock industry? 

Have they given us one thin dime with this give peace a 

chance? Well the answer is, no. And in fact what‟s so galling, 

what‟s so galling is that the Saskatchewan members of 

parliament are talking about the auto industry and the aerospace 



November 24, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 1825 

industry, and they‟re not talking about the hog industry. And 

they‟re sure as heck not talking about the cattle industry. And, 

Mr. Speaker, those people are desperate. They are desperate. 

It‟s not about losing their job. It‟s not about losing their 

pension, Mr. Speaker. It‟s about losing their life‟s work, and the 

government members have absolutely nothing to say about this, 

absolutely nothing. 

 

Now they say we had 16 years. Well I do note that we have a 

member, and I referred to him earlier, Kevin Hursh who‟s an 

independent observer. And he said, “The Sask Party 

government has been . . . ineffectual [ineffectual] in stemming 

the downturn in the cattle and hog industries.” And then he 

says, and I quote, the government has actually — can you 

believe this; can you believe this — they‟ve been actually less 

supportive than the previous NDP government. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Well you know to hear those people talk, we did absolutely 

nothing for the agriculture sector in our province — absolutely 

nothing. And here we have an independent observer who says 

the new government has actually been less supportive than the 

previous government. Well can you believe that, Mr. Speaker? 

Given what all of those members over there had to say about 

the NDP when we were in government, given what they‟ve had 

to say since they became government, here‟s an independent 

agricultural observer that says that the Sask Party is actually 

less supportive than the previous NDP government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these people control the purse strings. These 

people have all of the rural seats. These people represent over 

10,000 operators involved in the cattle industry. These people 

control it all. They‟ve got friends in Ottawa, you know. They‟ve 

given peace a chance, a lovely relationship between the Premier 

and the Prime Minister. You know, I see that they‟re trying 

really hard to get things for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well I say, how‟s it working for you? How‟s it working for you 

so far? What have you gotten Saskatchewan? A clean coal plant 

where we‟re going to put up over $750 million and a quote, 

private-sector partner, which they haven‟t been able to find yet, 

a federal government that says they‟re not going to put any 

money up if there‟s any cost overruns — a technology that 

we‟re not sure about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what‟s going to happen to you and me, the citizens of this 

province? This little lark, I think, could lead to very significant 

increases in the cost of electricity. And by the way, Mr. 

Speaker, you will know and others will know that electricity 

forms a lot of the cost of production for people involved in the 

livestock industry. Electricity forms a lot of the cost of 

production. And I predict we‟re going to see a very significant 

increase in our power utility rates. 

 

Now, members opposite could have done something with 

capping the cost of SaskEnergy for those livestock producers. 

Did they? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. When we were in 

government, we capped the increase which was recommended 

by the Rate Review Board which was also recommended to the 

folks opposite. But no, they‟re not going to do a darn thing to 

try and mitigate any of our SaskEnergy costs — which I do 

note, Mr. Speaker, have dropped since the government agreed 

to implement the SaskEnergy utility rate increase. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know . . . I just wanted to repeat this. Now 

this was at a time when oil was less than 50 bucks a barrel. 

What did the Minister of Agriculture have to say? That 

government has money falling out of all of their pockets, but 

only that government has money, and they see fit to neglect our 

farmers and rural Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, if he thinks 

we had money falling out of our pockets, and this was said 

probably four years ago — no, three years ago — can you 

imagine the money that‟s falling out of their pockets? 

 

They‟re predicting a $2 billion Fiscal Stabilization Fund or 

insurance fund or whatever you want to call it. They have so 

much money that they‟re going to reduce our GRF [General 

Revenue Fund] debt by the end of March by $2 billion. We left 

them with $1.8 billion in the bank, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if the Minister of Agriculture could say three years ago the 

government has money falling out of all of their pockets, but 

only that government has money, they see fit to neglect our 

farmers in rural Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, toute de 

suite, same thing. Billions of dollars sitting in the Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund or their insurance fund or whatever they 

want to call it, and not one thin dime for the livestock industry. 

Not one thin dime, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in opposition, the Minister of Agriculture 

has had this to say: 

 

In opposition I could say just about anything I wanted and 

I did on a lot of occasions for 12 years. 

 

. . . when you‟re minister, you‟re responsible and you 

have to do it right. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟re waiting for the Minister of 

Agriculture and all of those rural MLAs to get it right. 

 

And this is what the minister said explaining why he wasn‟t 

going to provide any of those drought-stricken producers in the 

Southwest part of the province any provincial help, even though 

he had committed on behalf of your caucus to help people after 

you were sworn in. And they got no help. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, here‟s what he said. I‟ve made one 

commitment to the livestock industry here and I stand behind it. 

We‟re not going to force them into any program like Alberta 

has done until they ask for it, and then we will assist them to go 

that way. Well, Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry has asked 

for help. They have asked for help. 

 

The minister opposite doesn‟t have to implement half of the 

Alberta program, the half he doesn‟t like. But they have asked 

for help, and that minister and that government has the money 

to do something. And the response so far has been nothing — a 

big zero. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the minister, who‟s into this giving 

peace a chance, asked Gerry Ritz for aid. What did Ritz say? 

“He was non-committal in that area right now, but at least we 

have it on the table and he‟s heard it from us.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, people are waiting. Gerry Ritz represents a part of the 



1826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2008 

province where they have thousands and thousands of head of 

cattle. That member represents a part of the province where 

they have thousands and thousands of head of cattle. Those 

members over there represent the cattle herd in this province 

which is over 4.5 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this industry is worth over a billion. It 

represents 10,000 producers and countless other people who 

provide service to those producers. Well, Mr. Speaker, they‟re 

waiting. They‟re waiting for something, and I would call upon 

the Government of Saskatchewan to do something. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I note that we‟re close to adjournment, and I would 

move adjournment of this debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 

order to allow the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

do its work this evening, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

made a motion that this House now stands adjourned. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:54.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1795 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1795 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1795 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1795 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1795 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Moose Jaw Masonic Lodge 125th Anniversary 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1795 

 Prince Albert Student Housing Project 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1796 

 YMCA Peace Medallion Recipient 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1796 

 Investment in Disability Programming 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1796 

 Stem Cell Transplants 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1797 

 Palo Mine 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1797 

 Dairy Farmers of Saskatchewan 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1797 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Schools Under Review 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1798 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 1798 

 Clean Coal Project 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1799 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1799 

 Response to Deputy Minister’s Report 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1800 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1801 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1802 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1802 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1802 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 70 —The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2008 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1803 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Apology 

  Taylor (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................... 1803 

  Gantefoer (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................... 1804 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 1805 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1805 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1807 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1809 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 1809 

 Recorded Division (motion) ....................................................................................................................................................... 1810 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Livestock Industry in Jeopardy 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1810 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1812 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1815 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1818 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1820 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 




