




















































Hansard: March 17, 2008


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 50 NO. 13A  MONDAY, MARCH 17, 2008, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
Vacant  Cumberland 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 319 

 March 17, 2008 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

legislature, I’d like to introduce some people in the east gallery. 

There are many people here who have travelled from 

throughout our province to watch the proceedings, and whose 

interests lie on the recent amendments to The Trade Union Act 

and the essential services Bills before us. 

 

From Prince Albert, we have Carol McKnight, president of 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] Local 4777. 

She’s accompanied by members from Paddockwood, Birch 

Hills, Prince Albert, and Shellbrook. 

 

We have President Brian Manegre from North Battleford and 

he’s accompanied by members from Lloydminster and Meadow 

Lake and North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, we also have Larry 

Hubich, president of the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour]; Tom Graham, president of the CUPE; Larry 

Kowalchuk I see is up there — general counsel, RWDSU 

[Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union]; Terry 

Zahorski, Regina & District Labour Council. 

 

We have Melanie Medlicott, a director CUPE; Bert Ottenbrite, 

Dave Miller; Barb Cape’s out there, Service Employees 

International; Gordon Campbell from the CUPE; Patti Ginny, 

Amalgamated Transit Union; and I apologize to some of the 

other people I don’t know. 

 

But I’d ask all members here to welcome these trade unionists 

— I see Marianne Hladun, is also here from the Public Service 

Alliance of Canada — to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I present a 

petition on behalf of Moose Jaw residents with the hope that 

this government will support them and move forward on this 

initiative. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 

the necessary steps to provide funding for the expansion 

and renovation of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present this on behalf of Moose Jaw residents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

on behalf of concerned residents of Saskatchewan. The 

petitioners are concerned with the inadequate access to quality 

and affordable child care spaces in Regina and across the 

province. They see these as vital for many to enter the labour 

market and/or education. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to add at least 2,000 new child care spaces in 

Saskatchewan by 2011. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are presented on behalf of residents of Regina. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition 

signed by people of Saskatchewan on Bills 5 and 6. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan urge the new government to withdraw both 

Bills and hold broad public consultations about labour 

relations in the province. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by people from Carnduff, Alida, 

Redvers, Yorkton, Rhein, Springside, Saltcoats, Canora, 

Bredenbury, Melville, Grayson, Killaly, Ebenezer, Kelliher, 

Ituna, Waldron, Goodeve, Neudorf, Foam Lake, Elfros, 

Wynyard, Tuffnell, Sintaluta, Indian Head, Montmartre, 

Regina, Regina Beach, Qu’Appelle, Kendal, Kamsack, Veregin, 

Norquay, Togo, Lintlaw, Invermay, Margo, Rama, Pelly, 

Preeceville, and Sturgis. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

New Democratic Party Convention 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

Mr. Yates: — Over the past weekend, hundreds of New 

Democratic Party members gathered here in Regina for the 

annual party convention. Mr. Speaker, NDP [New Democratic 

Party] conventions have a well-deserved reputation as 

boisterous and contentious affairs, filled with straight talk and 

strong, often conflicting opinions, just as you’d expect from a 

party that believes fundamentally in democratic principles and 

the value of open, honest debate. 

 

The NDP’s freewheeling, let’s-hear-what-everyone-has-to-say 

style is a far cry from the rigid, talk down, 

I’ll-tell-you-what-to-think-and-say style that characterizes the 

Saskatchewan Party under their current leader. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past weekend was a time to examine the past 

and to think and talk about the future, about the future of their 

great province, about the future of our great party, and about the 

future of the arrogant and far out of touch . . . [inaudible] . . . 

government members opposite have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the honest, heartfelt, and inspiring words of 

our leader to the freewheeling, often impassioned debate about 

ideas, innovation, and possibility from party members, young 

and old, urban and rural, long-term or new members, it was 

clear to all present . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I know it’s the beginning of the 

week, and members have come back energized to participate in 

debate, but we have one member recognized on the floor. The 

member from Regina Dewdney may complete his statement. 

 

Mr. Yates: — From party members young and old, urban and 

rural, long-term or new, it was clear to all present that the 

process of party renewal has begun towards victory in 2011. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

St. Patrick’s Day 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, 

today it is March 17, St. Paddy’s Day. It’s the annual feast day 

which celebrates Ireland’s patron saint. It is widely observed as 

a time for celebration and merriment. While not an official 

holiday here in Saskatchewan, but in Newfoundland and 

Labrador consider it to be a selected holiday in their province. 

 

Yesterday Montreal held its 184th St. Patrick’s Day parade 

which was attended by over 300,000 people. Although New 

York city’s parade is over five hours long and attracts 

approximately 2 million observers, the Montreal parade is the 

longest-running, continuous parade in North America, has never 

been stopped due to war or weather. 

 

While this great province was founded, one in ten of our 

residents were of Irish, Irish origin. While many in 

Saskatchewan can claim some Irish ancestry, St. Patrick’s Day 

is when everyone can be Irish for a day. The Irish have been a 

crucial part of Saskatchewan’s development, and it’s fitting that 

we recognize it. 

It’s also a great date to have birthdays. I know a few members 

in the . . . There is one member that has a birthday, but she said 

she didn’t want to say who it was, but it’s also my dad’s 

birthday today. We always celebrate that, and I want to wish my 

dad a very happy birthday. 

 

Ever since I can remember, we’ve always celebrated St. 

Patrick’s Day. And with that I want to wish my dad a toast: 

 

May the road rise to meet you, 

May the wind be always at your back, 

May the sun shine warm upon your face, 

May the rain fall soft upon your fields. 

And until we meet again, 

May God hold you in the hollow of his hand. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Z99 Radiothon 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Z99’s 21st annual radiothon took 

place Thursday and Friday, March 13 and 14. Regina and 

southern Saskatchewan people showed we care by putting our 

money where our hearts are. Baby heart, lung, and more 

state-of-the-art monitors at the Regina General neonatal 

intensive care unit will help the professional health care 

providers give every baby the best possible chance for a life. 

 

Rawlco Radio’s best, CC, Lorie, and Buzz of Z99, provided the 

selfless leadership we, the raging masses, rallied behind. For 36 

straight hours on air, CC, Lorie, and Buzz provided the humour, 

wit, and just plain zany fun along with the poignant stories of 

successes and failures at the neonatal intensive care unit. 

Throughout the 36 hours CC, Lorie, and Buzz spoke only of 

hope and how we are, quote, “changing the world.” 

 

Thanks to everyone involved, especially CC, Lorie, and Buzz 

for providing so much of themselves as they entertained us with 

the 21st annual Z99 radiothon. We responded. Regina and 

southern Saskatchewan gave a record $406,970. 

 

To everyone involved, congratulations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Spring Free From Racism Event 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the honour of attending the ninth 

annual Spring Free From Racism event at the Regina Italian 

Club, in recognition of upcoming International Day for the 

Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Over 1,500 people 

attended this great event which offered great food and 

wonderful entertainment to a packed house. 

 

I had the opportunity to bring greetings on behalf of the new 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

government and join in the celebration of our diverse 

community. As a multicultural province, it is important for us to 

take every chance to learn about other cultures and experience 

their uniqueness. 

 

During this celebration, I had the chance to speak with Sonny 

de Paz. He’s the president of the Philippine Association of 

Saskatchewan. He’s been a friendly, welcoming face at the 

airport for our new Filipino nurses, and his association has 

helped them integrate into their new home. It is through people 

like Sonny that the newest residents of Saskatchewan first 

experience our friendliness and our world-famous hospitality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to have all other members join me in 

praising the committee and their members who organized this 

fantastic event, the sponsors who backed it, and the volunteers 

who provided the wonderful cuisine and top-notch 

entertainment all day long. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Labour Community Service Award to Saskatoon 

Union Member 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, for the past 10 years the 

Saskatoon and District Labour Council and the United Way of 

Saskatoon and area have honoured the dedication and work of a 

union member in our community. The Labour Community 

Service Award dinner is an annual event held to recognize a 

dedicated trade unionist, active in both their community and 

their union. This year I was happy to be in attendance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Labour Community Service Award is one of 

several projects of labour’s partnership program of Saskatoon 

and District Labour Council and the United Way of Saskatoon 

and area — a partnership that is working to build community 

together. 

 

This year the recipient of the 2008 Labour Community Service 

Award was Linda Flowers, member of Service Employees 

International Union Local 333. The overriding theme of Linda’s 

involvement was both in her union and her community, as well 

as her ability to inspire and motivate others to get involved. 

 

We heard, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to important issues 

and causes, Linda has the ability to inspire the participation of 

others, helping them to understand the importance of their 

volunteerism and activism in making change and building a 

better community for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in a huge thank you 

to Linda Flowers, member of Service Employees International 

Union Local 333, for making our community a better place for 

all. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

[13:45] 

New Democratic Party Convention 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my unfortunate duty to 

inform this House that, unshackled from the discipline of 

power, the NDP has fallen into the hands of the radical left. 

 

At its weekend convention, the NDP debated a motion that 

would have seen the virtual elimination of private property 

rights. Of even greater concern was the motion that called for 

increasing royalty rates in oil and gas. 

 

The highlight of the convention was the keynote speech on 

renewal delivered by a young firebrand named Allan Blakeney, 

with new ideas straight out of the 1970s. The federal NDP 

leader also put an appearance in, the same NDP leader who 

advocates a total shutdown of the oil sands, the confiscation of 

all firearms, and $2 per litre gasoline. 

 

At the conclusion of the convention even the Leader of the 

Opposition was forced to acknowledge that it was probable that 

his party would lose the next election, the only bit of foresight 

noticeable from a party that has its eyes firmly focused on the 

past. 

 

Last week the NDP raised a concern about driving. That’s kind 

of ironic because for 16 years the NDP was driving our 

government while looking squarely in the rear-view mirror. 

Well I’m happy to report that there’s finally a government and 

Premier behind the wheel who’s looking forward instead of 

backward, who’s planning for growth instead of decline, and 

who’s building the province instead of tearing it down. The 

Leader of the Opposition says that he’s focused on providing 

strong opposition. Well I hope he gets the hang of it soon 

because he’s going to be there for a very long time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Luther Invitational Basketball Tournament 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to 

represent a constituent high school that hosts a first class 

basketball tournament that is steeped in tradition. The Luther 

Invitational Tournament, L.I.T., began in 1953 by John 

Chomay. It is the longest-running basketball tournament in 

Western Canada. 

 

Tournament director, Mr. Dave Hall, notes that this would not 

have been such a success without the wholehearted support of 

faculty, students, alumni, parents, fans, and friends. Mr. Hall 

points out to the tournament legacy of great basketball, student 

leadership and organization, and sportsmanship. 

 

I ask all members in this House to join with me in thanking Mr. 

Hall, faculty, students, alumni, parents of Luther College — 

present and past — for their enriching contributions to our 

community. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I will give the Minister of Labour 

credit; at least he is consistent. He won’t answer questions in 

this legislature. He won’t answer questions out in the rotunda to 

the media, and when he meets with the public, it turns out he 

won’t answer their questions either. 

 

The minister was at the CUPE convention last week, and 

because they don’t know the minister very well, they made the 

mistake of asking a question and actually expecting an answer. 

When the Minister of Labour was asked to speak about an email 

which showed clear contact between the government and 

University of Saskatchewan President Peter MacKinnon, the 

minister was left speechless. Now that he has had some time 

we’ll try again. 

 

To the minister: what discussions took place between 

government and the university president about essential services 

legislation prior to the Bill being tabled in the House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Employment and 

Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, there is an issue of 

credibility, and the issue of credibility rests on that side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. In essence, Mr. Speaker, what we see is an 

email is distributed during a CUPE convention. It makes brief 

reference to a conversation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the problem is — and it’s a troubling 

problem — that is there’s either an unwillingness or inability to 

grasp the distinction between a concept of essential services, 

which was certainly in the air after the strike at the University 

of Saskatchewan, and the actual legislation. Mr. Speaker, I will 

reiterate. There were no substantive conversations with any 

external stakeholders regarding essential service legislation. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — If only the member’s competence was 

determined by his ability to not answer a question, he’d be 

doing splendidly well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of months ago it was suggested that the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour had 

been in contact with the University of Saskatchewan president, 

Peter McKinnon, during the recent CUPE strike. At the time the 

minister reportedly engaged in what he called quote, “quiet 

diplomacy.” 

 

But it’s starting to come out. We learned on Friday that 

members of the Premier’s communication staff, the minister’s 

office, and quite possibly the minister himself were in 

discussions with President McKinnon about the essential 

services legislation which would be introduced just days later. 

 

I have a very direct question for the minister. When he engaged 

in his quiet diplomacy back in December, did he talk about 

essential services legislation? Yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, instead of speaking about 

the value of essential service legislation, instead of speaking 

about the fact that we’re the only province to not have it in 

place or at least have it in tabled, instead of talking about the 

fact that this legislation balances the right to strike with public 

safety, instead they want to ask a very specific question. The 

very specific answer is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is kidding no one — 

not the media, not the opposition, and not the people of 

Saskatchewan. The emails released on Friday by CUPE make it 

painfully clear that the Premier’s staff and the minister’s staff 

were in discussions with the president of the University of 

Saskatchewan before the government’s essential services 

legislation was introduced — this despite the government 

saying on numerous occasions that consultations did not take 

place. In fact just minutes before having the truth exposed 

through these emails, the minister told CUPE delegates that 

quote, “I did not consult with any stakeholder regarding the 

essential services legislation until after the legislation was 

tabled.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain why he hasn’t been 

forthcoming with the Assembly, members of the media, and the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to clarify this. In essence, in early December our Premier noted 

that essential service legislation would be forthcoming. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s nothing curious about the fact that most of 

Saskatchewan was speaking about it when we tabled the 

legislation. It’s nothing curious because 400 people per day 

were being turned away from medical care during the CUPE 

strike. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will reiterate. I will simply reiterate. There 

seems to be an inability to grasp the distinction between a 

general conception of essential services and the legislation. In 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

fact, in fact, Mr. Speaker, what is most troubling, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the member opposite does not listen to what Peter 

MacKinnon said publicly. What President MacKinnon has said 

publicly is, “. . . I was in support of the concept, but I had never 

seen any bills or legislation on the subject.” From President 

MacKinnon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we saw last week that the 

Minister of Labour doesn’t really like to answer questions, 

either inside or outside of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, allow me to ask a very direct question. Speaking 

to CUPE delegates last week he said, I quote, “This legislation 

was drafted by the Ministry of Justice and all consultations 

were held subsequent to the legislation being tabled.” A simple 

yes or no will do. Does the minister stand by this statement? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I really appreciate the 

opportunity to reiterate what’s already been said. Essentially 

our focus is in ensuring that the people of Saskatchewan have 

their public safety and security addressed, at the same time to 

balance the right to strike. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we aim to 

do through this legislation. 

 

We went into consultations, extensive consultations, and we’ve 

actually taken under advisement from right across the policy 

community. On this it just is to reinforce the message. The 

Ministry of Justice was drafting this. The consultations occurred 

after the drafting occurred and the legislation was tabled. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — The member was probably doing better 

when he said, when he’d say, I’d get back to you. But anyways 

. . . Mr. Speaker, one of the names on the email mentioned was 

that of Kevin Wilson. I’ve done some research on Mr. Wilson. 

It appears that he is a lawyer who was involved in the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce back when the current 

member from Moose Jaw North was president. 

 

A Saskatoon and district chamber of commerce newsletter from 

September 2003 discusses a report circulated by Mr. Wilson 

which documents, I quote, “. . . disenchantment with the current 

labour laws and regulations.” Mr. Wilson has also donated $400 

to the Saskatchewan Party since 2003, while his law firm has 

donated over 15,000 in that same period. 

 

To the minister: please explain who Kevin Wilson is. Did the 

minister meet with Kevin Wilson on Bills 5 and 6 prior to their 

introduction in the House? And what role did Mr. Wilson play 

in drafting Bills 5 and 6? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to speak 

about Kevin Wilson. He’s a partner with MacPherson Leslie 

Tyerman in Saskatoon. And you know, Mr. Speaker, he was 

retained by this government very early on in our mandate. And 

indeed he’s done extensive work with my ministry. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the 

previous email, I’m also in possession of a similar email sent a 

few days earlier by the deputy minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. The email, which I will now table, 

describes a briefing which includes a number of ministry 

officials as well as Kevin Wilson. Allow me to quote from the 

email: 

 

What I would like to try is Mary Ellen taking us through 

each of the Bills, explaining important changes, 

implications, etc. Kevin Wilson will be present to offer his 

take on this too. 

 

To the minister: the minister has repeatedly stated that the 

legislation was drafted by Justice officials and that no 

consultations took place. And yes, this email seems to 

contradict him. 

 

Can the minister explain . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the members to 

give the member the right to place his question. I ask the 

member to go directly to the question, please. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — The minister has stated that the Ministry of 

Justice has done all the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to go directly to his 

question. Order, order. I ask the member to go directly to his 

question. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Can the minister explain the contradiction? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — I’ll do my best, Mr. Speaker, because it 

seems there’s an inability to quite grasp what I’m speaking 

about. In essence, Mr. Speaker, what we’re dealing with is we 

had put Mr. Wilson on retainer, Mr. Speaker. We did that very 

early on in the mandate of this government, Mr. Speaker, to 

help us as we move forward with our ministry. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My first question as 

well today is to the part-time Minister of Labour. The only 

inability that we’ve witnessed here in this afternoon’s session is 

the inability or the unwillingness of that minister to answer a 

simple question. Yes or no, to the minister, did Mr. Kevin 

Wilson have any role in drafting the legislation that is before 

this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — It’s a privilege to address a question from 

the rather retiring member opposite. Mr. Speaker, the Ministry 

of Justice drafted this with input, obviously, from my ministry 

and Executive Council. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One further question 

to the part-time Minister of Labour: is Mr. Kevin Wilson now 

or has he been on contract or is he an employee of the 

department of — whatever you call it — Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wilson is retained by 

our government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the truth of Mr. Wilson’s 

role. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the next questioner, 

I think it’s appropriate to address members by their actual title. 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Accountability 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question now 

will go to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, over the past weekend, 

even beyond the past week, we have observed a part-time 

Minister of Labour who has considerably mismanaged his 

portfolio. We witnessed a minister break the Sask Party promise 

to the people of Saskatchewan that there would not be essential 

services legislation. He has refused to consult with working 

people, particularly in the health care sector, with working 

people before any introduction or discussion of this legislation. 

We witnessed a minister who has acted with impunity in the 

way he has fired the existing members of the Labour Relations 

Board; a minister who has put in place now a partisan choice to 

head that board; Mr. Speaker, a minister who’s now being 

questioned about his role in the CUPE strike, who’s now under 

questioning in his involvement with Mr. Kevin Wilson and his 

comments publicly to the contrary. 

 

My question is to the Premier. Does the Premier still enjoy the 

confidence . . . does he still place confidence in this minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer to the 

question is absolutely. The minister enjoys . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The minister enjoys the confidence of the 

Premier. He enjoys the confidence of his colleagues . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And, Mr. Speaker, let me also just say this, 

that when it comes to introducing important trade union 

amendments that will rebalance the labour legislative 

environment in our province, Mr. Speaker, he enjoys the 

support of the people of Saskatchewan. When it comes to 

introducing essential services legislation that puts health care 

and public safety ahead of all other interests, he also enjoys the 

support of the people of the province in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve observed again in the 

House today, as it was observed with members of the public on 

Friday, as has often been observed with members of the media, 

this minister simply refuses to answer questions, simply refuses 

to answer questions. 

 

Now I want to remind the Premier of his letter to this minister 

when he took office. He said in his mandate letter to the 

minister, quote: 

 

Integrity and accountability will be at the forefront of our 

dealings as a government, and in your work as Minister of 

the Crown. 

 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to talk about accountability. 

It’s quite another thing, Mr. Speaker, to practise accountability. 

 

So this minister, he fires the Labour Relations Board members, 

goes without a competitive process to put a new person in 

place, gives a $60,000 raise to their Sask Party hand-picked 

friend who’s heading up the Labour Relations Board, won’t 

answer a question about it, won’t tell this House or the general 

public what this is going to cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess my question is to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Is this his 

definition of accountability? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, accountability is very much 

about doing the things that you said you would do, Mr. Speaker. 

When the essential services piece of legislation was introduced 

in the wake of what we saw with the CUPE strike in the 

province, when that was introduced, there was a commitment to 

consult both with management and unions, with employers. 

That’s happened, Mr. Speaker. There have been 20 meetings 

involving 100 groups. I think we may see some changes 

brought forward as a result of those good meetings with both 

sides. 

 

There was a commitment, Mr. Speaker, in the election 

campaign for secret ballot certification. We’ll keep that 

promise. There was a commitment made, Mr. Speaker, to 

improve the labour legislative environment through better 

communication in the workplace. We will keep that promise, 

Mr. Speaker. Promise after promise will be kept, and in our 

view that is precisely the definition of accountability and 

integrity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on one point the Premier’s 

right. Accountability is doing what you said you would do 

before the election, after the election. On that he is right. 

 

And he — the former leader — and the now Minister of Health 

said to the people of Saskatchewan, there is no need for 

essential services legislation. That’s exactly what they said 

before the election. Now we see exactly the opposite. And they 

put this entire file in the hands of a minister who is 

demonstrating that he will not be accountable, not be 

accountable. He may enjoy the Premier’s confidence today, but 

does he enjoy the confidence of working people in this 

province? I ask you that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Will the Premier, will the Premier assist his 

minister and instruct him today to begin to answer the 

important, significant questions that are outstanding? Let’s start 

with the Labour Relations Board. Let’s start with the Labour 

Relations Board, a very simple question: how much is this 

costing the taxpayer of Saskatchewan? How much? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the essential 

services legislation, I know the Leader of the Opposition is very 

aware that over a year ago, reported in The Globe & Mail 

newspaper, the article reported that the then leader of the 

opposition — myself — indicated that essential services 

legislation may well be needed in the province. The intervening 

CUPE strike at the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina where health care, where health care, the 

smooth delivery of health care was being threatened for 

Saskatchewan people underscored the need for this. 

 

And so now the most important question before this Assembly 

on essential services — and I welcome this debate with the 

Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker — the most important 

question is, how will the NDP vote? Will they vote in favour of 

public safety? Will they vote in favour of the continuance of 

health care for Saskatchewan people? Or will they vote, Mr. 

Speaker, for the agenda of union bosses and union leadership? 

What will be the choice? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Equalization 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I today have another question to 

the Premier about another of his cabinet colleagues. Last 

Thursday in this House, the Attorney General, the Minister of 

Justice began what can only be described as a new era in 

interprovincial co-operation when — what does he say? — he 

calls Premier Danny Williams in Newfoundland and Labrador 

destructive, destructive for vigorously pursuing a fair 

equalization deal promised by the Harper Tories. 

 

Now my question to the Premier: does he share the view of his 

Attorney General, Minister of Justice that the current premier of 

Newfoundland Labrador is destructive? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I think the comment’s underscored a 

different approach being taken by different premiers. And each 

premier, and each premier for each province will undertake 

their methods of dealing with the federal government in their 

own way, responsible to the people of their province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noted in his year-end interviews in fact that on 

this count Premier Williams and I have something in common. 

There’s a realization on the part of the Premier of 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

Newfoundland Labrador and the Premier of Saskatchewan — 

myself — that the national government is simply going to not 

move off of their position, that they refuse to reopen the 

question of the retention of natural resources. He has made the 

observation that that’s the case. I’ve made the observation that 

that’s the case. 

 

The next question then is what do we do? What do we do on 

behalf of the people of the province who deserve more? What 

do we do on behalf of the people of the province who deserve to 

have federal help in infrastructure, who deserve to have federal 

help in our pursuit of clean coal technology? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken a certain tack, and it’s pretty clear it’s 

paying off, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have a minister that won’t 

answer questions, and now the Premier won’t answer a very 

direct question. So let me try this one out on the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Informed sources in this country are saying that the Harper 

Tory federal government has requested that the Government of 

Saskatchewan withdraw any legal action, any constitutional 

challenge. Again a very simple question to the Premier: has the 

federal government asked of him or any member of his 

government through bureaucratic channels that the Government 

of Saskatchewan should drop our constitutional challenge 

which fights, which fights for a fair equalization deal for the 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been actually . . . I’ve 

been in conversation with the Prime Minister of Canada who’s 

encouraged that this event take place. I have said to him, as I 

have said to the media and to the people of the province, that no 

final decision has been taken with respect to the court 

challenge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question was not about 

whether the Premier or not has made up his mind or not. My 

question is: has any member of the Harper Conservative 

government, has the Prime Minister himself or any member of 

that government or any part of its bureaucracy approached the 

Premier or any minister or any department of this government, 

requesting that that constitutional challenge be shelved? That’s 

a very simple question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I did answer the 

question. But to be fair, the NDP just had a renewal convention 

over the weekend, and maybe the sound of all the celebration is 

still ringing in their ears, and they can’t hear the answer. The 

answer is the Prime Minister has raised that with myself, and 

we’ve indicated to him that no decision has been taken at this 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — So to be clear then, Mr. Speaker, the Prime 

Minister has lobbied the Premier of Saskatchewan for this 

province to drop its constitutional challenge. Is that correct? 

That’s what the Premier just said. 

 

Well then, Mr. Speaker, then let us as a legislature resolve 

ourselves, let us resolve ourselves today, Mr. Speaker. Three 

years ago almost to the day, I think three years ago last week, 

this legislature stood in common purpose, stood unanimously, 

demanding of this federal government, this Prime Minister that 

they keep their promise to the people of Saskatchewan, a 

promise worth $800 million a year — $800 million a year. 

 

This Premier, this Premier has an opportunity today to stand up 

for the people of Saskatchewan, to stand firm for the people of 

Saskatchewan and join us in an emergency resolution which I 

intend to, which I intend to present here shortly, an exact replica 

of that resolution which this legislature passed two years ago, 

which that member, which that member supported, which every 

member in the House at that time supported. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Premier allow this emergency resolution 

debate to go ahead, and will he support the same resolution that 

he supported two years ago? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear 

from the events of the NDP convention over the weekend and 

even in this question that the NDP continue to look behind. 

They continue to look in the rear-view mirror. 

 

We’re focused on the future, Mr. Speaker, and we’re focused on 

delivering results, results like, for example, an announcement 

from the national government that there would be $250 million 

for carbon capture and the province of Saskatchewan got $240 

million of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Now progress, progress, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Progress, Mr. Speaker, like additional money, funding for the 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask members to give 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

the Premier the opportunity to respond to the question from the 

Opposition Leader. Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Progress and results, Mr. Speaker, like 

additional new funding for the synchrotron, like additional new 

funding for child care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we’re going to continue to work hard because we think 

there is more opportunity and more of an opportunity not just 

for our government, but the national government to be investing 

in the province — including, Mr. Speaker, in the area of the 

nuclear file, including pursuing value-added opportunities in 

nuclear power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — We’re going to continue to do that work, 

Mr. Speaker. Compared with 16 years — the last four years 

from the NDP — when they got, as my friend from Invermay 

would say, nyet from the federal government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear!  

 

The Speaker: — Time for oral questions has elapsed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 13 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 13, The Teachers’ Life Insurance 

(Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved that the 

Bill No. 13, The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government 

Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Energy Accord and Equalization Formula 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as we move to government 

orders, I’m asking leave of the Assembly to move a motion 

under rule 49 of the Rules and Procedures of this Assembly. 

The motion that I intend to introduce as an emergency 

resolution, as an emergency motion, is in its text identical to a 

resolution that was passed by this legislature two years ago. A 

resolution that was passed by this legislature, Mr. Speaker, I 

would remind you and others, that followed a gathering of 

people concerned about the ability for Saskatchewan people to 

retain the benefits of their own natural resources. This meeting 

was held in this legislature. It involved the now Premier. It 

involved the Leader of the Liberal Party. And it involved, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I bring to the attention of the Leader of the 

Opposition, for the emergency debate, to give us a quick, short 

review of the intent and then present the motion. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Calvert: — The intent, Mr. Speaker, is to have this 

Assembly again demonstrate for the people of Saskatchewan, to 

demonstrate on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, this 

Legislative Assembly’s determination to get a fair deal for their 

natural resources; this Legislative Assembly demand that the 

Harper Conservative government keep its promise. Therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly urge the Prime Minister and the 

federal Minister of Finance to respect the principle of 

equity in the treatment of provincial energy revenues and 

immediately begin negotiations with the Government of 

Saskatchewan on the achievement of a Saskatchewan 

energy accord . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, by the way, that was in their party platform, the 

government’s party platform. 

 

On the achievement of a Saskatchewan energy accord that 

guarantees 100 per cent protection from equalization 

clawbacks on its energy revenues; and further, 

 

That this Assembly urge the Prime Minister and the 

federal Minister of Finance to introduce reforms to the 

manner in which equalization entitlements are determined, 

to recognize that natural resources are non-renewable and 

that the financial benefits from the depletion of these 

resources should remain with the province that owns them, 

and that any program reforms include the return to a 

national determination of provincial fiscal disparities. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 

leave to move a motion without notice under rule 59. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Next item of business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask members to come 

to order so that we can move forward with the government 

business, second readings. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, after my remarks I’ll be 

moving second reading of The Natural Resources Amendment 

Act, 2008. The Act authorizes the termination of the Resource 

Protection and Development Revolving Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fund was used mainly to provide radio and 

communication services for the Ministry of Environment, other 

ministries, and outside agencies operating in the province’s 

North. The fund charged for its services and used the income to 

cover expenses and pay salaries. 

 

During 2006-07, Ministry of Environment staff reviewed the 

operation and concluded that there was a way to provide the 

radio and communication services in a more efficient manner. 

The review indicated that there was significant administrative 

effort involved in maintaining the Resource Protection and 

Development Revolving Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the review also determined the services delivered 

through the Resource Protection and Development Revolving 

Fund could be seamlessly integrated into the Ministry of 

Environment operations. The authority for the Ministry of 

Environment to continue to perform the activities of the fund in 

this manner can be found in subsection 2(g) and 4(1)(i) of The 

Natural Resources Act and sections 3 and 4 of The Resource 

Protection and Development Services Regulations, 1994. 

Effective April 1, 2001, the money generated by the continued 

communications activities goes into the General Revenue Fund 

and all costs previously incurred by the fund are now budgeted 

within the Ministry of Environment appropriation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Comptroller’s office and the 

Treasury Board have approved this plan. As a result, the 

activities of the former Resource Protection and Development 

Revolving Fund and the staff who fell under it were transferred 

to the Ministry of Environment on April 1, 2007. 

 

The Ministry of Environment is constantly striving to provide 

the people of Saskatchewan the best possible service in the 

most efficient and cost-effective manner. The Bill before you 

repeals section 19 of The Natural Resources Act and officially 

terminates the Resource Protection and Development Revolving 

Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 8, The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to talk about the revolving fund and the Act here 

that’s being brought forward to eliminate this particular fund 

from the administration or structure of the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I know that some of these things can be rather humorous 

or difficult to sort out sometimes, but I think that it’s important 

that we spend a little bit of time understanding what it is that 

we’re doing here today, because this particular fund is the type 

of fund that exists throughout government. And there are a 

number of times where these are created; there are a number of 

times where these are eliminated. 

 

Just for example, in the Department of the Environment or the 

Ministry of Environment as it’s now called, there presently 

exist, including this one, I think, three funds. One is the 

Commercial Revolving Fund. And that’s a fund that’s used for 

collection of revenues and funds used in the provincial parks, 

recreation sites, and historical parks. And that’s one where often 

there are public discussions because people get concerned about 

how much it costs to camp, how much it costs to go to a 

particular facility, how much for the various services that are 

there. And so in that particular instance over the years, there’s 

been a very good use, appropriate use, of a revolving fund to 

provide for the continual renewal and expenses involved in the 

whole parks system. And basically this recognizes that there are 

many aspects of the services that are provided in the parks 

system that are commercial in nature and therefore have 

revenues that are directly related to expenses that provide 

services for people. 

 

One of the challenges always in running a central 

administration for the government — or as we call it in 

Saskatchewan, a General Revenue Fund — is that to be 

accountable to the public when a budget is introduced, as it will 

be later this week, the fewer funds, whatever you want to call 

them, that are in your budget, the more transparent the activities 

that are presented to the public. And it would be my 

understanding that this particular fund related to the Resource 

Protection and Development Revolving Fund is one that has 

outlived its usefulness according to the people within the 

Finance department and within the Ministry of the 

Environment. 

 

And one of the aspects of the funding as it relates to the overall 

General Revenue Fund is that when you have to defend the 

kinds of expenditures that you need in a particular area — 

whether it’s a department or a division of a ministry — on an 

annual basis, there’s more opportunity for appropriate questions 

to be asked in the budget building process. 

 

So my sense would be that the reason that the various . . . 

comptroller’s office, the Finance department officials, and 

others who are very supportive of this particular piece of 

legislation would be that it will mean one less fund that they 

end up having to review and deal with as a separate entity. 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

Now the Resource Protection and Development Revolving 

Fund had a number of interesting aspects to it. And I think it’s 

important that we understand what these are. It was effectively 

a funding mechanism that allowed for the cost allocation for 

capital and operating expenses for a number of different cost 

centres. 

 

One of the first cost centres was radio communications. And 

this is effectively the centre based out of Prince Albert but has 

offices in other parts of northern Saskatchewan that provided 

the connections, or does provide the connections for 

departmental staff across the North. And there were many times 

that there were expenditures, especially for capital in that 

particular area, that it just made more sense to have a particular 

revolving fund there to fund that. 

 

Also included in this fund was a whole area of equipment 

rental. And what happened was that there were various types of 

equipment that were needed within the Saskatchewan 

Environment that actually provided revenues to the department 

when they were being used in other places for other paying 

customers, whether it would be other governments or I think 

sometimes some other private people working with that. So this 

would allow for the rental payments to go into this fund and 

then replenish the fund so it could be used to purchase new 

equipment that would then subsequently be rented out. So this 

was a relatively long-term project within the particular fund that 

was well used. 

 

Another area that was covered out of this fund was the whole 

issue of staff housing. Many times it was a challenge to find 

housing in some of the areas of the province. And what this 

fund allowed the department to do was to secure housing by 

purchasing housing that would subsequently then be rented out 

to the staff that would be assigned to various parts, particularly 

in northern Saskatchewan. By taking the revenues that would 

come in from that housing, put it into this fund, it could then be 

used as a way of replenishing or purchasing new housing 

depending on what would happen. 

 

And finally, this also included the whole . . . a lot of the 

financial information related to the northern air operations. If 

you want to get some sense of what was happening in this 

particular fund, I would like to go back to look at the 2003-2004 

budget and look through the types of revenue and expenses that 

went through the budget at that time. In 2003-04, the revenues 

that came in on an annual basis from equipment rental and 

recoveries was $331,000. Now that was the last year that this 

particular source of revenue was available to the fund because 

in that year all of the capital assets were removed from the 

Resource Protection and Development Revolving Fund. 

 

The next source of revenue was the radio communications 

revenue, and that was $1.698 million. This is funding that came 

into the fund as it relates to the cost of radio communications. 

And that amount continued at approximately that amount right 

up until the fund was finally wrapped up on April 1, 2007. 

 

In the 2003-04 budget, the staff housing program brought in 

revenue of $174,000. So this would be revenues that came in 

from people who were using staff housing and would then go to 

replenish the housing stock as that went. But that source of 

revenue was eliminated from the fund after April 1, 2005. 

[14:30] 

 

A third area of revenue was the northern air operations repair 

facility. There was money paid to the revolving fund from the 

northern air operations repair facility so that they would 

actually pay for the capital asset there and keep it going. 

 

And finally, there were funds that came in from land titles fees 

that were directed to this fund. So in 2003-04, which was last 

year where there was the full robust revenue, it was about 

$2.353 million in revenue that came into the fund. 

 

Now in the same year the expenditures were as follows . . . And 

the net income from the operations in that year was a negative 

$36,000. It was about a break-even. But the equipment rental 

and recovery expenditures were $331,000, exactly the amount 

that was taken in on the revenue side. 

 

On the radio communication side, the cost was exactly as was 

brought in, so that balanced off. On the staff housing, the 

expenditures were 210,000 which is about $40,000 more than 

what was coming in . . . or $36,000 more than what was coming 

in on the revenues for that. And then on the air operations repair 

facility, the amount that was coming in was the amount of the 

expenditure and, in a similar way, the land titles fees. So 

effectively this was a way to have a fund available that would 

continually renew the equipment and deal with the expenses in 

these particular areas. 

 

As we move forward in the next years from ’03-04 to ’04-05, 

’05-06, the various forms of expense with their related revenue 

were moved out of this fund and back into the department’s 

budget and therefore included in the General Revenue Fund. 

The last parts that were kept in the fund up until April 1, 2007 

were the radio communications area and the land titles fee area. 

 

At the end of that particular period of April 1, 2007, there was 

an accumulated surplus in the fund of $264,000. And this 

amount was to be transferred into the General Revenue Fund. 

So what we have is a method of accounting for costs and 

expenditures that was obviously an entirely appropriate way to 

do that when it was originally set up, but which has in many 

ways outlived its usefulness. 

 

Now sometimes the plans that are made around the financing 

arrangements don’t always anticipate the ebbs and flows and 

the needs of a particular area of government or of the operations 

of a ministry. And one of the questions that does arise here is 

whether there will be sufficient funds in the general budget to 

cover the costs that will undoubtedly be there as the radio 

communication system is modernized, as the needs for a new 

air operations facility in the North is identified and completed. 

 

And so when we look at this we end up wondering whether 

some of the mechanisms that are available in this revolving 

fund may not still have some use as we move forward, and I’d 

like to just give a couple of examples. And I think that one of 

the areas that we do know needs further resolution and 

development and I know, in the long-term plans of the 

province, the arrangements are there about making sure that we 

have the capacity in northern Saskatchewan to do the 

maintenance of our air fleet. 

 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

As we all know, over the last number of years, we purchased a 

number of the new chemical retardant planes to use in fighting 

forest fires. They’re bigger than the water bombers that we have 

used, which we still have but don’t use as often. But we know 

that the ability to fly a longer distance and have a greater 

payload of fire retardant does make a difference in how fires are 

fought. And so one of the questions becomes, as we move 

forward is, will there be sufficient funding out of the General 

Revenue Fund to make sure that we build the appropriate 

maintenance facilities, whether that be in Prince Albert or La 

Ronge or other communities in the North. 

 

One of the options which is always there — and it’s one that is 

of concern to the people of Saskatchewan — is the fact that 

there are contractors located in other provinces or even other 

countries who would say, well bring your planes to us; we will 

do all of that work maintaining them. But I think we all 

recognize that the airplane maintenance jobs in Saskatchewan 

are skilled jobs that are very important for those communities 

where these services are provided. 

 

And so I raise that particular issue because I’m not certain 

whether the resulting mechanisms that are being developed 

within the Ministry of Environment will provide as much 

assurance around making sure that the new air maintenance 

operations facilities in the North are going to be built as planned 

or expanded as necessary as we refurbish the forest fire fighting 

fleet. 

 

Now another area which we know continues to be an issue not 

just in northern Saskatchewan, where Saskatchewan 

Environment has a great deal of responsibility, but throughout 

the province relates to housing. And one of the factors in this 

revolving fund is that it did provide another mechanism, 

another tool to allow for housing to be available for the workers 

who were required to live in various communities to do their 

job. 

 

Now ideally all of that will be covered through the General 

Revenue Fund, but we don’t have assurances of that, in what we 

see here, that that in fact will actually happen because given, as 

I started out talking about, how the General Revenue Fund 

allows for an annual decision on priorities for budgets, it does 

eliminate the ability to plan through a revolving fund over a 

number years around providing housing in Saskatchewan for a 

number of these employees who work for Saskatchewan 

Environment. 

 

So I think that that’s a question that we should keep out there, 

and I assume on Wednesday, when the budget’s introduced, that 

we will see some very clear provisions around providing 

housing across the province, but more specifically to the areas 

in the North because we need to deal with all of these things in 

a very reasonable, positive way. 

 

Now it’s interesting how, when one examines this role of the 

Resource Protection and Development Revolving Fund, it was 

justified and continues to be justified when it was in full 

existence back in ’03-04 as being a major support program that 

supported several of the goals and objectives of the department. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’m thinking there are just too many 

discussions taking place in the Assembly and while I don’t want 

to interfere with members being able to communicate, if you 

could just cut the level down a little bit, it would make it a lot 

simpler to hear the member on his feet. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Yes. As I was just saying that this Resource 

Protection and Development Revolving Fund was set up as a 

support structure within the department and as I’ve identified it, 

it contained these different programs: radio communications, 

equipment rental, staff housing, northern air operations support. 

And basically the resource users were charged a fee based on 

the cost of providing these goods and services across the North. 

 

But the revolving fund itself supported the goals of the 

department in a few interesting ways. Basically the radio 

communications and the northern air operations segments 

support goal number one of the department, which is reduced 

risked clean and healthy ecosystems. Goal number two of the 

department: people, resources, and property values at risk from 

wildfires are protected. And goal number three, a fair 

opportunity for sustainable use and enjoyment of renewable 

resources. 

 

Now I’m not sure how much discussion the members opposite 

had within their caucus around this particular fund, but I know 

in my previous role as the minister of Environment, I answered 

many, many questions about protection of people, resources, 

and property from wildfires, and I’m not sure that the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood had a chance to look at this 

and if he realizes that there may be some threat to some of the 

services that are being provided through the department as it 

relates to wildfires. 

 

Now over the longer term, the clear message that we need for 

the people of Saskatchewan as we move forward with these 

kinds of pieces of legislation are, what will replace the existing 

structures that have been of benefit to quite a number of 

communities in the province? And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

imperative that the minister or others who are going to be 

explaining the rationale for this moving forward, that they set 

out for us how the services are going to be provided in each of 

these different areas, and in actual fact what the budgets are and 

what the continuing budgets will be that support what this 

revolving fund has provided over many, many years. 

 

Because that’s not obvious today, I think that we need to wait to 

hear what will be set out within the budget later this week as it 

relates to some of these services. Because it doesn’t make sense 

to me that we would eliminate one tool that would help us deal 

with housing issues in the North or deal with northern air 

operations or deal with radio communications that are so vital 

for especially the forest fire fighting and other emergency 

services provided. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 8, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 9, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation pertains to the following defined 

benefit plans: the public service superannuation plan, the Liquor 

Board superannuation plan, the Power Corporation 

superannuation plan, the Anti-Tuberculosis League employees’ 

superannuation plan, and the Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company employees’ superannuation plan. These defined 

benefit pension plans were closed to new members on October 

1, 1977. Effective that date, new employees join and participate 

in the public employees pension plan, which is a defined 

contribution pension plan. Mr. Speaker, when members of these 

closed defined pension plans return to work for government 

after retirement, their pension income may be impacted. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Several inequities arise from the return-to work-provision, 

which is commonly referred to as section 27. Section 27 applies 

to persons who retire under one of the old defined benefit plans 

and does not apply to people who retire under the public 

employees pension plan. At December 31, 2007, there were 

1,847 active and inactive members remaining in the defined 

benefit plans and 7,856 pensioners. 

 

In comparison, there are over 45,000 active and inactive 

members participating in the largest Saskatchewan public 

pension plan, being the public employees pension plan. 

Members of this pension plan have a variety of retirement 

income options, which includes the option to transfer the money 

out of the plan to purchase a prescribed pension benefit. 

 

The public employees pension plan does not and has never had 

a restriction for pensioners returning to work in the public 

sector. Employees retained through contract are excluded from 

the section 27 provision. A retiree can return to work with the 

government on a contractual basis, as long as the contract does 

not create an employee-employer relationship, without affecting 

the pension, the payment of the retiree’s pension. 

 

A retiree who returns to work for a fixed term of employment 

that is less than 132 days in the fiscal year of the pension plan, 

can return to work and not have his or her pension suspended. 

Retirees working less than full-time often do not monitor how 

many days they work in a fiscal year, and by extension of their 

end date, may work more than 132 days in the fiscal year. This 

is unfair to those who return to work on a full-time basis with 

an immediate suspension of pension benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to establish effective administrative 

practices for the purpose of section 27, causing its enforcement 

to be an issue of concern for many years. It is the retired 

member’s responsibility to inform the pension plan of the return 

to work for the government. Likewise the employer is 

responsible for asking for this information and reporting it to 

the pension plan. If the information is not voluntarily reported 

by either party, the pension plan has no way of knowing that the 

retired employee has returned to work. Employees are informed 

upon their retirement of what employers are deemed to be 

government, but often retired members forget and do not see 

that the information pertains to their situation. 

 

Annually, Mr. Speaker, since 2001, the plans to which The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act pertains have 

been cited by the Provincial Auditor for not ensuring that 

pensions are suspended when retired members are re-employed 

by the government. A number of provincial public sector 

defined benefit pension plans permit pensioners to return to 

work without affecting their pensions. Mr. Speaker, we want to 

ensure that the return-to-work rules are the same for all public 

sector pensioners. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, given the tight labour market in 

Saskatchewan and its growing economy, it is appropriate that 

the rules governing these pension plans do not create artificial 

barriers that would prevent people from returning to 

employment in the civil service if the opportunity presents 

itself. The government is therefore moving to eliminate 

suspension of a pensioner’s income if the pensioner returns to 

employment. 

 

This Act was also amended in 2003 to provide members who 

would obtain a spouse after retirement the opportunity to 

provide the new spouse with a survivor’s benefit upon the death 

of the pensioner. This was in response to the needs of the 

pensioners. It is necessary to amend the existing calculation of 

this benefit to ensure that it results in a benefit that is cost 

neutral to the pension plan and the pensioner. 

 

The legislation, Mr. Speaker, requires the pension boards to 

identify in the pension plan’s annual report the names of those 

members who have retired or died in the fiscal year. This 

requirement serves no practical purpose and is not consistent 

with the spirit and intent of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

Housekeeping amendments have been introduced in this Bill to 

ensure that legislation correctly reflects administrative practice 

and that the legislation complies with the Income Tax Act of 

Canada. 

 

It is proposed that these changes will come into effect on assent. 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments demonstrate government’s 

concern for current and former employees and for the overall 

governance of the pension plans subject to this legislation. And 

with that, I move second reading of The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 9, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. Is the 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased this afternoon to rise to speak on this very important 

piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation 

fundamentally changes a position of very sound public policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 27 of the superannuation amendment Act, 

2008, and all previous Acts, was there for a reason. Section 27 

prevented an employee who was collecting superannuation 

from the Government of Saskatchewan from being re-employed 

with the Government of Saskatchewan or continuing their 

employment without actually retiring, which would be allowed 

under this provision, Mr. Speaker, prevented somebody from 

double-dipping and prevented the taxpayers from paying twice 

for the same service — a fundamental, important public policy 

position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the way this Act now reads, an employee can . . . 

And let’s use as an example a deputy minister being paid a 

$200,000 salary, who has worked for the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we do value and appreciate their work and 

their service to the people of Saskatchewan. They’re 

fundamentally important to the well-being of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. But they could retire, Mr. Speaker. They could retire 

and get 70 per cent — if they’ve worked 35 years in public 

service in Saskatchewan — 70 per cent of their pension, so be 

collecting a $140,000 pension and collecting a $200,000 salary 

at the same time, Mr. Speaker. The taxpayers of the province 

would be paying twice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have provisions in many Acts, in many pieces 

of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that prevent individuals from 

double-dipping — from collecting twice from the public purse 

— prevent individuals from getting paid for doing the same 

work twice. And that’s in essence what would happen if 

somebody was able to retire, collect their pension, and continue 

to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you may or may not be aware that in many pieces 

of legislation, if you receive a severance payment, you cannot 

continue to collect that severance payment if you go back to 

work for the Government of Saskatchewan. It’s the exact same 

principle. It’s the exact same premise that you cannot 

double-dip. You cannot collect twice for performing services 

for the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the difference if an individual is severed 

from employment and given a severance and goes back to work 

and is still collecting a severance and a salary or collecting a 

pension and a salary, Mr. Speaker? They’re both the taxpayers 

of the province, the citizens of the province, paying twice for 

the same work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s been a long held premise in the public 

sector in Canada. Over the last number of years it’s been 

watered down where it’s been on the onus of the employee to 

tell the government or the employer whether or not they return 

to work. And rather than put in place provisions to 

cross-reference and check whether somebody returns to work in 

the broader public sector, we’ve decided to take the easy road 

and just pay. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, we have had the Provincial Auditor cite 

over the last number of years that in fact people were doing that 

— they were double-dipping. And they shouldn’t be 

double-dipping, and they should be prevented from 

double-dipping. So rather than, Mr. Speaker, dealing with that 

issue, we’ve chosen to deal with it in another way and simply 

make it legal to double-dip. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, most people in the general public wouldn’t 

approve of that. I know my parents and my aunts and uncles 

and my friends wouldn’t approve of that. But, Mr. Speaker, 

why are we doing it? Why would we choose to take that route 

rather than find a mechanism to ensure that people couldn’t 

double-dip? 

 

And we can talk about the employment environment. We can 

talk about the employment environment, Mr. Speaker. And yes, 

we have a tight market employment environment. We have a 

desire to keep people employed. But we don’t desire as 

taxpayers and citizens to be paying twice for the same work. 

Where would you enjoy paying twice for the same work, Mr. 

Speaker? It comes out of the same pot of money. It comes out 

of the General Revenue Fund. It comes from the taxpayers of 

this province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve taken an easy way to deal 

with a very complex problem. 

 

We have another piece of legislation coming forward very 

shortly that’s going to change the pension provisions to allow 

people to work much longer and saying that you’re not forced 

to retirement. Mr. Speaker, that means you could be paying 

these double-dipping potentially for a great deal longer than you 

would have in previous times when it was forced retirement at 

age 65. 

 

Today, when you don’t have to retire our new provisions or 

under Bill 10, which you’re proposing and we’ll be speaking to 

in just a few minutes, it’s now age 69. That’s when the 

provisions kick in in the Income Tax Act, Mr. Speaker. But 

what this allows is people to continue to potentially double-dip 

for a much longer period of time. 

 

The other difficulty with this, Mr. Speaker, is that the people 

who would generally enjoy the benefit of this opportunity aren’t 

the entire members of the civil service. If you go and look who 

has come back on contract, who has come back to work for 

government after retiring, it’s generally those in the senior 

executive levels of departments and/or Crown corporations. 

And, Mr. Speaker, these provisions make it easier for those in 

the higher positions to earn even more money, and that does not 

necessarily sit well with the general population of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we pay salaries that are comparable or competitive 

to the employment climate in the province of Saskatchewan. 

We have to or we wouldn’t be able to hire people, Mr. Speaker. 

So we hire competent people paying a competitive salary. Mr. 

Speaker, I contend we don’t have to pay them twice to do the 

same job. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we do this — if we proceed and pass this 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

legislation — the next thing we have to do is deal with the same 

issue on severance, Mr. Speaker. Because we can’t say on one 

hand you can collect twice on pension and you can’t collect 

severance and collect a salary because, Mr. Speaker, we can’t 

speak out of both sides of our mouth. We either have to believe 

in the fundamental principle that you cannot double dip or you 

have to allow it in all of its circumstances, Mr. Speaker. You 

can’t be unfair about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an issue where it would be easier. I fully 

agree it is much easier to change this legislation and allow it to 

happen because people have found loopholes to be able to do it 

as a contract employee, to be able to do it in other ways. But, 

Mr. Speaker, the issue is, it’s been a concern because people 

have found loopholes in the existing legislation. The solution 

isn’t to make it legal. The solution is to close those loopholes so 

that you can’t be hired on as a contract employee after being 

retired and continue to collect your pension. It’s still 

double-dipping. And the fundamental principle of public policy 

when this was brought forward is that the taxpayers should pay 

once. 

 

And I believe in rural Saskatchewan, which the members 

opposite represent, that the concept of paying twice for doing 

one job, Mr. Speaker, would not go over well. In fact when I 

talked to my friends and relatives in rural Saskatchewan, they 

have a great deal of difficulty with it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, section 27 of this legislation, which is being 

eliminated now today, puts limits on what can be done. I 

believe those limits should be increased. Section 27 should go 

on to address the issue of employees in contract situations. It 

just shouldn’t be eliminated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it already allows provisions for short-term 

employment. It allows for provisions for employees to come 

back on a temporary basis or for a short-term period for up to 

six months in a year. So for those situations where you need a 

carry-over of knowledge or you need carry-over of a particular 

expertise, there is an ability to do that. 

 

[15:00] 

 

But it was never contemplated that people should be able to 

continue employment and both collect a pension and work for 

the same employer. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe taxpayers 

believe that should happen. I don’t believe we should either. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental shift in public policy. I 

believe very strongly that those people who elect us, those 

people who live in small towns, villages, and on farms in rural 

Saskatchewan, as well as those who live in our urban areas, 

don’t believe that a government should pay somebody twice for 

doing the same job. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you can make the argument, well one’s a 

pension and one’s a paycheque. One’s their salary. But the 

pension is coming from the same payer as is the salary. Mr. 

Speaker, in the real world out there, you can retire from one job 

and go to work for somebody else. You can collect a pension 

from a different employer and go to work for another employer. 

And that ability is open to every single employee that retires 

from the civil service or the public service of Saskatchewan and 

is covered by our superannuation plan. They can go to work for 

somebody else; it doesn’t end their employment. But there’s 

been a long-standing provision and public policy position that 

you cannot retire, collect your pension from the same employer, 

and in fact collect your salary. 

 

And as the analogy I used earlier where a person can, if they 

were making $200,000 a year, be collecting a $200,000 salary 

and if they have worked 35 years for government in the old 

pension plan, Mr. Speaker, superannuation pension plan, could 

be collecting 70 per cent of that $200,000 salary as a pension 

benefit, so in essence making $340,000 for doing the same job 

he was doing one day before. On Friday of one week he could 

be making $200,000 and Monday the next week making 

$340,000, with the taxpayer of Saskatchewan paying both the 

pension and the salary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

serious concern to people. It’s an awful lot of money. And it’s a 

concern when people have to pay twice to get the same job 

done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second part of this Bill deals with paying an 

appropriate pension to a spouse. We amended the Bill in 2003, 

allowing for pension provisions to be paid to a second spouse if 

in fact there had been an agreement between the first spouse 

and second spouse as to how pension would be divided. Or had 

there been a death of the first spouse, you could then sign your 

second spouse up to be entitled to pension benefits. That was a 

good amendment. It made sense. It was a logical amendment: 

that you paid into a pension, it’s your money, but your spouse 

should be able to collect. There’s a minor amendment in this 

legislation as well, Mr. Speaker, that I think the people of 

Saskatchewan would agree with, they’d fundamentally agree 

with it. It allows for a proper calculation of that benefit for that 

spouse. And, Mr. Speaker, that provision we agree with. Not 

only do we agree with it; we agree with it wholeheartedly. We 

believe that there should be an appropriate division of funds. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the repeal of section 27, we don’t 

agree with. Section 27 fundamentally changes public policy. 

And I would challenge the members opposite to test public 

opinion on the issue, if whether the people of this province 

believe that you should be paying somebody a pension and their 

salary for doing the same job. And that’s what this legislation 

would allow. That’s what repeal of section 27 would allow. 

 

And rather than deal with the problems that have been created 

through loopholes — the problem that has allowed a Crown 

corporation or a government department to hire an employee on 

contract, to hire them back, where they’d be able to collect both 

a pension and the salary — rather than fix that problem in the 

way that it has historically been fixed in pension plans by 

changing the provision to make that provision of working in a 

contract and collecting pension, to make that clear that that’s 

not allowed, we decide to open the door all the way. And we 

decide to open the public purse, and we decide just to pay the 

people of Saskatchewan’s money to somebody for doing the 

same job, paying them twice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that does not make sense to the average person in 

rural Saskatchewan, and I dare you to ask that of your own 

parents, your own friends, and your own family because it’s 

their money. They’re not going to want to pay twice. You 

should go and talk to the people of this province before you put 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

forward such a provision. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you allow this, the next step is not to claw 

back severance payments, if somebody receives a severance 

payment and then comes back to work, because what’s the 

difference? The concept is you can’t double-dip. Well if you’re 

collecting a severance from the employer and come back to 

work, they claw back the severance, and they should. 

 

But what’s the difference with somebody collecting a pension 

from the same employer and collecting their salary? Nothing. 

It’s the concept of double-dipping. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

serious issue to people. Taxpayers of this province pay taxes, 

and they pay a lot of taxes for their services. But they do not 

want to pay for people to collect twice for doing the same job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen, since the new government’s taken 

power, we have seen an explosion of expenditures and spending 

on salaries. We saw an increase of about $60,000 on the top 

ministerial assistants’ salaries. We’ve seen new heads of boards 

and commissions paid significantly more money. We’ve seen 

spending galore in ways that the people of this province 

probably don’t appreciate. 

 

And now we see, now we see the government brings forward a 

provision to allow double-dipping. And taxpayers in this 

province aren’t going to support that. And rather than clean up 

the existing problems, rather than clean up the existing 

problems, Mr. Speaker, they want to make it legal to 

double-dip. 

 

Now there are many problems with the process and how this is 

done within the civil service as well, Mr. Speaker. The people 

who make the decisions on whether or not who gets hired are 

the ones most likely to access this benefit. It doesn’t apply to 

the front-line clerical support employee or to the resource 

officer in rural Saskatchewan or to the corrections worker in the 

correctional centres or any of the front-line employees. It’s 

primarily, if you look who’s done this and who has accessed 

this provision through contract employment and through other 

employment, it is not front-line workers, Mr. Speaker. It’s those 

who sit in the top positions in departments and Crown 

corporations. 

 

So it’s not fairly distributed. It’s not equally applied to all 

employees. All employees aren’t equally eligible to the 

benefits. Even though it’s a flawed concept to start with, even if 

it were a concept that would be allowed, it’s not equally applied 

across the piece, and nor would we expect it to be in the future. 

 

But fundamentally the issue is this, Mr. Speaker. Taxpayers in 

this province don’t want to pay twice for the same service. I as 

a taxpayer don’t want to pay twice for the same service. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, as many of the members in this 

Assembly know, I spent many years and most of my life in the 

civil service. Many of my friends may have access to these 

benefits. That’s not the point. The point is, from the point of 

public policy, we don’t want to have taxpayers have to pay 

twice for the same service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why does the government want this? Yes, 

they can cite that the Provincial Auditor has cited the various 

departments and Public Service Commission and Finance for 

not correcting the problem of people being employed in 

contract basis. But rather than deal with the problem, rather 

than deal with the problem, they’ve made it easy to simply 

double-dip. Mr. Speaker, it isn’t the way to deal with this 

problem. 

 

I will acknowledge that there is a problem. Any time that you 

have a set of rules, that you have legislation that’s not 

enforceable, you have to find a way to deal with it. I agree with 

that. But this isn’t the way to deal with it. Just to make a bad 

problem worse or make a bad problem legal doesn’t solve the 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan, the people that the 

members opposite and government represent, the people that we 

represent in opposition, the people we need to speak for, do not 

want to pay twice for the same salary. Mr. Speaker, I just urge 

members to ask their neighbours, ask their friends the simple 

question: do you believe somebody that’s getting paid a salary 

— and you could pick the number of $100,000 a year or 

$80,000 a year — should be able to also collect an $80,000 

salary and 70 per cent of that $80,000 in pension? And they’re 

going to tell you no, because they’re paying for it and they 

don’t get the right of the same benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe the major unions in 

this province will support this. I don’t believe the majority of 

employees support this because again, as I’ve pointed out, the 

benefit is afforded to few and those few are largely in the 

position of determining whether or not they would continue 

their own employment. Mr. Speaker, we have to get back to the 

fundamental principles of good government and the 

fundamental principles of good government would say you 

cannot double-dip — you cannot double-dip. You cannot be 

paid twice for doing the same job. 

 

We work and we work respectfully for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, all of us. But we need to understand 

what the people of Saskatchewan want us to do. And I can tell 

you my friends and neighbours don’t want me to support a Bill 

that’ll allow people to be paid twice for doing the same job. 

And I believe, I believe that the constituents and the people that 

the members opposite represent don’t want — do not want — to 

pay an individual’s salary and their pension at the same time 

when it’s one employer. So they’re paying 70 per cent more 

perhaps, or up to 70 per cent more, to get the same job done. I 

don’t believe the constituents of Moose Jaw North would agree 

with that. I don’t believe the constituents of Swift Current 

would believe that. I don’t believe the constituents of Yorkton 

would believe in that. I don’t believe constituents across this 

province believe that. 

 

I think what you’re trying to do is you’re trying to solve a 

problem by taking the easy way, and the easy way is to simply 

make something that’s problematic, hard to enforce, legal. Well 

the proper way to deal with this, Mr. Speaker, would be to take 

a step back and say, why haven’t we been able to enforce this? 

What things do we need to change to be able to enforce this, 

Mr. Speaker? And how do we go about making sure that in the 

future that people cannot be collecting a salary and a pension 

from the same employer at the same time? 

 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

I believe that’s what the people of Saskatchewan would want us 

to do. Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of reasons for that. 

Every time somebody that has retired remains in their position, 

it means that somebody else younger doesn’t get to promote. 

The younger people don’t get to move up in our workforce. 

Younger people don’t get the opportunities to those key jobs 

and to bring new ideas forward. Mr. Speaker, it allows the same 

people to remain in the same jobs for a very long period of 

time, collecting an even larger salary, limiting opportunities for 

young people in the province. 

 

And one of the key things we need to do is encourage more 

young people to come back to our province. We don’t need to 

encourage a bunch of people to remain in their jobs past 

retirement, collecting both their pension and their salary. I want 

my children and I want the children of the members opposite to 

have the opportunities for advancement within the public 

service of Saskatchewan. I want our children to have the 

opportunities to move up rather than have somebody collecting 

both their salary and their pension sitting in their same chair, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I believe that’s what the people of Saskatchewan want. If I 

didn’t believe it, I wouldn’t be talking about this issue in the 

manner in which I am. I don’t believe that the constituents that 

any of us represent — that any of us represent — believe that a 

person should be able to be collecting their full salary and their 

pension for doing the same job from the same employer 

because they’re both paid out of the General Revenue Fund. 

They’re both paid by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. We’re 

paying twice. 

 

Did you get any practical advice when you decided to proceed 

with this legislation? Did you talk to your caucus? Did they 

understand that people would be able to double-dip? Did you 

talk to any of your constituents, to your friends and neighbours 

in those communities which you represent? Because I don’t 

believe if you asked them in that fundamental a way that any of 

them would agree with this. I know employers wouldn’t agree 

with that. I don’t know that you agree with it. I think you just 

brought forward a piece of legislation to solve a problem in the 

easiest possible way. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I know my relatives that live on the farm — who don’t have a 

nice pension plan, who pay the salaries, who work very hard on 

their farms to make ends meet, and through taxes pay the 

salaries of those who work in the civil service, pay our salaries 

— don’t want to pay for the ability for an individual to both 

collect pension at the same time they remain employed in their 

job and collecting their full salary. I believe fundamentally that 

that’s true of your constituents; it’s true of my constituents. I 

think it’s true of the majority of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Did you look at other ways to fix this problem? Did you look at 

ways to close the loopholes, look at ways to make it more fair 

so that the taxpayers could only ever pay once for that work 

being performed? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fundamental public policy issue which 

leads us down a road that’s going to open other doors. Because 

if we move down this road, Mr. Speaker, next comes clawback 

of severance payments, and that leads to other challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers, our constituents, the people of this 

province don’t believe they should pay twice for a service. They 

don’t believe they should be paying a person a severance and a 

salary at the same time as they’re working for the same 

employer. And I don’t believe that, and I hope the members 

opposite don’t believe that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is no different when it’s the same payer on 

a pension and a salary. You could be working, as I’ve said more 

than once before, on a Friday you could be making $200,000 a 

year sitting in your desk doing your job. I’m not going to say it 

isn’t being well done because it would be being well done. We 

have a very quality, professional civil service, people who work 

very hard for their salaries. I’m not going to say that they don’t 

work hard and they don’t earn their pay, because they do. We 

have a very quality, professional civil service. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is not right. Fundamentally it is not right 

that that individual can be making his salary on a Friday and on 

Monday could be receiving a full pension and collecting a 

salary and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan paying 170 per cent 

on Monday of what they were paying on Friday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know, I know the constituents that you represent 

and the constituents I represent do not agree with that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think they need to take a long, hard look at this 

legislation and re-evaluate whether they want to proceed with 

this legislation. This is important public policy. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite are making remarks and 

saying things that probably aren’t fair. Mr. Speaker, they don’t 

like the fact that I’m challenging this legislation and the fact 

that I’m laying it on the line for their constituents and mine, 

how it would apply. Mr. Speaker, they don’t have to like it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the taxpayers of this province need and have a right to 

understand what the implications are. Mr. Speaker, we’re not 

here to just slide things under or put things through that people 

don’t understand. The people of the province have a right to 

understand what this legislation can mean. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they can say, they can say over there that 

we, you know, we don’t understand it. Section 27 was put in 

place, section 27 was put in place to prevent people from both 

collecting a pension and collecting a salary, Mr. Speaker, 

working for the same employer. That makes sense. That’s what 

public policy has been about in this province for a long time up 

until now. 

 

Now because the Provincial Auditor has said that this practice 

can’t continue because there have been some loopholes in 

which individuals have both been able to collect a salary and a 

pension, rather than closing those loopholes, rather than telling 

those people that they can’t double-dip, they want to make it 

legal to double-dip. Well if you make it legal to double-dip in 

this mechanism, in this manner, with pensions and salaries, next 

comes severance and salaries. And where does that slippery 

slope end, Mr. Speaker? 

 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

Mr. Speaker, we are elected to represent the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. We’re elected to represent their 

interest and their ideology, Mr. Speaker — not our own. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we need to in fact live up to the principles of 

which the people of Saskatchewan want us to. And I 

fundamentally don’t believe that our neighbours, our friends, 

our constituents want people to have the ability from the same 

employer to be collecting a pension and collecting a salary. Mr. 

Speaker, I think that people in this province are fundamentally 

against that. 

 

And the members opposite can say whatever. They can say, 

well it’s a bad speech, and I don’t know what I’m talking about. 

But I just challenge them to go ask their neighbours and their 

constituents in their ridings if they agree with that — that you 

should be able to collect a pension from the same employer at 

the same time you’re collecting salary for doing the same job. 

And it can happen, the way they’ve got this legislation 

constructed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe their neighbours agree with that. I 

know my neighbours don’t agree with it. I know my 

constituents don’t agree with it. And I know that the people of 

this province don’t agree with it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can’t hide from it. This is what they’re 

proposing. You have to live with what you’re proposing. You 

have to be accountable for what you’re putting forward. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that the people of this province will 

pass judgment on. They will pass judgment on this issue. This is 

the type of issue, Mr. Speaker, this is the type of issue that 

ordinary people in this province, that citizens care about. 

 

We don’t have the money, we don’t have the money to have a 

universal seniors’ drug plan, the members opposite say. So we 

would put a means test in that you can’t be part of the universal 

seniors’ drug plan if you have a salary over $65,000 a year. But 

we’ll let a civil servant, a senior civil servant, make $200,000 a 

year, collect $140,000 pension, and their health benefits at the 

same time — all at the same time — but we won’t let a senior 

citizen with a family income of 65,000 be part of a universal 

seniors’ health plan. 

 

It’s all about choice, Mr. Speaker. So we’re choosing. Instead 

of allowing seniors to have a universal health plan, we’re 

choosing to pay twice for people who . . . allowing people to 

retire and collect their salary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t believe that’s the public policy choice that the people of 

Saskatchewan have made. I don’t believe your constituents 

agree with that. And I think, Mr. Speaker, when the people of 

Saskatchewan understand that, they’re not going to be very 

happy. And let me assure you, they will understand it because 

we will make sure that they understand it. Seniors can’t have a 

universal drug plan because you can’t afford it; you have to 

means test it. But not the same means test for people who can 

collect a pension and collect their salary at the same time, as 

well as have the health benefits they would be afforded as a 

government employee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very bad public policy choice, and 

I think the members need to take a very careful look at this. 

They need to understand the implications of it before they 

decide to proceed with it. And, Mr. Speaker, although this is a 

bad public policy choice, the one good thing about it is now that 

we’ve made them aware of all the problems, they have the 

opportunity, if they like, to change their mind. They can fix it. 

They can withdraw this legislation. They don’t have to proceed 

with it. 

 

They instead could bring forward a Bill, an appropriate Bill that 

would close the loopholes with the existing problems — close 

the existing loopholes — so that we then could be in 

compliance with what the Provincial Auditor wanted. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’d be a good piece of legislation and we’d . . . I 

would heartily support that. I would even second the motion. 

I’d stand up and speak in support of it, and we could push that 

through very quickly. But this particular piece of legislation that 

allows double-dipping, Mr. Speaker, is not the way to fix the 

problem. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, because I’ve just started my remarks and I 

have many, many other points of discussion on this particular 

piece of legislation, at this point I’d like to adjourn debate on 

this piece of legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Regina Dewdney that Bill No. 9, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 be 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 10 — The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes 

(Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of Bill No. 10, The 

Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of Pension) 

Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2007 federal budget speech proposed to 

increase the age at which retirement savings and registered 

retirement savings instruments must be converted to pension 

income to 71 years of age from 69 years of age, effective 2007. 

The Income Tax Act Canada and regulations were amended 

accordingly in 2007. This measure allowed registered pension 

plans to permit members to continue to contribute to the end of 

the calendar year in which they turn age 71, at which time they 

would have to receive a pension. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, has the effect of mirroring the changes 

in age from 69 to 71 for a number of provincial public service 

pension plans, including the public employees pension plan, the 

Saskatchewan pension plan, the teachers’ superannuation plan, 

the municipal employees’ pension plan, the public service 

superannuation plan, the Liquor Board superannuation plan, and 

the Power Corporation superannuation plan and other smaller 

pension plans. 



March 17, 2008 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this legislation will actually amend 

the age at which pensions must commence from the end of the 

calendar year in which members turn age 69 to the end of the 

calendar year pursuant to provisions of the Income Tax Act of 

Canada. The generic wording of the amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

permits provincial statutory pension plans to automatically 

change the age at which pensions must commence to whatever 

the corresponding rules are in the Income Tax Act of Canada. 

This will eliminate the need to amend provincial legislation in 

the future and to align with whatever changes are in the federal 

rules. 

 

In 2007 members of the provincial statutory pension plans that 

I’ve already referenced required their members to commence 

their pensions at age 69 until the legislation could be amended. 

These pension plans continue to comply with the Income Tax 

Act Canada, as this Act specifies the latest date that a person 

may convert their registered retired savings plan to pension 

income without tax consequences. Amending this legislation to 

require members to retire at December 31 of the calendar year 

in which the member turns an age specified pursuant to the 

Income Tax Act of Canada is consistent with the elimination of 

mandatory retirement effective November 17, 2007 pursuant to 

The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code as amended in 2007. It 

is proposed that these changes will come into effect on assent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Miscellaneous 

Pensions Statutes (Commencement of Pension) Amendment 

Act, 2008. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 10, The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement 

of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand on this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill now puts the province in line with the 

federal Income Tax Act. Now the Income Tax Act says when 

you reach age 69, you must start to collect your pension. What 

it has done is postponed from age 65 to age 69 the period in 

which, time of which you must start to collect benefits from 

your pension. And, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of 

legislation conforms now with the Income Tax Act. 

 

It also makes a very fundamental change that automatically will 

change our provision to meet that of the Income Tax Act. So 

there are subsequent changes to the age of mandatory . . . that 

you must retire and you must start collecting your pension. It 

moves whenever the federal government chooses to change the 

Income Tax Act, and that makes sense. So that every time that 

there’s a moderate change or perhaps a minimal change in this 

piece of legislation, that we don’t have to reopen the Act and 

make the change. We’ll just simply amend ours automatically 

as the Income Tax Act changes, and that makes good sense. It’s 

good legislation that puts common sense to the approach. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation says you 

shouldn’t and don’t have to collect your pension benefits till 

you reach the age of 69. The previous piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, allowed you to collect both your pension and your 

salary. This talks about the option, Mr. Speaker, about not 

collecting it till age 69. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation will be well 

accepted by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. This 

means those who at age 65 can continue to work and enjoy 

employment . . . Many people now choose to work beyond age 

65. Many times they move from one job to another in order to 

work at different types of employment later in their life. But 

people are, have an interest today, Mr. Speaker, in working 

beyond age 65. And many, many people do. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they contribute greatly to our economy, they contribute greatly 

to our province, and they contribute greatly to the well-being of 

individuals in our province. Mr. Speaker, people who choose to 

want to work beyond age 65 are very, very important to our 

economy, important to our communities, and important to the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it does go on to say that you can’t make 

contributions after age 69 to a pension plan, to one of our 

pension plans, and that makes sense again as well, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s continuity in direction across this piece of legislation. 

Basically if you make contributions to age 69 you don’t have to 

collect, and then in fact you can in fact stop making those 

contributions at age 69. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also clarifies what people can do with their 

pensions upon reaching the age of 65 and what determinations 

the pension board will make if we as individuals don’t make an 

option or notify the pension board of what option we would like 

to pursue. It lays out what will happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is very much a 

housekeeping piece of legislation that is putting our rules and 

our regulations and legislation in compliance with the Income 

Tax Act, but also making it easier for people who reach that age 

of 69 to deal with first getting their pension and opting in which 

way to receive their pension. There are many options in which 

to receive their pension, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are provisions in this Act that change the 

reporting accountability so that we no longer have to report who 

is receiving pensions. It makes sense; it falls in line with where 

we’re at in this piece of legislation. It also allows for an 

individual to make voluntary contributions to their fund up until 

age 69. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all in all this is a largely a housekeeping piece of 

legislation that allows us to comply with the Income Tax Act, 

as I’ve said before. It makes sense. It is an appropriate piece of 

legislation and I believe all members in the House will support 

this piece of legislation. It makes sense. There’s no need not to 

support it. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

colleagues opposite are encouraging me to continue this 

vigorous debate on this particular piece of legislation but I 

think, Mr. Speaker, I think, Mr. Speaker, that we need to at this 

time consider this piece of legislation. It’s a good piece of work 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2008 

and, Mr. Speaker, with that I will adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 10, The 

Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of Pension) 

Amendment Act, 2008. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To allow the 

important work of the committees to move forward, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that in order to facilitate the working of committees, the 

Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:34.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 319 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 319 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 319 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 319 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 New Democratic Party Convention 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 319 

 St. Patrick’s Day 

  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 320 

 Z99 Radiothon 

  Trew ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 320 

 Spring Free From Racism Event 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 320 

 Labour Community Service Award to Saskatoon Union Member 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 321 

 New Democratic Party Convention 

  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 321 

 Luther Invitational Basketball Tournament 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 321 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Consultation Regarding Labour Legislation 

  Broten ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 322 

  Norris ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 322 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................... 323 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 324 

 Accountability 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 324 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 324 

 Equalization 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 325 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 325 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 13 — The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Krawetz...................................................................................................................................................................................... 327 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Energy Accord and Equalization Formula 

  Calvert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 327 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 8 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2008 

  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 328 

  Nilson ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 328 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 331 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 332 

 Bill No. 10 — The Miscellaneous Pensions Statutes (Commencement of Pension) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 336 

  Yates ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 337 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Capital City Commission 


