




















































Hansard: April 28, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 54A  TUESDAY, APRIL 28, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2863 

 April 28, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to make a 

statement relating to the National Day of Mourning. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for a 

statement regarding the National Day of Mourning. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

National Day of Mourning for Workers 

Killed or Injured on the Job 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to first recognize a number of guests in your gallery 

who have been invited to the legislature today in honour of the 

National Day of Mourning. Mr. Speaker, I know all members 

will wish to join me in welcoming to their Assembly families 

and friends of those who sadly have lost their lives at work. On 

behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I wish to express 

our profound condolences for your loss. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we recognize the National Day of Mourning 

for workers killed or injured on the job. This is a time for us to 

turn our thoughts toward those employees, co-workers, and 

friends as well as family members who are injured and to 

honour those who have lost their lives while at work. 

 

We join together today in a common commitment — to protect 

our colleagues and co-workers in their daily endeavours. Since 

the Day of Mourning was first declared in 1984, April 28 has 

offered a special opportunity for workplaces across the country 

to reflect on the impact, the loss of life, and the importance of 

prevention. Across Canada, workplaces today are observing the 

Day of Mourning through moments of silence, candle lighting 

ceremonies, and the donning of pins, ribbons, or black arm 

bands. Here at the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, 

members wear Day of Mourning pins and the building’s flags 

fly at half-mast in recognition of this sombre day. 

 

Those who lost their lives are being recognized here today. 

Their names will also be read into the official record and 

inscribed in the national registry at the Canadian Labour 

Congress in Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in reading names into the official provincial 

record, Saskatchewan people acknowledge the women and men 

who have lost their lives in their pursuit of a strong and 

prosperous future for themselves, for their families, and for 

their communities. 

 

It saddens me to report that in 2008 the Workers’ Compensation 

Board indicates that 31 Saskatchewan workers lost their lives 

while on the job. I would ask that all members please rise while 

I read the names of those who have lost their lives during this 

year. They are: 

 

Stuart Bangsund Ronald Benning 

Terry Bogner  Rick Boughner 

Branden Bourassa Daniel Brent Boxall 

Stanley Brzoza Ross Castle 

Walter Essar Norman Fletcher 

Derek Galbraith Bertrand Grise 

Murray Hill Benjamin Hingston 

Ken Jewsbury Jeffrey Johnson 

Ken Joinson Alex Kobsar 

Stuart Lord Vernon Lund 

Gerald Molleken Leonard Paetsch 

Deon Patey Arthur Pickering 

Celine Reichert Spencer Skagen 

Andrew Smith Henri St. Pierre 

Royden Taylor Robert Tkach 

James Walker  

 

On behalf of our government, I express my sincere condolences 

to the families gathered here today and to the loved ones of all 

those who have lost their lives at work. Regardless of 

occupation, each death is a tragedy that brings grief and sorrow 

to our entire province. 

 

On the Day of Mourning and every day, let us make safety a 

priority on the farm, work site, and in our personal lives. Let us 

come together in 2009 to embrace a common commitment to 

building a stronger culture of health and safety in every 

Saskatchewan workplace. Let us make getting home safely the 

most important part of our workday. Together, with a renewed 

commitment to the health and safety of our workplaces, we can 

prevent injuries and the loss of life that takes such a tragic toll 

on our families and on our communities. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I ask that we observe a moment of 

silence in this Assembly. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to welcome the 

families who are gathered here on this special day to help us 

commemorate the workers killed on the job. Mr. Speaker, today 

being April 28, National Day of Mourning, we appropriately 

commemorate and honour those killed or hurt by workplace 

injuries or disease. That we do this, that we have been able to 

set aside a special day where we honour those who are killed at 

work, that we take time to pause and read the names into the 

provincial record, that we acknowledge this ultimate sacrifice, 

we have made progress however small it may be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, workers make the ultimate sacrifice in the course 

of building our communities, farms, towns, villages, and cities, 

all to make this province and country what we have today. They 

do not intend to die or get injured when they leave their homes 



2864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2009 

on a daily basis. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, for many this 

is the sad reality — the reality that they will not return to their 

families and loved ones, the reality that they will be injured or 

killed on the job. We honour them through our speeches. We 

pledge ourselves to recommit, and we work towards no injuries 

and no deaths on the job. 

 

But there is a nagging feeling that tugs at us and says we are not 

doing enough. Mr. Speaker, I feel that we have somehow failed 

these workers. We have failed their families, because for some 

reason there are more deaths this year and there are more names 

to be read. Because of the workers killed or injured at work, we 

renew our calls for new legislation, stiffer penalties, special 

prosecutors, more staff, more investigations, and more 

education. And we hope against all hope that there will be no 

more deaths and ultimately hoping that we will not read more 

names again next year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that we have a financially sound 

Workers’ Compensation Board so that those injured and killed 

at least have the hope that their families and loved ones have 

the financial protection for the loss of earnings that they 

themselves could have provided had they been alive. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the real solvency will come when there are no more 

injuries or workers killed on the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from myself and for all of us, I know we 

personally commit to redouble our efforts during this year and 

to propose solutions for this heavy load that refuses to let us be. 

I commit that I’ll work to implement my suggestions, my 

proposals, so that they become a reality — a reality which will 

see no more workers injured or killed on the job. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members in the legislature, I would like to introduce someone 

who has become a very important part of my life, and someone 

who has a keen interest in the politics of Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, someone who is obviously not here in Regina for 

the weather. Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 

all members of the legislature my partner, Ann St. Denis. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 

to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly two 

special guests who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. With us 

today is Ruth Smillie, the artistic director and CEO [chief 

executive officer] of Globe Theatre, Saskatchewan’s largest arts 

organization. A very important part of Globe Theatre’s mission 

under Ms. Smillie’s leadership is to work to support and 

promote Saskatchewan’s emerging artists. 

 

Accompanying Ms. Smillie is one of those artists. Mr. Joey 

Tremblay is originally from Ste. Marthe, Saskatchewan, which I 

believe is in your constituency, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Tremblay has 

been the artist in residence at Globe Theatre for the last six 

years. Today we announced that the Globe Theatre’s production 

of Elephant Wake, written and performed by Mr. Tremblay, has 

been selected by the Vancouver Olympic organizing committee 

to be presented at the 2010 Cultural Olympiad. 

 

Elephant Wake is a one-man play that tells the poignant story of 

a Saskatchewan francophone community which is now 

inhabited by only one remaining citizen. To have this play 

chosen among the first 20 pieces of VANOC [Vancouver 

organizing committee for the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic 

Winter Games] is certainly a very well-deserved honour for Mr. 

Tremblay and for the Globe Theatre. 

 

And for the province, this is a wonderful opportunity to 

showcase our Saskatchewan artists and present our cultural 

talents on the world stage at the Vancouver 2010 Cultural 

Olympiad. 

 

I ask my fellow members to join me in offering our 

congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

together with the minister to welcome Ruth and Joey to the 

legislature. And I know that they will be observing this place 

with keen interest because Joey, as a writer and as somebody 

who creates plays, he always sees opportunities for drama and 

for real situations in real life. And so, I invite both Ruth and 

Joey to be here at the legislature and look for good material for 

future entertainment for Saskatchewan residents. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce three people that are seated in your gallery. The first 

is Philipp Kollenda, a 17-year-old German exchange student 

from Hannover, Germany. He is here attending Dr. Martin 

LeBoldus High School. He is not comfortable with our weather. 

He indicates that the normal low where he comes from is about 

zero degrees, which we are seeing a lot of these days. 

 

The other student is Christoph Moeller. He is 17 years old. He 

is from Essen, Germany. He attends Luther High School. He 

says that he misses home because he misses good quality 

German chocolate. His mother recently sent him a care package 

which he very generously shared with me, and I’m not giving 

any of it back to him. 

 

They are joined today by Elaine Courchene who is their host. 

They have indicated that they’re enjoying their time here. And 

they’re both at an age where they’re learning to drive, and 



April 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2865 

Elaine has told me that she is having some difficulty convincing 

them that Saskatchewan highways — as good as they are 

because of our new Minister of Highways — they are not the 

autobahn, and she is going to ensure that they drive slowly and 

carefully and appropriately. 

 

I would ask that all members welcome all three of them to the 

Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melville 

Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and, through you, to all 

members of the House 10 grade 10 students from the Melville 

composite school. They are accompanied by their teacher, 

Stuart Wilson, and I’d like to thank Mr. Wilson for bringing his 

class in and touring them through the legislature. We all 

appreciate that. So I would ask all members to help me 

welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce to the Assembly a distinguished lady 

sitting in the west gallery. Hilda Rooke, who is visiting us from 

Mission, British Columbia, will be turning 101 years old 

tomorrow. And my information said that in her early years she 

lived in a mud house at Govan, Saskatchewan. Accompanying 

Mrs. Rooke is her daughter, Pearl, and son, Norman. Please join 

me in welcoming them to the Assembly, please. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to, in your gallery, introduce a couple of community members 

from La Ronge — Glen and Mary Ann Halkett of La Ronge. 

They’re here accompanying their sister, Mary Johnson, who 

lost her husband in a work-related accident. They’re here 

supporting her. And I just want to acknowledge them and thank 

them for accompanying her. And I guess, you’re in our hearts 

and prayers as a family. And I just want to welcome to their 

legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — And, members, it’s also my pleasure to 

introduce some guests who have joined us this afternoon. 

They’re seated in my gallery right at the top with Richard and 

Joanne Lepp, a group of Sunday school students from the 

People’s Church in Kipling — the one we attend — Chad 

Bruce, Aimee and Aynslee Hassler, Sarah Barbour, Samuel 

Toth, and Benno Jooste. And Benno, as his parents just moved 

to our area from South Africa, so he’s getting accustomed to the 

climate here. And we welcome them. They’re accompanied by 

their teachers, Sharon Barbour, Merodee Hassler, Taryn 

Rapitta, and of course my wonderful wife, Lois. I’d invite 

members to welcome this group of students to our Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my honour 

to present a petition in support of changes to The Highway 

Traffic Act, to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment. The 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres 

per hour when passing a snowplow with their warning 

lights activated on Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to present these petitions on behalf of 

people from Vibank, Regina, McLean, Qu’Appelle, and points 

around. I see Gray and some other places as well, so I’m 

pleased to present these petitions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the need for the Government of 

Saskatchewan to recognize the essential role of all health care 

providers as valued members of the health care team. And it 

speaks specifically to the issues of utilization and value of the 

full range of professional skills that are promoted through 

recruitment and retention and ensuring safe staffing levels are 

maintained and that this can only be achieved by a commitment 

to adequate funding and the installation of good faith in the 

provincial collective bargaining process. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



2866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of residents of Central 

Butte, Saskatoon, and surrounding areas. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of indexing the minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, we all 

know that indexing minimum wage would ensure the minimum 

wage earners would be able to maintain a standard of living as 

the cost of living increases. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitioners are presented from people from Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert, and Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

many of these workers who work for community-based 

organizations here in Saskatchewan have traditionally been 

underpaid, and many continue to earn poverty-level wages. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these folks come from Grenfell, Esterhazy, Regina, and 

Montmartre. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good residents 

of Rosthern, Osler, Duck Lake, and Agassiz, BC [British 

Columbia]. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to pave Highway 135 that runs through Pelican Narrows, 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by the leadership and 

community members of Pelican Narrows First Nation, the 

village of Pelican Narrows and area. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

on August 24, 2007. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good citizens of Pelican Narrows and area. I 

so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was 

my pleasure to join two-thirds of the Saskatoon MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], the Health minister, and 

a crowd of 600 who attended the 17th annual gala to benefit the 

Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation, held this past 

weekend in Saskatoon. The atmosphere was electric, largely 

due to the announcement on March 18 made by the Finance 

minister of a $200 million allocation to build our province’s 

very own children’s hospital. 

 

After advocating for a provincial children’s hospital since 1992, 

Brynn Boback-Lane, president and CEO, and the entire CHHF 

[Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation of Saskatchewan] 

team are seeing the dream become a reality. 

 

Earlier last Friday, John and Sonya Remai had delivered a $1 

million donation to purchase equipment for the facility. 

Generous but generally low-profile philanthropists for many 

worthwhile causes, the Remais came forward at this time in 

order to encourage other possible donors to give to the 

campaign. To quote: “When I saw it in the budget and read it in 

The StarPhoenix, I knew it was now real and time to step up to 



April 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2867 

the plate,” said John Remai. 

 

At the dinner, the Health minister made a brief presentation. 

Actually it was so good he did it twice, along with the health 

region’s Maura Davies, about the collaborative work to come in 

planning the location of the hospital and operational function 

and timelines. The 2009 Sponsor Child, Saskatoon’s 

tuxedo-clad Riley McIntosh, age 11, stole the show as he spoke 

briefly about his experience in fighting aplastic anemia since 

2006. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating 

the Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation for 17 years of 

advocating for a children’s hospital in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Day of Mourning for Workers 

Killed or Injured on the Job 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, 21 years ago, Saskatchewan 

became the first jurisdiction in all of Canada to make today, 

April 28, a statutory day of mourning for people who were 

killed or injured on the job. Glenn Hagel, then the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] MLA for Moose Jaw North, introduced the 

private members’ Bill, and the Assembly passed it 

unanimously. Now the day of mourning is observed across the 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a day to solemnly remember those whose 

lives were changed forever as a result of injury and those who 

lost their life while working to provide for themselves and their 

loved ones. 

 

During the year 2008, 31 Saskatchewan people died while 

working, and over 43,000 Saskatchewan people were injured in 

the workplace — one every 12 minutes of every workday. Mr. 

Speaker, New Democrats join with the family and friends of 

those killed and injured in recognizing that prevention of 

workplace tragedy rests with meaningful and enforced labour 

laws to protect workers and concurrently strong unions who 

advocate for their members’ well-being. Day of Mourning 

ceremonies will be held across the province today, including a 

vigil hosted by the Regina & District Labour Council to be held 

at 5:30 p.m. this evening in front of the cairn at the Regina city 

hall courtyard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this House make a 

renewed commitment to prevent the loss of life and livelihood 

in Saskatchewan workplaces, for one name read into the record 

is one name too many. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Knights of Columbus Annual Convention 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I had the pleasure of bringing greetings to the 

87th annual State Council Meeting of the Knights of Columbus 

of Saskatchewan held in Saskatoon on April 17 to 19. The 

convention was a call to return to the basics of the Columbian 

order, a call for Knights to hold fast to the Catholic principles 

around which the order was founded 127 years ago. 

 

Under the theme Follow Us — Help Us Build Up the Church, 

state deputy Arden Andreas, the state executive, and the 

delegates, their families from around the province celebrated 

the past year’s successes and deliberated on how to better serve 

the church and the community and to build up the church. The 

convention included business meetings, guest speakers and 

passed several resolutions, including deploring the trafficking 

of women and children; following their bishop’s lead in 

becoming aware of the issues surrounding the possible 

expansion of the uranium ministry and the building of a nuclear 

reactor; reaffirm support and unwavering loyalty to our Holy 

Father, Pope Benedict XVI, our bishops and priests. 

 

The 87th annual convention of the Knights of Columbus of 

Saskatchewan was a great success, holding firm to the 

principles of the order: charity, unity, fraternity, and patriotism. 

The delegates left Saskatoon better informed and inspired to go 

back to their communities and join together to help build up the 

church. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Saskatchewan Curling Association Forms 

Wheelchair Curling Team 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to speak to you today about the Saskatchewan Curling 

Association’s initiative to assemble a wheelchair curling team. 

Wheelchair curlers use a stick to push the rock down the ice 

with a teammate behind them to steady their chair. And 

wheelchair curling features an eight-end game, and there’s no 

sweeping involved, which appeals to many of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan Curling Association held a selection camp to 

choose the team, which has to have at least one member of each 

gender. The Saskatchewan team made their first appearance at a 

national competition in Nova Scotia at the end of March. Moose 

Jaw was well represented by curler Marie Wright and coach 

Lorraine Arguin, and the team also featured Del Huber, Gil 

Dash, Darwin Bender, and Calvin Bird, who curled out of the 

Regina Callie Club. 

 

The competition brought together 10 teams with over 50 curlers 

from across Canada, and many were joined by family and 

friends. The Saskatchewan team came very close to making the 

playoffs, finishing with four wins and five loss record in their 

first appearance at the event, and the top four teams went on to 

the playoff round. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the Saskatchewan Curling Association for this wonderful 

milestone to include wheelchair athletes, and our Saskatchewan 

team in their performance in what I’m sure was a memorable 

event for all. Thank you very much. 

 



2868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Lakeland Citizen of the Year 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

acknowledge and recognize Peggy Stevenson, one of the 

hardest working and dedicated women in my constituency. Mr. 

Speaker, Peggy was recently named Lakeland Citizen of the 

Year. She is well known in the Lakeland area as a dedicated 

mother to her to boys and her 11 foster children. 

 

Peggy has devoted her time and motherly love over more than 

six years to improve the lives of those less fortunate and has 

welcomed these foster children into her home with open arms. 

She has also received recognition from the Saskatchewan 

Housing Authority for 10 years of volunteering on the 

Northside housing board. For 15 years, Peggy made sure letters 

to Santa Claus that arrived at the Christopher Lake post office 

got to the North Pole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Peggy selflessly gave her time to make life better 

for the children in her community. Her actions offered hope. 

She filled her children with hope and taught the rest of us how 

to bless the lives of others. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 

to join me in celebrating Peggy Stevenson’s achievements and 

in congratulating her on being the 2009 Lakeland Citizen of the 

Year. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Business Wins Better Business Award 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gus’s Automotive of 

Prince Albert, located in Prince Albert Northcote recently won 

its first automotive product and services award at the 

Saskatchewan Better Business Bureau’s Torch Awards held in 

Regina. 

 

Gus’s Automotive has a policy of always letting the customer 

know what is going to be done to their vehicle and how much 

it’s going to cost before their mechanics do anything. They 

always ensure that their last quote is accurate so that there are 

no surprises for clients after the work is done. This attitude 

towards its customers is why this business is nominated for and 

won the Torch Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Torch Awards are handed out each year by the 

Saskatchewan Better Business Bureau to businesses across our 

province that demonstrate fair, ethical, and honest business 

practices with their customers and within their communities. 

There are seven different categories for the awards, based on 

different areas of business. 

 

The Better Business Bureau’s mission is to be the leader in 

advancing marketplace trust. The Torch Awards are one of the 

ways that the Better Business Bureau acknowledges businesses 

that fall within their mission and vision. 

Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert businesses are known for their 

friendly, efficient, and honest service. Prince Albert citizens 

know that they can trust the businesses that they patronize. 

Gus’s Automotive has demonstrated that they’re fair, ethical, 

and honest and the Saskatchewan Better Business Bureau has 

acknowledged something that many in Prince Albert have 

already known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating Gus’s Automotive on being a recipient of the 

2009 Better Business Bureau Torch Awards. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Arm River Communities Celebrate 100th Birthdays 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 

today to speak about the communities in my constituency that 

are celebrating their 100th birthdays this summer. It has been a 

pleasure for me to attend these volunteer community-organized 

events over the past four years. 

 

On Saturday, June 27, the community of Loreburn will be 

having their 100th event starting with a pancake breakfast, 

volleyball, horseshoes, and an evening street dance, and finally 

a fireworks display. My thanks in advance goes to the 

organizing Chair, Valerie Hagen, and her committee for their 

good work. 

 

On Wednesday, July 1, the community of Jansen and the RM 

[rural municipality] of Prairie Rose 309 host their centennial 

event that includes an antique road show, slo-pitch, bowling, 

music and talent show, supper, and fireworks. My thanks in 

advance to the volunteer organizers, Joni Mack, Bruce and 

Rhonda Elke, Audrey Crowe, Jack Robson, Rodney and Linda 

and Angel Liebrecht, Charles Wildeman, Dave Renwick, 

Dwayne Kochinsky, Melissa Klinger, Elmer Kinzel, and 

Roxanne Schindel. 

 

From Friday, July 3 through to Sunday, July 5, the community 

of Watrous celebrates their centennial event in conjunction with 

the 90th anniversary of Manitou Beach, and it includes a golf 

tournament, street dance, Danceland pancake breakfast, parade, 

slo-pitch, heritage tours, and a beach boogie. 

 

My thanks in advance to Chair Karen Mark and committee 

members: Pat Isherwood-Thomas, Lionel Sproule, Charles 

John, Ralph Schalm, Ed Collins, Christine McIver, Kathy 

Bergen, Shelley Engele, Margie Borsheim, and Murray Westby, 

Pat Weichel, and Glenda McArthur, and Helen Leslie-Mason. 

 

And finally from Friday, July 24 through to Sunday, July 26, 

the community . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2869 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

2010 Winter Olympics 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister responsible 

for the Olympics revealed that Saskatchewan taxpayers will be 

spending $3.6 million for a temporary building at the 

Vancouver Olympics. 

 

I had heard that housing was expensive in Vancouver, Mr. 

Speaker, but $3.6 million still seems expensive for only two 

weeks accommodation. I’m sure my colleagues from the North 

have better ideas on how to spend 3.6 million on housing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — To the minister: what is the benefit of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers of a $3.6 million building in 

Vancouver that will remain standing for just two weeks? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 

presence at the 2010 Olympics is an amazing opportunity to 

showcase our province to the country and to the world. 

 

Many of the promotional items, Mr. Speaker, such as the 

high-definition video and the still photos, will be used for years 

to come and hence creating a legacy product. 

 

This opportunity will be a showcase of Saskatchewan’s vibrant 

arts and cultural community and of course our athletes. We will 

also highlight the province’s strong economy, job opportunities, 

tourism opportunities, and quality of life. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the media was told that 

the purpose of the Saskatchewan Olympic pavilion is to attract 

new people to the province and to promote Saskatchewan 

business. Those are worthy goals, Mr. Speaker, but past 

Olympic champions like Catriona Le May Doan have arguably 

done more to promote the province at an Olympics than a 

pavilion that will stand for two weeks before being torn down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — To the minister: what share of the $7 million 

being spent for the Vancouver Olympics is being invested in 

Saskatchewan athletes? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, 

Saskatchewan’s presence at the 2010 Olympics is an amazing 

opportunity to showcase our province to the country and the 

world. Mr. Speaker, this government is looking forward, Mr. 

Speaker, and looking at what we have here in Saskatchewan to 

showcase to Canada and the world. The viewership, we 

anticipate the viewership at the 2010 Olympics will be around 3 

billion worldwide, Mr. Speaker. This is part of the reasons why 

it is so important that we tell the country and the world the 

Saskatchewan story. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister assured the 

media that any Sask Party ministers in Vancouver during the 

Olympics will only be there for a “business purpose.” Of 

course, ministers can find reasons to be in a given part of the 

country if properly motivated — like when seven Sask Party 

ministers found reason to be in Calgary on the same day as last 

year’s Calgary Premier’s Dinner. 

 

To the Premier: will he guarantee Saskatchewan taxpayers that 

cabinet ministers will not be booking business trips to 

Vancouver that are conveniently timed to coincide with the 

Olympics? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for the 

question. I stand by what I said yesterday, that there will be, for 

ministers or other members of this government to be at the 

Vancouver Olympics, it will be for a bona fide business 

purpose, Mr. Speaker. My mind has not changed. My statement 

has not changed. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. Yesterday the minister compared 

the $6 million spent by the Devine government on the 1986 

Vancouver Expo with the 7 million the Sask Party is spending 

on the 2010 Vancouver Olympics. Mr. Speaker, the opposition 

is willing to concede the point that this government manages 

public finances as prudently as the government of Grant 

Devine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are asking 

why, with families paying more for utilities, more for tuition, 

more for housing, and more to camp in our provincial parks, the 

Sask Party believes that spending $7 million on an Olympic 



2870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2009 

photo op is a priority. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party so out of touch? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you for the question. We said 

yesterday that Saskatchewan’s budget for the Olympics will be 

about in the middle of the pack out of the provinces within 

Canada compared to other provinces. We cannot expand on 

what the other provinces still . . . because the other provinces 

still have tenders out and lease agreements to sign, Mr. Speaker. 

To say any more in relation to what the other provinces are 

spending would betray their confidence and would not be fair to 

other province. 

 

The one amount, Mr. Speaker, that I can refer to, is Yukon has 

publicly announced that their province of approximately 30,000 

people is spending approximately $2.6 million. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Future of Former Mill Properties 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, news reports over the weekend 

suggest that Iogen is considering the site of the former Prince 

Albert pulp mill for its new ethanol plant. The Sask Party has 

repeatedly stated that the government will not invest public 

funds in forestry industry or in what it calls “mature industries.” 

 

To the minister: can the minister tell us if he’s considering 

Iogen as to be either a forestry industry business or part of a 

mature industry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 

have been talking with a number of people, including Domtar 

and Iogen, about the possibility of development or 

redevelopment for the P.A. [Prince Albert] site. This is an 

approach that we have taken. We have decided that the 

important thing here is to consult with the companies that may 

be interested in this, talk about the opportunities, talk about the 

investment that may be necessary, talk about the type of jobs 

that would be required in a facility of that type. 

 

Certainly this is a part of an innovation agenda that we have 

talked about in a number of times and occasions, and we think 

that this is a potential development for that. And there’ll be 

announcements at an appropriate time with respect to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Sask Party 

believes that Saskatchewan people should “educate 

themselves,” and that failure to ask particular questions is 

grounds to keep something under wraps. So I’ll try to cover all 

the bases with my next question. 

 

To the minister: what incentives or concessions, direct or 

indirect, financial, regulatory, or otherwise is the Sask Party 

willing to provide to Iogen to build an ethanol plant? Is the 

government prepared to provide indirect support by building or 

renovating infrastructure? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Member, 

we have said right from the very outset that if there is a need to 

look at infrastructure, the province would be prepared to do 

that. If there is a need to look at potential cogen opportunities, 

we’d be prepared to look at that. 

 

The one thing that we are not prepared to do is put $100 million 

on the table like you suggest we should be doing, as opposed, as 

opposed, Mr. Speaker, to the member from P.A. Northcote who 

says they shouldn’t be doing it. So the NDP should get their 

story straight over there. Do you want to put a bunch of money 

in, like $100 million, like the former premier and that member 

would suggest? Or should we do like the former member or the 

member from P.A. Northcote and not do it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I remind members and 

ministers and those asking the question to place their responses 

though the Chair. The member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Last week the Minister of Energy and 

Resources hinted that a deal might be close with respect to 

Weyerhaeuser facilities in Hudson Bay and Carrot River. We 

know that C & C Wood Products has expressed interest in these 

facilities in the past, and we know that C & C was at one point 

seeking major financial concessions from the government in 

exchange for its investment. 

 

To the minister: will the Sask Party be providing any financial 

assistance, incentives, concessions, direct or indirect, to C & C 

Wood Products or any other possible buyer of the mills in 

Hudson Bay and Carrot River? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s position 

has always been that we will provide the best possible business 

climate for business to do their work here in Saskatchewan. 

Clearly companies are responding to that. They’re moving to 

Saskatchewan in record numbers. 

 

People are moving from across Canada to this province in 



April 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2871 

record numbers. And it should come as no surprise, given the 

fact that now they have a business-friendly environment which 

to work within. They are coming to this province in 

unprecedented numbers. This may be just another example of 

that. 

 

I would say to the member opposite, just stay tuned. There will 

be announcements when the companies themselves decide to 

proceed with that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Severance for Former Public Servants 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, last fall the Sask Party told us 

that they’d already spent over $4 million on severance packages 

for civil servants that were fired without cause when they came 

to government; that was $4 million over eight months ago. So 

to the Deputy Premier: we know the government has finalized 

more settlements since that fall time. Can he give us the total 

figure of all of the severance packages that the government has 

settled to date. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the Assembly 

that these things are an ongoing matter. A number of them are 

before the courts and it would be inappropriate to try and 

speculate the different stages that the different matters are at. So 

it’ll all come out in estimates. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of this government to treat 

these people with compassion and fairness and it would not be 

appropriate for this Assembly to be discussing the amount of 

the various settlements at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we are not speaking about an 

individual case. We are asking a very simple question. The 

Government of Saskatchewan upon its election terminated a 

number of people in the classified public service without cause. 

Last fall they advised us that they had spent $4 million on 

severance. 

 

We have had many more severance packages that have been 

negotiated. Can the Government of Saskatchewan confirm 

today that as of January they have negotiated over $7 million in 

severance to those terminated public employees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a government that’s 

known for being open and transparent and accountable. This is 

a government that will, when those files are settled, we will 

provide all of the information that has been requested, all of the 

information that’s appropriate to release. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

are quite prepared to compile the information for the 

settlements that have been made to date and provide that 

information as well. It is our intention to provide all of the 

information to the taxpayers. 

 

When governments change, Mr. Speaker, people are changed, 

people are let go, people are hired and that is all information 

that is public record. And it is the intention of this government 

to be open, transparent, and fully accountable to the taxpayers 

of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has the opportunity 

to be open and transparent. We have a list of employees who 

have severance packages totalling over $7 million. There’s one 

employee who has negotiated a severance package that isn’t on 

the list. That employee’s name is John Wright, the former 

deputy minister of Health. Can the minister confirm today that 

Mr. Wright, when you include his pension benefits that go 

forward, was able to negotiate a severance package worth over 

$1 million? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated earlier that we 

are not prepared to debate, negotiate, or settle individual cases 

on the floor of this Assembly, nor are we prepared to give away 

information that violates the confidentiality and privacy of 

specific individuals. We will provide the information when the 

settlements are concluded. We will provide it through public 

estimates and we will provide information as to all of the 

settlements, Mr. Speaker, that have been made up to today’s 

date. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can ask the questions on a 

global basis and we will provide that answer. But we will not 

now or will not at any time discuss cases that are still before the 

court that have not yet been concluded. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I want the minister to be very 

open and transparent. Mr. Wright has a negotiated severance 

package; it is not before the courts. The members opposite have 

been quite prepared to give us a summary of severance 

payments for public servants that were dismissed after 

November 30, 2007 up until January 31, 2009. 

 



2872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2009 

Mr. Wright has negotiated a severance package. Can the 

minister confirm that that severance package, particularly when 

you look at his contributions to the defined pension plan, is 

worth over $1 million, and that the taxpayers have paid this 

amount because that government fired — fired — a long-term 

public servant, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

thinks that we will now or at any other time discuss an 

individual case on the floor of this Assembly, she is sorely 

mistaken. Mr. Speaker, we will take notice of the question, we 

will look at and determine whether the settlement has been 

concluded or not, and we will provide appropriate information. 

 

But we will not discuss the matter before it is settled and before 

we have full and final approval from everybody that has to be 

involved in it, which may include the courts, it may include 

officials within the Ministry of Justice, it may include Mr. 

Wright’s personal financial advisers. And it is not appropriate, 

Mr. Speaker, to be discussing or negotiating that type of matter 

on the floor of this Assembly, and we will not participate in it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Disposal of Nuclear Waste 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Minister for CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] told the 

members of this Assembly that this government is looking at 

nuclear waste storage. This is in complete contradiction to the 

Minister Responsible for Enterprise and Innovation who said 

quite specifically that the government is not looking at waste 

storage. Once again, as is too often the case with this 

government, the right hand doesn’t know what the extreme 

right hand is doing. 

 

To the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation: is the CIC 

minister right? Is he right? Are they both wrong? Who should 

the people of Saskatchewan trust? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for this question. Certainly I stated the answer before, 

and I’ll state it again. This government is not considering 

disposal of nuclear waste in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — April 22 in this Chamber, the Minister for CIC 

said, and I quote, “And yes, we’re going to look at storage.” Mr. 

Speaker, this government talks in circles. Saskatchewan people 

want to know — and more importantly have the right to know 

— what will happen to the nuclear waste produced by a reactor. 

 

To the minister: what will his government do with nuclear 

waste produced at a reactor built in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for that question as well. I know that he asks it solely 

for the purpose of obtaining information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, clearly even in the event that all of the lights turn 

green and a nuclear reactor is built at some point in this 

province, it certainly won’t happen until the year 2020 at the 

very earliest, if it ever happens, Mr. Speaker. And by then, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s fully anticipated that the federal government will 

have a waste disposal facility in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — So how is it that his own consultation, one of 

the five breakout sessions, is on nuclear waste? It’s his 

consultation. And he says that it’s not possible in 

Saskatchewan. Why is he wasting the taxpayers’ money and 

time? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] 

says that this report, the government should “Support any 

willing host community that comes forward through this 

process . . . [in] the development of the deep geological 

repository in the context of a broader nuclear development 

strategy.” 

 

To the minister: yes or no, will this government support a 

Saskatchewan community willing to store nuclear waste? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 

say to the member through you, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government doesn’t consider consulting with the people of 

Saskatchewan a waste of taxpayers’ money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — And I’ve said — now this will be the 

second time today, Mr. Speaker, and many times in the past — 

that this government is not considering the disposal of nuclear 

waste in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2873 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Enterprise and 

Innovation says clearly waste storage is not an option, yet they 

have it included in their own consultation, and a year ago the 

Minister of the Environment, and Energy and Resources, met 

with the Nuclear Waste Management Organization. To the 

minister: if nuclear waste storage was never on the table, what 

were they discussing with the Nuclear Waste Management 

Organization? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member for that question, but clearly I haven’t had a 

meeting with that organization. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Here we go, Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that 

because they’re all on different pages, they refuse to answer 

simple questions. Mr. Speaker, the nuclear power public 

consultation process is about to get under way. Each forum will 

include five discussion sessions based on each chapter of the 

UDP report. One of those chapters is a nuclear waste storage 

management session. If it’s as the Minister for Enterprise and 

Innovation said March 30 and waste storage is off the table, 

why is it part of his own consultation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate that question from the member as well, but I’ve 

previously stated the answer to that one too, Mr. Speaker. And 

the answer is that the waste disposal was not originally included 

in the mandate of the UDP. The UDP came back to this 

government and asked if we would include it because they felt 

that it should be discussed in the overall picture of the nuclear 

cycle. So we consented to allow them to do that. Nothing has 

changed about our position on the disposal of nuclear waste in 

the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Could the minister then explain why one of the 

members of his government said in this House just this week 

that nuclear storage is indeed on the table and that they’re 

discussing it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — The subject of nuclear waste will clearly 

be discussed at the public consultation and that’s, I’m sure, 

what the member was speaking of. And you know, I don’t know 

how much more clearly I can say it. This will be what, the 

fourth time now, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve answered this question. 

The Government of Saskatchewan is not considering the 

disposal of nuclear waste in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Maybe he could inform the people of 

Saskatchewan then who’s in charge of this file. Is it that 

minister, is it him, or is it the Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s clearly 

myself that’s responsible for this file, Mr. Speaker, and that 

would explain the reason why I’m answering the questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — It’s become crystal clear, Mr. Speaker, on this 

file, what they do is tell people what they think people want to 

hear. One day no public money will be spent on a reactor. The 

next day all options are on the table. One day private companies 

are paying for export grids. The next, these were just 

hypothetical conversations that they’ve had. One day they’re 

looking at nuclear waste storage. The next day they’re not. One 

day the Premier says that this decision has to be made by the 

end of 2009. The next day the minister said a decision is years 

and years away. 

 

So it’s no wonder that people have no trust with them when it 

comes to this issue, Mr. Speaker. And they mock questions in 

this Assembly that we’re asking on behalf of the people. 

 

To the minister: when will he stop this nuclear process so his 

government can finally give people some straight answers? On 

a file as important as this, why are they so clueless? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I truly do 

appreciate that question from the member opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. And it gives me a beautiful opportunity to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan that one of the reasons that we’re 

pursuing this file as we are, we’re pursuing public consultations 

on the findings of the UDP. One of the reasons we’re going 



2874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2009 

ahead with that, Mr. Speaker, is because every single one of 

those members voted in favour of a motion to do something. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009/ 

Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc 

de la Reine 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 92, 

The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 92, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? Agreed . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 93, 

The Condominium Property Amendment, 2009 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 93, The Condominium Property Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 61, The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 

2008 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Government has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 61, The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2008 with amendment and that its amendments 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall the amendments be read 

the first time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 



April 28, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2875 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 61, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 with amendment be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 85, The Municipal Grants Act with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill and its amendments be now read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 85, The Municipal Grants 

Act with amendment and that the Bill and its amendments be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall the amendments be read 

the first time? 

 

I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

the amendments now be read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs that Bill No. 85, The 

Municipal Grants Act with amendment be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 68, the arts professional Act without amendments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 



2876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2009 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — I request leave to waive consideration in the 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 68, The Arts Professions 

Act without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/ 

Loi sur les professions artistiques 
 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — I move that this Bill be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport that Bill No. 

68, The Arts Professions Act without amendment be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

facilitate the standing committees on Crown and Central 

Agencies and the Economy to do their important work, I move 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 

that, in order to facilitate the work of standing committees, this 

House do now stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:36.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2863 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2863 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2864 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2864 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2865 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2865 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2865 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2865 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2866 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2866 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2866 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2866 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Children’s Health & Hospital Foundation 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2866 

 Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2867 

 Knights of Columbus Annual Convention 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2867 

 Saskatchewan Curling Association Forms Wheelchair Curling Team 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2867 

 Lakeland Citizen of the Year 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2868 

 Prince Albert Business Wins Better Business Award 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2868 

 Arm River Communities Celebrate 100th Birthdays 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2868 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 2010 Winter Olympics 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2869 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2869 

 Future of Former Mill Properties 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2870 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2870 

 Severance for Former Public Servants 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2871 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2871 

 Disposal of Nuclear Waste 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2872 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2872 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009/ 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2874 

 Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2874 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2874 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2874 

  



 

 Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2875 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2875 

 Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2875 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 2876 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


