




















































Hansard: November 16, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 14A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3573 

 November 16, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture, the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the west gallery I’d like to introduce the members to 

Chad MacPherson, general manager of the stock growers; and 

Dave Marit, president of SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities]. And I want to ask everyone to welcome 

them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and all the members in the legislature, I’d like to introduce 

a delegation that’s seated in the west gallery. They are the 

individuals that work at Red Cross, through the Red Cross and 

through the Red Cross RespectEd program. And perhaps they 

could stand as I call their names. 

 

We have with us today Mr. Norm Jakubowski, Richard Kies, 

Rebecca Benko, Dee Friday, Amanda Ulrich, Diane Francoeur, 

and Brad Hebert. These individuals are here today, of course, to 

kick off Anti-Bullying Week, national Anti-Bullying Week. 

And these individuals do a tremendous amount of work within 

the province on various fronts, and one of them of course is an 

anti-bullying strategy and campaign. 

 

And I’d like all members of the legislature to welcome them 

here today to the legislature, as they are here to hear a 

member’s statement being read in the future. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that workers in community-based organizations, 

CBOs, in Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid. And 

many continue to earn poverty-level wages, and these low 

wages impact workers and result in high staff turnover. And the 

subsequent lack of caregiver continuity has a negative impact 

on the quality of care clients receive. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan that ensures CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Canora, Yorkton, 

Saltcoats. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, individuals who signed this petition are from 

communities all over Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who have yet not had any commitment of 

assistance. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. I so present. 

 



3574 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, we all hope that the Saskatchewan government 

commits to adequate funding and the installation of good faith 

for the provincial bargaining process, Mr. Speaker. And the 

petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Outlook, Beechy, 

Delisle, Milden, Cudworth, Wakaw, and Rosetown. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise in support of a petition or to present a petition in support of 

affordable rents and housing in The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker: 

 

The petitioners humbly pray that the honourable 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords, 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all from the city of North 

Battleford, the majority of whom reside in Killdeer Apartments. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of their finances by the Sask 

Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I present these on behalf of concerned residents of Regina. I so 

present. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Northern Drug and Gang Enforcement Unit 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, in mid-September of this year, our 

government announced the northern drug and gang enforcement 

unit. For years now communities in the North have identified a 

need to establish a dedicated enforcement unit to work with 

partners to address the problems of illegal drug use and gang 

activities. 

 

According to the 2007 police-reported crime data, the amount 

of crime rate in the northern administrative district was about 

six times higher than the corresponding provincial rate, and 

overall crime rate was more than four times higher. 

 

After years of being ignored by the previous administration, our 

government responded to these concerns from northern 

communities by providing funding to the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] and the Prince Albert Police Service 

to create this enforcement unit. Provincial funding to support 

this initiative totals $380,000 in the 2009-10 year and will 

increase to $760,000 in the ’10-11 year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although this unit has only been operational for a 

month now, we are already hearing about the great work being 

done by them in the northern communities. On October 19th, 

the unit assisted RCMP in La Loche with the arrest of a 

41-year-old man. Members seized marijuana, cash, and rifles. 

Then on October 27th, officers made another arrest in Buffalo 

Narrows where, after searching a home, officers discovered 

cocaine and cash. Finally on October 29th, officers seized 

marijuana, cash, and a rifle from a home in Prince Albert. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the seven members of this unit on their first 

arrests. On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, we 

thank them for their hard work and dedication up north. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

National Medicare Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 16 to 20 

marks National Medicare Week. This week is designed to allow 

Canadians to pledge their support for public health care. The 

Canadian Health Coalition has designed an online form where 

Canadians can sign on, and it reads as follows: 

 

As a Canadian, I believe access to quality health care must 

be based on need, not ability to pay. 

 

Our public health care reflects those values of equality and 

fairness. 

 

We must improve our public health care for everyone, 

instead of expanding private for-profit services that benefit 

only a few. 

 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3575 

I pledge my support for the protection and improvement of 

public health care in Canada. 

 

So far more than 6,000 people have signed the pledge, 

including Shirley Douglas, Maude Barlow, and Allan Blakeney. 

According to a Nanos research poll, 90 per cent of Canadians 

remain supportive of public health care — 90 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This pledge and this entire week is a very important initiative. 

Attacks on medicare are occurring across the country and 

indeed right here in our province. The Wall government, the 

Sask Party government, has told us during this session of the 

legislature that they are willing to pay a premium to ship 

Saskatchewan citizens out of the province for their surgeries. 

Instead of investing in the public health care system right here 

at home, they are willing to finance the surgical tourism 

industry in BC [British Columbia]. This is a blatant 

encouragement of a two-tier health care system, ensuring that 

those who can finance their own trip to BC jump to the front of 

the line. 

 

In the light of these recent events, it is essential, now more than 

ever, that we tell this government that the people of 

Saskatchewan support medicare and its principles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members and citizens to join me in 

signing the pledge to support medicare and in celebrating 

National Medicare Week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Good News for Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I got up this 

morning, I thought to myself, self, it’s a great day to be alive. 

The Riders are going to the Western final. I live in the greatest 

province in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s November 16, and I 

didn’t have to scrape my windshield. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan people are feeling the same 

way. You only have to look as far as the local car dealership to 

see that, Mr. Speaker. They sold more cars in a single month 

than any other dealership in Canada. The owner says, in his 20 

years of business, he’s never seen anything like it. 

 

I even have more good news, Mr. Speaker. In September, 

Saskatchewan had the highest increase in Canada in 

manufacturing sales. Now when I look at the grumpy feeling of 

faces of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, and then look at 

today’s sunny skies, I just want to sing: 

 

I can see clearly now the rain has gone. 

I can see all obstacles in my way. 

Gone are the dark clouds that made me blind. 

It’s going to be a bright, bright sunshiny day. 

 

Turn those frowns upside down. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

International Day for Tolerance 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 

November 16, marks International Day for Tolerance. Fourteen 

years ago today, UNESCO [United Nations Educational, 

Scientific, and Cultural Organization] member states, of which 

Canada is one, adopted the Declaration of Principles on 

Tolerance. 

 

This declaration provides for the meaning and the practice of 

tolerance and lays out the following ideas. Tolerance is respect, 

acceptance, and appreciation of the rich diversity of our world’s 

cultures, our forms of expression, and our ways of being 

human. At one time, tolerance used to refer mainly to ethnic 

and religious differences, but it can also be applied to gender, 

sexual orientation, people with physical and intellectual 

disabilities, and other differences too. 

 

As the UN [United Nations] quite simply puts it, tolerance is 

harmony in difference. This declaration makes it clear that 

practicing tolerance does not mean that we tolerate social 

injustice, nor does it mean we need to abandon or weaken our 

own convictions. Rather it means we are free to adhere to our 

own convictions and need to accept that others adhere to theirs. 

It means accepting the fact that we humans, who are naturally 

diverse in all kinds of ways, have the right to live in peace and 

to be as we are. One might say tolerance means treating others 

the way we would like to be treated. 

 

Intolerance comes in many forms and includes outright injustice 

and violence. But discrimination and marginalization of 

vulnerable groups are also common forms of intolerance. This 

declaration points out — with globalization, increasing mobility 

and communication, large-scale migration, and displacement of 

populations among other things — practising tolerance today is 

more important than ever. 

 

In our role as elected members, how can we practice and 

promote tolerance? We need to think about our words, our 

actions, and sometimes our inactions, and the legislation we 

propose. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members today to join with me in 

celebrating International Day for Tolerance and to consider the 

role we play as elected members in enhancing tolerance in our 

province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Martin Glackin Honoured for Years of Service 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a sunny prairie 

day, Martin Glackin was honoured by the RM [rural 

municipality] of Reford which he served not only as a 

councillor and reeve, but also as an employee. 

 

Martin started working for the RM in 1951 building roads and 

continued until 1959. Martin became a councillor in 1968, 

assumed the position of reeve in 1978 which he held until he 

retired in 2002. He was very proud of the many 

accomplishments of the RM during his time on council. The 

one that was most notable was the building of the Tramping 

Lake causeway. 



3576 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

[13:45] 

 

Martin was a hands-on reeve, making sure everything ran 

smoothly for the ratepayers and the council. Martin was very 

dedicated, putting in lots of hours checking out and supervising 

every project Reford had, whether it was the building of a 

causeway or putting in an approach. Martin was not only 

worried about the roads, but also the ditches. He tried to make 

sure that the ditches remained free of any glass containers or 

cans that could potentially cause harm. 

 

The RM of Reford wanted a way of recognizing Martin’s 

contribution to the RM which would mean something to Martin, 

but also something that would last for years to come. On 

August 10th, the RM erected the sign Martin Glackin Road on 

the newest road in the RM. Congratulations and thank you to 

Martin Glackin on the many years of service to the RM of 

Reford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

National Anti-Bullying Week 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, November 15th to the 21st is 

National Anti-Bullying Week. The Canadian Red Cross, 

through their RespectEd program, is raising awareness of this 

critical issue for our youth. 

 

Through education, youth learn that bullying is not normal 

behaviour, and that no one deserves to be bullied or treated with 

disrespect. Unfortunately we know that millions of youth suffer 

in silence because they find themselves without support or the 

skills needed to handle these situations. The impact of youth 

bullying harassment ranges from anxiety to missing school, to 

illness, to a tragic event of suicide. The Red Cross RespectEd 

program is active in many schools and school divisions across 

Saskatchewan. Parents, staff, and students learn that bullying is 

not just a school issue; it’s a community issue that comes to 

school. 

 

Two young women, Brea Lawrenson and Braiden Turner, who 

were bullied in their youth, are the national spokespersons for 

the Canadian Red Cross RespectEd program. They are visiting 

schools across Canada, targeting students in grades 5 to 8. They 

wrote a song, “Black and Purple,” which tells about the pain of 

both victims and bullies and the emotional and sometimes 

physical harm bullying does. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our obligation to empower our youth to 

support each other, and in doing so create safer environments 

for everyone. The outcome we are all looking for is a bully-free 

province. I would like to commend the efforts of the Red Cross 

and the provincial RespectEd program in combating youth 

bullying in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Movember 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

inform the Assembly of the worldwide movement of Movember 

— the month formerly known as November and “mo” for 

moustache. Movember is changing the face of men’s health. 

 

You may have noticed the early stages of a fantastic cop ’stache 

on the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy or the caterpillar 

warming the upper lip of the Minister of Justice. In fact, if you 

look close, Mr. Speaker, very close at many members and staff 

who have joined the Legislative Push Brooms, our Movember 

team, you will see the start of a moustache — some who have 

had to shave their mos in order to regrow a new mo, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Movember is all about raising funds for Prostate 

Cancer Canada. One in six men will be diagnosed with prostate 

cancer. It is the most common cancer to affect Canadian men. 

Prostate Cancer Canada uses the funds raised to educate the 

public about the disease, to support people who have been 

affected, and to fund research into prevention, detection, and 

prostate cancer treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the moustache has long been a symbol of a rugged 

man, from Wyatt Earp to Tom Selleck. Movember sends a 

message that prostate cancer is a non-discriminating disease 

that can affect even the manliest of men. 

 

I would like to invite everyone to give generously to any mo out 

there that they see this month. They are changing the face of 

men’s health, one ’stache at a time. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Support for Livestock Producers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, the agriculture industry in 

the province, and especially livestock industry, is being hit with 

a perfect storm: higher input costs, whether it’s feed or the fuel 

needed in the production operation; at the same time, borders 

are being closed for much of our livestock products; at the same 

time, prices are low. 

 

My question to the minister who said last Thursday, and I 

quote, “The potash industry has slowed right down and we also 

have restraints right now.” To the question being asked by 

many producers: when will this minister come forward with a 

meaningful program to see that our livestock producers are 

protected this winter? Or will they, like other members of our 

society, suffer the consequences of the waste and 

mismanagement of this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll maybe do a quick review for the member opposite 

because he missed a number of years in this province and things 

have changed here. 

 

The government actually pays some attention to rural 

Saskatchewan, not like the 16 years previous. He might need to 

be reminded, Mr. Speaker, that we put a $70 million cattle and 

hog support loan program in place. In fact the last of those 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3577 

cheques went out in July — a short three months ago, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Did it solve all the problems out there in rural Saskatchewan in 

the livestock sector? Not for a minute. But I’ll tell you what it 

did do. It did a lot more than doing nothing like the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] did for 16 years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is correct. 

Some things have changed. We did have balanced budgets. 

Cattle production was increasing. It’s now reduced, and hog 

production as well. 

 

My question to the minister, who is a very good friend with 

Ottawa and the Prime Minister. And I know that this 

government has run out of money. That’s an admission they 

made last week with the announcement that we’re now in 

deficit and that we now have spent up the $2.3 billion left. In a 

quote that the minister made in the Lloydminster newspaper, he 

said: 

 

When we go to Ottawa, the whole picture has changed. We 

scared the hell out of them down there. 

 

End of quote. I wonder, while they’re shaking in their boots in 

Ottawa, have you managed to get any money for the producers 

in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to 

the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, actually we have got some 

money. We brought into place a water program last year, and it 

started out to be $15 million for the southwest . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Allow the 

minister to respond to the member’s question. I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition laughs about the water 

program. And yet the NDP, for four or five years, did nothing 

when there was a drought in southwest Saskatchewan. 

 

We designed a water program, Mr. Speaker, $6 million 

originally and $9 million federally. That’s where the federal 

government come to the table. We did a rebate program for 

gophers. They’re also assisting with things like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the uptake for the water program was so 

great — and actually the applications amounted to $29 million 

— what did we do? We went to Ottawa and asked them to cost 

share it and we put that amount of money in. We didn’t cut the 

program off at the 15 million. We honoured our commitment, 

give that to the people of southwest Saskatchewan. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite, the farmers and 

ranchers in southwest Saskatchewan seemed to like that 

program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — To the Minister of Agriculture. And as 

has been indicated, the number of hogs being produced in this 

province, the breeding herd is down — also for cattle — and 

that will continue unless there’s help for livestock producers 

this winter. 

 

I understand that in the past year the minister and the Sask Party 

government, a year ago, gave half a bale per cow to farmers. 

But he may not know it or the government may not know it, but 

that half bale has been eaten up by the cows, and people are 

wondering what is going to happen this winter. 

 

To the minister: the Liberal government of Ontario got billions 

of dollars for the auto industry; the Liberal government in 

British Columbia got huge payments for the forest industry. 

When will this minister come forward with a meaningful 

program to help support this industry which is in danger of 

collapsing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I just want to remind the member opposite, the Leader 

of the Opposition, about the education tax issue in the province 

of Saskatchewan. For many years at SARM convention, the 

previous government was lobbied for help with the education 

tax on farm and ranch lands. What did they do about it, Mr. 

Speaker? They said the status quo isn’t on and didn’t, long 

term, address that problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as producers, whether you’re on the grain side or 

the cattle side right now, you’re going to pay your taxes. And 

every producer in this province, unless their assessment has 

gone up dramatically, is finding it far cheaper to pay their 

education tax on farm land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s other areas. The hog TAP [targeted 

assistance program] program that we brought in place just lately 

with the blessing of the federal government, who gives hog 

producers an advance on their AgriStability program. 

Something not done by the previous government; in fact, I 

would say not even asked for by the previous government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is saying we 

get nothing from Ottawa. How would he know? Him and his 

former colleague walked out on most meetings when they were 

actually designing these programs. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Severance and Present Employment of Former 

Public Servant 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, people are now learning how 

badly the Sask Party has mismanaged our province’s finances. 

We all remember when the Premier brought in Garnet Garven 

to be his deputy minister. The pattern of the Sask Party is to 

bring in their friends, find out that they don’t like the job 

they’re doing, fire them, and then give them severance. We’ve 



3578 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

seen this with Tim Korol and Allan Hansen and Terry Coleman. 

 

To the Premier: does he still stand by his statement that he 

made to this House that Garnet Garven was paid no severance? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members will realize that if you 

continue to interfere, you’re taking away from your question 

period time. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this government is like no 

other . . . like every other government in the country. It is 

unique in many ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the previous administration terminated 

people every single year of their administration — in 1993, 121; 

1994, 32; 1996, 176; and so on right up to the present, Mr. 

Speaker. This government is exactly the same. People will 

come and people will go. When people are outplaced by this 

government, they will be treated with dignity, compassion, and 

grace, Mr. Speaker. We will work within the scope of the law to 

ensure that they receive an appropriate, fair, and compassionate 

settlement in a timely manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will not discuss individual cases or individual matters, 

whether there was or was not just cause, because in most cases 

in law there is not. But people can see what is paid out. There is 

no secret what is paid out. We will continue to handle the 

matters exactly as they should be handled, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The Sask Party hasn’t stopped paying off 

their friends; they’re just getting sneakier about it. Garnet 

Garven has joined the Public Policy Forum as the person 

running the Western office — the very same Western office that 

this government is paying for. Will the Premier just admit that 

the $600,000 the Sask Party is spending on this branch office of 

a think tank is nothing other than a soft landing for Garnet 

Garven? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide an update on the Public Policy Forum. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a reputable Public Policy Forum. It was 

established in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. This organization was 

looking for a Western office. They looked at places like 

Vancouver or Calgary and, Mr. Speaker, we’re delighted to say 

that their Western office is located right here in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker. We think that that demonstrates the leadership that 

Saskatchewan is now playing, not just in the West, but right 

across the country. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have come forward with $600,000. Mr. 

Speaker, that should come as no surprise to the members 

opposite because in question 337 that was asked, we responded. 

They have that information, Mr. Speaker. We’re serving the 

interests of the people of this province, and that includes taking 

an aggressive approach on issues of public policy. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can just imagine how 

delighted they are. The government was looking for a soft 

landing for Garnet Garven, and the public policy institute was 

looking for a Western Canadian office. So we have $600,000 

and the Sask Party can claim no connection between Mr. 

Garven leaving and this money going to set up a branch office, 

but that is as unbelievable, or as believable as spending a third 

of a million dollars on Doug Emsley for additional spam, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So to the Premier: why are two Sask Party insiders like Emsley 

and Garven getting almost $1 million between them, when this 

government is running close to or more than $1 billion deficit, 

and it’s cutting money and services left, right, and centre, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that we 

have a government policy to provide out-of-scope employees 

receiving notice of termination with an offer of severance based 

on common law principles. Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of good 

people that have worked for this government and for members 

opposite. I think from today’s perspective the current member 

from Douglas Park and the Leader of the Opposition should 

remember what he said in November of 1991. He said 

government needs “. . . people who better reflect the needs of 

the government.” Mr. Speaker, we’re making sure that we have 

an opportunity to have people that are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. The minister may 

complete her response. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity 

now. Our government is committed to strengthening people for 

. . . the public servants. And we are looking at opportunities 

through the Transparency International Canada Inc. and the 

federal accountability initiative and looking for a public 

integrity commissioner. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased with the 

work our government is doing with our employees. They’re 

very important to our government as we’re going forward, and 

we value every one of them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve asked three 

questions and I’ve gotten three ministers: Justice, Advanced 

Education, and the Public Service Commission. So I’m going to 

try a fourth question and maybe someone will actually answer 

the question. 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3579 

We have a man by the name of Garnet Garven that was hired by 

the Sask Party as soon as they came to office. That man was 

later dismissed, severed, whatever, and sent back to the 

University of Regina, but he didn’t have a place to go to. At the 

time the government said that they were going to set up a 

Western office for this policy forum. 

 

Can the government confirm . . . Can they just tell us the truth. 

Just tell us the truth. Is the $600,000 for the Public Policy 

Forum a severance pay to Garnet Garven? Just tell us the truth. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I would ask that when 

members are placing a question that the question be given in a 

manner that is not implying an individual is not being actually 

truthful. Members know the rules, not to imply indirectly what 

they would do directly. I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity. The investment, that’s a three-year investment in 

the Public Policy Forum, no, Mr. Speaker, it’s in no way as the 

member opposite would suggest. This is an investment in the 

future of the people of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Future of Regina and Moose Jaw Casinos 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will soon learn the details 

of just how badly this government has mismanaged the 

provincial budget. Unrealistic revenue projections, runaway 

spending are getting to be the financial hallmark of this 

government. And in recent weeks the government has seemed 

so strapped for cash that it appears to be operating out of 

desperation rather than some good old common sense. 

 

And on that point, Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that 

the budget situation has become so bad that this government is 

currently considering the sale of Casino Regina and Moose 

Jaw? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the government will release its mid-year report on 

Thursday. And certainly we can report, as we have last week, 

that challenges in our revenue projections from the lack of sales 

of potash are significant. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a significant 

challenge for our government and our administration. And I 

have to reiterate that while we have a revenue challenge, the 

province’s economy is doing very well, thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard just over the weekend that Saskatchewan 

dealer was actually leading the country in the sales of cars. And 

that’s very significant, and I hope that members will take that 

into account. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve been leading in manufacturing one month 

over last — September over August — of 16 per cent, and that 

is very good. Mr. Speaker, all of these things point to future 

opportunities for our administration and the people of this 

province. And we will have the budgetary capacity to realize 

that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, we never said that the economy 

and the private sector is having problems. It’s this government 

and their mismanagement of the government revenue that’s the 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister should know that Ken Thomas, the 

First Nations economic development consultant, has been 

meeting with First Nations leaders around Saskatchewan telling 

them that the government wants to sell Casinos Regina and 

Moose Jaw to SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 

Inc.], and telling them that the government could use the 

proceeds from such a sale to finance the domed stadium project 

here in Regina. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously the minister avoided the answer, 

talked about their financial problems. So by that I would almost 

guess that the answer is yes, they have been looking at this. 

 

Is the government in negotiations with this or any other group 

for the sale of Casino Regina and Casino Moose Jaw? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise in the House and address that question. It’s 

incorrect to assume anything with regard to ongoing 

negotiations and discussions. While it is true that a number of 

parties have expressed interest over the years — this year and in 

years past — in acquiring those properties, no decisions have 

been made whatsoever, none at all. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan are getting concerned because this Premier seems 

to have a considerable preponderance, I guess, towards big 

projects — clean coal, nuclear reactors, the CO2 with the United 

States, and the domed stadium. People want to know how these 

projects are going to be financed and paid for. 

 

And when my colleague from Regina Elphinstone asked the 

other day about this question connected to Casinos Regina and 

Moose Jaw, the minister said out in the media that we’ll look at 

that, of the casinos picking up the operating or overexpenditure 

in a domed stadium. 

 

And since its creation, we have to look at the Gaming Corp. 

And it’s returned $356 million in profits into the coffers of the 

Government of Saskatchewan that provides benefits for 

taxpayers. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, still not a straight answer from the Minister of 

Finance and not a straight answer from the minister responsible. 



3580 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

Because what the question was is, what negotiations, if any 

negotiations, are being currently conducted, and why would this 

government be prepared to trade some strong annual dividends 

for these profitable operations for a one-time cash injection into 

their coffers unless they’re absolutely desperate for cash? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, we can be a lot briefer 

in our answer than the member in her question. The casinos are 

not for sale. 

 

Only the NDP would ask for the results of the feasibility study 

currently under way before the feasibility study is actually 

finished. Mr. Speaker, we’ll have to wait the outcome, but the 

casinos are not for sale. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — A question to the Minister of Finance. It 

has to do with his March budget, the most irresponsible budget 

in the history of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, on November 10th 

in this House, the minister admitted that revenues are down 

sharply from his budget forecast. He went on to say, and I 

quote, “And we are coping with the downfall in revenues . . . by 

using some funds from the Crown sector.” 

 

My question is this. When he announced the first quarter 

financial results, the minister admitted to stripping $480 million 

out of the Crowns to help balance his disastrous budget. How 

much beyond the $480 million does he plan to drain when the 

mid-year report gets tabled this week? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. On Thursday we will release our mid-year report 

and we will have all the details of the magnitude of the 

challenge that we face and the solutions that we are going to 

bring to bear in order to meet that challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly would be remiss if I didn’t freely admit 

that our budget, particularly in the forecast for potash revenues, 

has been significantly off in the first quarter, and it’s going to 

be off by further numbers in mid-year because we still haven’t 

sold potash. And, Mr. Speaker, that is a significant challenge 

for the province of Saskatchewan, and we’re going to make sure 

that we meet that challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to meet that challenge to ensure that 

we have a balanced budget, and we’re not going to meet the 

challenge by the way that government did in the past in 2004. 

When they faced a challenge, they raised taxes. We said we 

won’t do that, and we intend to keep that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we should be clear. This 

government does not have a revenue problem, with over $9 

billion coming in, flowing in to coffers. It’s a simple, simple 

problem over there and it’s one of mismanagement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the March provincial budget was so irresponsible 

and has been so discredited that the mid-year financial report 

will almost be like getting a new provincial budget. The 

minister is getting a do over, a financial mulligan if you will, 

Mr. Speaker. So he needs to stop blowing smoke, start spouting 

the truth, straight answers to straight questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every dollar the government strips from the 

Crowns to help balance its irresponsible budget is a dollar the 

Crowns don’t have to keep rates low for Saskatchewan people 

and business. The public has a right to know. How much more 

money does the Minister of Finance plan to strip from the 

Crown corporations to try to hide for his own . . . [inaudible]? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on Thursday all of this information will be laid out in 

front of the people of Saskatchewan, in front of the members of 

the opposition. And they will understand completely the 

challenge that we face and the steps we intend to take in order 

to meet that challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the members opposite are really 

seriously asking the people of Saskatchewan to believe that they 

would have predicted that potash revenues would approach 

virtually nothing. It is easy to say in hindsight that they would 

have put a different number in place. In hindsight I would have 

put a different . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. But really, Mr. Speaker, 

there are two stories in the province: the potash challenge that 

has a significant impact primarily on the revenues of 

government, but it also has a significant impact on the potash 

corporations themselves. And in spite of that, they continue to 

invest on increased infrastructure at record levels, some $7 

billion, and that’s a good indication about the belief that this 

industry has in the future of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — As an article said this weekend, Mr. 

Speaker, again that minister is being disingenuous. This 

opposition has been crystal clear from day one that this budget 

was tabled as it relates to our concerns around potash revenues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, about a year ago the government sold its 49 per 

cent interest in Saskferco. The sale provided a net profit of $783 

million for Crown Investments Corporation. That was money 

Crowns like SaskPower and SaskEnergy could have used to 

help maintain and build their provincial-wide networks while 

keeping rates low, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3581 

Can the minister confirm that by the end of the current budget 

year virtually all of the $783 million profit will have been 

squandered to try to cover up the mistakes of his irresponsible 

budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, implied in the member’s 

question is that we have introduced a lot of spending that isn’t 

needed or wasn’t appropriate or wasn’t appreciated by the 

people of Saskatchewan. And I would like to know which kind 

of things would the opposition have suggested we not do. 

Would they suggest that we not raise taxes? Would they suggest 

that we shouldn’t have tax relief for our citizens . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members of the 

opposition to give the minister the same opportunity to respond 

as was given to the member from Regina Rosemont to ask the 

question. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the past, 

the opposition’s answer to any of these challenges was to raise 

taxes. Mr. Speaker, what we have done is important to the 

people of Saskatchewan. What we have done is the biggest 

property tax decrease in the history of the province. What we 

have done is $300 million of real savings for people who pay 

taxes in the province, mostly the most vulnerable. Which of 

those things would you suggest we not do in order to meet the 

budget targets? 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Introduces Reusable Bags 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Friday, I 

had the occasion to visit the South Albert liquor store in Regina 

where I had the pleasure of encouraging customers to BYOB. 

That’s right, Mr. Speaker. I encourage customers to bring your 

own bag when shopping at Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority stores in Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] has launched a new, reusable bag for customers 

looking for a greener alternative to carry out their purchases. 

The bag holds from one to six bottles and sells for 97 cents, all 

taxes included, at all SLGA liquor stores in the province. These 

new bags, which are made from recycled materials, are a small 

and simple way SLGA customers can help the environment 

while also providing a durable, handy tote to carry their 

purchases. 

 

With the introduction of these new reusable bags, Mr. Speaker, 

SLGA will eliminate single-use plastic bags at its liquor store 

once current stocks are depleted. Paper bags, in addition to the 

reusable bag, will continue to be available. Although the bags 

were only announced three days ago, they are proving to be 

popular amongst customers. I encourage all members to visit 

their nearest SLGA liquor store and of course purchase one of 

the reusable bags. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SLGA is happy to provide this option to 

customers in its liquor stores. The introduction of reusable bags 

at SLGA stores is another way our government is helping 

ordinary people help the environment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I want to thank the minister for sending across a copy of her 

ministerial statement before the House started today. And I 

have to say this is a good initiative, Mr. Speaker, because we 

know that there is lots of concerns for the environment, and the 

more we are using reusable bags, the better for all and the better 

for everyone in the province. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, I do have some concerns with this. I received 

a letter in April of this year, and also a copy that had been sent 

to the Premier for a response. And, Mr. Speaker, instead of the 

minister saying BYOB, it should be BYOQB — bring your own 

Quebec bag — Mr. Speaker, because that’s who the contract 

was awarded to. Even though a young group of entrepreneurs 

who are providing recyclable bags right across Western Canada 

— very successful at it, very innovative — had put a bid in for 

this contract, they were denied, and the contract was awarded to 

a Quebec company. 

 

So in the questions that were raised with me is, why would this 

government, when the bid that was put in by this company of 

young entrepreneurs . . . And the question he asked me was, our 

bid was professional, competitive, and followed the specs 

required by Liquor and Gaming, but they were notified that the 

contract had been awarded to a Quebec company. And they 

went on and said they’ve dealt in business. They know what to 

expect that they aren’t going to win every contract, but they felt 

they had done a very good job and were very competitive. And 

they said they were shocked that this contract was awarded to 

an out-of-province business.  

 

And if a Saskatchewan company would have been honoured 

with the bid, it would have created jobs, taxable revenue, and 

all the money surrounding the product would have stayed in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And his question’s not only to me, but to the government when 

he forwarded the letter to them: 

 

Why are you spending money on marketing and offering 

tax concessions to entice out-of-province young people 

like myself to come to Saskatchewan when your own 

government isn’t supporting the idea? While your 

initiative to enrich Saskatchewan and its people is clear, I 

must say that Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming has 

contradicted the efforts by giving its contract to an 

out-of-province company. Please consider strengthening 

Saskatchewan and its government by supporting local 

business first. 

 



3582 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, these young people have family in Moose Jaw. 

They were anxious to do business from the city of Moose Jaw. 

And it’s extremely disappointing when the government’s own 

Sask-first policy, which they had made — you know, big media 

conference; we’re supporting Saskatchewan — and then they 

deny people in our community and young people, Mr. Speaker, 

to grow and put down roots in their community and build their 

business here at home in favour of someone from 

out-of-province. Mr. Speaker, a good initiative with misplaced 

priorities by this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

New Funding Standard for Day Programs 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I am pleased to rise to advise the House that there is a new 

funding standard that has been developed for the province’s day 

programs for people with intellectual disabilities. 

 

As a result of this new funding standard, people with 

intellectual disabilities will have access to better funded, more 

personalized supports to meet their needs. The new standard 

will be tested over the next six months as part of the $588,000 

pilot project involving eight community-based organizations 

that deliver day program services in Lloydminster, Meadow 

Lake, North Battleford, Preeceville, Regina, Weyburn, Wilkie, 

and Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the piloting of a new funding standard for day 

programs demonstrates once again our government’s 

commitment to provide quality supports to people with 

disabilities. The new funding standard matches day program 

funding with the assessed needs of people with intellectual 

disabilities. The old funding model was based on cost per space 

which did not take into account individual differences in the 

support needs of clients. Mr. Speaker, full province-wide 

implementation of the new standard, across all day programs 

funded by the Ministry of Social Services, is expected to occur 

in the 2010-11 fiscal year. 

 

It is expected that implementation of this new standard will 

provide funding to CBOs for up to 170 full- and part-time jobs. 

The new funding standard is the result of the $7.7 million 

investment from the province, part of our government’s 

four-year, $76.9 million commitment to eliminate the wait-list 

to people with intellectual disabilities who require residential 

day and specialized programs that meet their assessed needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed new funding model and standard has 

the potential to be one of the most significant enhancements to 

day program funding for people with intellectual disabilities in 

more than a decade. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the statement today. And I appreciate the minister 

sending a copy over for me. And I know that the people who 

live with intellectual disabilities and their families will be 

looking forward to this information with interest, particularly 

around the funding standard. 

 

I note that there were seven communities. We were just 

mentioning Saskatoon wasn’t part of it. We’re not sure why 

Saskatoon wasn’t part of the pilot because we know people in 

Saskatoon are very interested in this. And whether it’s some of 

the local MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] on the 

government side did not see it as an important issue, we think it 

is important that it’s piloted in all the major communities. 

 

We note that there’s 170 jobs created in the CBO sector through 

this. We hope that, as I’ve raised quite often in the House, that 

we have concerns about the quality of pay that people in the 

CBO sector receive. And we hope that this is not off-loading, 

that in fact these people will be paid a reasonable wage and not 

poverty wages. 

 

We are also concerned, especially in this week of all weeks, that 

announcements like this will be sustainable. We know that 

through a highly irresponsible budget last March, this 

government is facing major issues. And this announcement that 

was made in that budget now will have to face scrutiny yet 

again. 

 

I would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, this is like a part B. 

While there is a new funding standard, and we appreciate that 

technicality and for those who live with it, it’s more than a 

technicality. But in the House, this is a ministerial statement 

that we’ve seen many parts of this, prior to, in many ways. And 

I’m not sure whether we will see part C next spring when the 

pilot becomes a real program. We saw it as part of the budget 

and part of some of the announcements. Now we’re seeing part 

B; now we’ll see part C. 

 

So with that, we’ll watch carefully to make sure that the 

expectations that has been created by this government to those 

who are living with intellectual disabilities, that that becomes a 

reality, and they’re not disappointed sorely in the weeks ahead. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 310 and 311. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 310, 311 tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Answers to questions 312 and 313 are ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — 312 and 313 are ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answer to questions 314 

through 339. 

 

The Speaker: — 314 through 339 tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip, question 340. 

 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3583 

Mr. Weekes: — Answers to questions 340 and 341 are ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 340 and 341 are ordered. Order. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answer to questions 342 and 

344. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 342 to 344 are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Answer to question 345 is ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 345 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answer to question 346. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 346 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — The answer to question 347 is ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 347 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 348 

through 406. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 348 through 406 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of The 

SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill being put forward proposes only one 

amendment to The SaskEnergy Act, the governing legislation 

for SaskEnergy. The sole amendment is that the debt limit 

contained in section 42(1) be changed from $1.3 billion to $1.7 

billion. 

 

SaskEnergy’s legislated borrowing limit has not been adjusted 

since 1992. Taking into account anticipated expenditures for 

SaskEnergy’s growing business and its existing debt, a review 

of this limit indicates that SaskEnergy could exceed the current 

debt limit of $1.3 billion. It is recommended that fixing 

borrowing limit contained in the Act be increased to 

accommodate the potential need to access funds beyond what 

the current Act contemplates. 

 

The proposed new borrowing levels will encompass 

SaskEnergy’s existing debt, as well as provide additional 

capacity to help support economic development in our province 

and future growth for the corporation including: $148 million 

for Saskatchewan-based business development with the 

expectation of leveraging additional project capital from private 

sector partners; some $422 million in system expansion, 

maintenance, and accommodating customer growth; and, Mr. 

Speaker, $150 million to finance gas marketing opportunities 

for SaskEnergy’s subsidiary, Bayhurst Gas Ltd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would note that SaskEnergy has been very active 

in supporting our government’s agenda of working with the 

private sector to benefit our province. It has an excellent 

working relationship with our plumbing and heating 

community, with contractors, with our producer and industrial 

community, and with companies like ATCO. This extra 

capacity will allow them to continue this good work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

No other changes to the Act are proposed at this time. For 

example, SaskEnergy will still require cabinet approval to 

borrow the funds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009. Thank you. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 105, the Saskatchewan 

energy amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to have the opportunity to rise and make comments on 

the amendments to The SaskEnergy Act, and especially in light 

of a number of the questions that were just raised during 

question period, and of course with the expectation of the 

mid-term financial report of this week. Now I don’t believe the 

minister has said exactly what day it will be. I could take a 

guess at that, but I won’t do that. We will just suffice to say that 

it will be this week that the mid-term financial will be released. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased to hear the minister comment 

on precisely what the dollars would be dedicated towards, but 

the items that he listed that were priorities for SaskEnergy — 

there was 148 million for Saskatchewan business opportunity, 

422 for business expansion. And I missed the third one; I think 

it was 138. Also . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . One fifty? The 

minister corrected me, Mr. Speaker. It’s 150 million. 

 

So these are a number of the things that the corporation is 

looking at, and with expectations that they will exceed their 

current legislated limit, debt limit, of $1.3 billion. And what 

they are doing is looking to increase that by 400 million in this 

change to the legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of things that raises 

questions. I think first and foremost when we look at the 

financial reports, when the government has mismanaged the 

financial situation here in the province, one of their first 

recourses was to not admit that they had made some mistakes 

and maybe been spending a little too quickly, little too much. 

We won’t get into priorities here, although there are a number 

of questions there. 

 



3584 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

But every time they have run into problems, they have gone to 

the Crown corporations for more money. And we saw that again 

just after the first quarter financial report was released, the 

government went again to the Crown corporations. Now the 

Crown corporations, they are a business entity. And they have 

always been expected to operate such as a business entity, in 

fact with higher scrutiny than many private companies. 

 

Because they are publicly owned and they are a Crown 

corporation in the province of Saskatchewan, citizens feel that 

they have a right to know the information. And citizens are 

entitled to know that information, Mr. Speaker. They’re not 

there to be used as someone’s piggy bank. 

 

So when the government keeps going back to the Crown 

corporation for special dividends, is how they refer to it, it 

raises a number of concerns. And then when we see this piece 

of legislation where there’s a need to increase the borrowing 

capability of SaskEnergy, when the government has taken 

almost 500 million out of the Crown corporations just this year 

and, Mr. Speaker, you also have to realize we’re only 

accounting for half the year. 

 

And we can go into all kinds of what-ifs, but worst-case 

scenario, what if there’s no potash sold for the rest of the year, 

which the Minister of Finance has alluded to? That means that 

there will be more difficulties as we move along through the 

year. We will get more details on the mid-term financial report. 

But all in all, Mr. Speaker, it comes right down to the Crown 

corporations are business entities that need to provide service to 

the people of Saskatchewan, and they need to have the ability to 

operate as a business. And that means maintaining retained 

earnings, maintaining operating capital that’s appropriate, and 

maintaining a debt level that is better than, or a worst-case 

scenario, meets industry standards. 

 

And I understand there will always be some fairly large outlays 

of cash because the projects that any of the Crown corporations 

take on by no means are small, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan, 

fairly small population over a fairly large geographic area. 

We’re all well aware of that. So when we talk about Crowns 

having that public policy mandate of providing low-cost, 

affordable services consistently across the province, it’s 

something that we have always strove to achieve in this 

province, no matter who is in government. We have done that 

and, Mr. Speaker, as advances have been made, the Crown 

corporations have responded to those demands and to those 

requirements by Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

So when we see this debt limit being increased substantially, 

400 million. Well, Mr. Speaker, if CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] has the money, instead of 

coming into the General Revenue Fund, why could not CIC 

have supported SaskEnergy with projects that they have on the 

go? Why is there a need to increase debt? 

 

And there’s a number of questions too. If the finances of the 

provincial government, the Sask Party provincial government, 

continue to deteriorate the way they have with their really 

outrageous revenue projections, which many people warned 

against the day the budget came down . . . And I know the 

Minister of Finance had some trouble recalling that today when 

he was up answering questions in question period. But you can 

go back into Hansard, you can go back into newspapers of the 

day, you can go back into transcripts of radio newscasts from 

that day, and you will see many, many people that were 

surprised by the projections that this government made for 

revenues in this budget year. 

 

And already, once we’ve seen the first quarter report, already 

we were seeing those revenue projections downgraded, but still 

with some expectations and some feel that we would see a 

turnaround. Well here we are at the mid-term report expected to 

be released this week, and again we are looking at a 

downgrading in projections of revenue for the provincial 

government. 

 

So instead of making some more conservative — small “c,” Mr. 

Speaker — projections in the budget, they have just fallen back 

on hoping and fingers crossed that these $2 billion in revenue 

would float in the same as it had last year. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the potash revenues last year and the projections for this current 

year were I think referred to as an anomaly by many people 

because if you look at the five-year average of potash revenues, 

you will see that we’re right around 200, maybe 250 million, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So to all of a sudden do a projection of $1.9 billion as just being 

the expected norm — heck, it was a windfall on the Sask 

Party’s first year. And they had a great time spending money. 

But you know what? That’s part of the problem with being 

reliant on a resource-based economy. You always want to 

expand that economy. And I know the Premier has talked a 

number of times about the innovation economy and the CO2, 

but these are big projects. 

 

And when the province is running into financial difficulty now 

and in their normal GRF [General Revenue Fund] budgeting, it 

raises concerns all the way around because now they have to 

start making decisions. 

 

So the other thing, Mr. Speaker, is when we’ve seen this Sask 

Party government rely so heavily on the Crown corporations, 

there’s always a concern of stripping assets out of the Crown 

corporations. We have seen them go forward with their 

Sask-first policy — well for the Crowns, anyway. Now in 

departments, as I just noted, SLGA, they awarded contracts out 

of the province, even though there was a contract and a bid 

internally. Some young people that reside in my community, 

they were denied for a company. And a company in Quebec 

was chosen over them. 

 

The government has expressed a strong concern for Crowns 

focusing purely on the province of Saskatchewan, their 

Sask-first policy, which is all fine and good. But we have seen 

them sell off some profitable investments, SaskEnergy included 

with Heritage Gas. There’s been a number of areas where they 

have cleaned up — just pure, ideological sense. Never mind if 

it’s a good investment. Never mind if it’s returning money to 

the province of Saskatchewan. It falls outside the boundaries of 

Saskatchewan, so it can’t be good for the Crowns anyway, but 

not for the rest of the government, obviously. 

 

So that raises questions. And as their finances continue to 

deteriorate, will we see this government continually go back to 

the piggy bank that’s called Crown Investments Corporation, 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3585 

which is a holding company for all of these Crowns? And if this 

is purely the reason for the borrowing limit to be increased at 

SaskEnergy, then there would be many, many people across this 

province that are dead set against it. 

 

If SaskEnergy has requirements, if SaskEnergy has some large 

projects coming up, then they need to go about it as a business 

would with CIC and the Crown corporation — figure out the 

financing, figure out what’s doable and what isn’t, and move 

ahead. Not have the government continually withdrawing 

money from the Crown corporations. They have to have a 

certain amount of cash and a certain amount of equity there to 

be able to operate how the people of Saskatchewan expect them 

to operate. And they aren’t the piggy bank for the Saskatchewan 

Party government. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that many, many of my 

colleagues have a number of questions. It’s a short Bill. But it 

raises an awful lot of concern, and it raises a number of 

questions that will need to be asked. And, Mr. Speaker, with 

that being said, we will have to do some discussing. But I know 

my colleagues are anxious to speak to this Bill, and for now I 

will adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 105. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s indeed a pleasure to rise today to present to the 

House for second reading The Labour Market Commission 

Repeal Act. As the members of this House are aware, our 

province has been looking at new ways to address labour 

market issues. With a dynamic economy that has been holding 

strong in these tough times, and a labour market that is always 

looking for skilled employees, we decided to address the labour 

market issue through Enterprise Saskatchewan, our economic 

development agency. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan has established strategic issue 

councils and sector teams comprised of private sector 

stakeholders from various sectors of the economy. The council 

and the teams are providing input to the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board on matters affecting their sectors, 

including labour market issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 2009-2010 provincial budget eliminated 

funding for the Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission, or 

Sask LMC. This started the process of orderly winding up of 

the commission’s operations and repeal of the legislation that 

established Sask LMC in 2007. Enterprise Saskatchewan has 

been leading the windup and the orderly transition of the 

commission’s activities to the other organizations and to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. Since July 1, 2009 the Sask LMC no 

longer had staff. 

 

Following an agreement between Enterprise Saskatchewan and 

Sask LMC, annual audits and preparation of tabling of the 

2008-2009 and 2009-2010 annual reports will be followed 

through and completed. Any residual assets or liabilities will be 

transferred to Enterprise Saskatchewan as part of the agreement 

to complete the Sask LMC obligations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the key provisions being proposed in the Act are 

section 3, which deals with the following transitional matters: 

transfer of assets and liabilities; requirement for an audit by the 

Provincial Auditor of the Sask LMC’s accounts and statements 

for the fiscal year 2009-2010; and the filing of Sask LMC’s 

financial statements with the Legislative Assembly. And section 

4, Mr. Speaker, which sets out the coming into force date upon 

proclamation. We feel this repeal is in the best interest of the 

provincial economy and the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to move The Labour Market 

Commission Repeal Act for second reading. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan has moved second reading of Bill 106, The 

Labour Market Commission Repeal Act. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, The Labour Market Commission Act, which repeals 

the commission Act itself, that’s what this is doing. This is 

another short piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and really just 

does away with the Labour Market Commission. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I know there are a number of my colleagues who had 

previously done a great deal of work with the Labour Market 

Commission and felt very strongly about it. And we just have to 

go back a few years, Mr. Speaker, where many organizations 

across the province were dealing really in isolation or in 

individual sectors having to do with the labour market. 

 

And there was a concerted effort to move towards the Labour 

Market Commission which would have representatives from 

various sectors across the province, plus from working people 

and labour organizations and also from the academic world here 

in the province of Saskatchewan, to make sure that we had a 

consistent policy and a consistent look right across the province 

as what was available, what were we doing well, what were we 

not doing well, where did improvements need to be made. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I look at this I’m somewhat saddened 

because this Labour Market Commission did some very good 

work. They were a very good group of dedicated citizens from 

across the province who were looking forward to putting 

together a workable plan, politics aside, Mr. Speaker. There was 

not politics involved in this. It was purely looking at the 

landscape in Saskatchewan. What do we need to improve 

opportunities? What do we need to provide the resources and 

the direction for young people in this province so they would be 

able to put down their roots and build their careers here? But 

purely on an ideological sense. 



3586 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

The Sask Party was never enthusiastic about the Labour Market 

Commission. They loved to criticize the former government for 

direction that it had taken. But I have to say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, this kind of goes parallel with the surgical care centre 

decision that was made by this government. 

 

The previous government had set aside money and had been 

doing planning for over a year towards surgical care centres in 

Regina and Saskatoon. And when this Sask Party government 

was elected, well it had NDP attached to it. It was an NDP 

initiative so it had to go. So there went the surgical care centres. 

They just kind of faded away. The experts who had been 

brought together on a team, that were working at the 

development of this project, were just quietly dispersed back to 

their jobs and it lay dormant for a while. 

 

Then all of a sudden it was reactivated and the government 

began to talk about it like it was their initiative. This was 

something they were putting in place. And that’s fine, Mr. 

Speaker. I understand how politics works. But, you know, there 

are many decisions that need to be made because they are good 

public policy. They don’t need to be political decisions. Good 

public policy can be good politics also, Mr. Speaker. And I 

believe that this Labour Market Commission is much like the 

surgical care centres. 

 

But back to the surgical care centres debate, Mr. Speaker, the 

discussion and kind of analogy at how it parallels this whole 

Labour Market Commission. Once the Sask Party had revived 

the idea of a surgical care centre and moved it along, it was 

wonderful. It was a great idea — probably the best thing since 

sliced bread. But when the financial trouble started to hit this 

province, when we started to see the mismanagement of the 

provincial budget by this government, we started to see the wild 

revenue projections and the spending that just went on and on. 

 

A problem would come up. Well gee, best imagination, best 

initiative. Throw some money at it. Well, Mr. Speaker, that may 

work for a while but once the money starts to run out then you 

have to start buckling down, making some difficult decisions 

and some difficult choices. 

 

And what we saw with the surgical care centres, good idea, just 

a revived former government idea. But it was wonderful for the 

Sask Party because they felt that they had removed the NDP 

initiative that had been attached to it. But when the financial 

crunch hit, they pulled the money from the surgical care centres. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if you go back to the original decision, the 

original planning that was done, that surgical care centre here in 

the city of Regina would have been opening and would have 

been providing service to people from across this province for 

day surgeries here in Regina. Would have relieved the wait-list 

that the minister was up talking about the other day. Instead of 

shipping people to British Columbia, we could have been doing 

it here — if this government had have stuck to making 

decisions as good public policy and not purely based on 

politics. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we think of that decision and look at The 

Labour Market Commission Act, and it being repealed and it 

moved over to Enterprise Saskatchewan, it’s exactly the same. 

Mr. Speaker, the Labour Market Commission was doing very 

good work. It was representative of sectors right across the 

province who had put in place a very good working relationship 

and had done a very . . . Well, I’m told it’s a very good final 

report. 

 

Now that’s another thing I’d actually like to ask the minister. 

Has the report of the Labour Market Commission ever been 

released publicly? I don’t believe it has. I have never saw it. So 

now when he talks about the assets of the Labour Market 

Commission moving over to Enterprise Saskatchewan, are we 

going to see Enterprise Saskatchewan just review this report, 

put their own cover on it and put their own letter of transmittal 

on the inside cover and ship it out as theirs? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely ridiculous that, purely for a 

political decision, we have dismantled the Labour Market 

Commission. We have discounted the work that this group of 

dedicated people have done over the last number of years and 

we are delaying progress in the province of Saskatchewan 

purely for a political decision. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of my colleagues 

who have put a great deal of work into this and they would have 

a number of comments to make. But, Mr. Speaker, just before I 

end, the minister stood up and he said that he was looking 

forward to the work Enterprise Saskatchewan was doing 

because there was many employers across the province looking 

for skilled workers. 

 

Well you know, maybe he should go talk to his colleague, the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour who 

just cut money from JobStart. You know, you can’t talk out of 

both sides of your mouth, Mr. Speaker. Either you are going 

support the development of a skilled workforce in the province 

of Saskatchewan by investing money in JobStart/Future Skills, 

or you’re going to have the minister standing up six months 

from now and a year from now still saying, well employers are 

looking for skilled workers in this province and we need to do 

more. Well you need to do what you started doing and you need 

to start making decisions based on good public policy, not on 

purely politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate but I know many of my 

members will be looking forward to standing and speaking on 

this Bill. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 106. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly? Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 108, The Cities Amendment 

Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act provides the legislative framework for all 

cities, except Lloydminster which falls under its own charter. 

Members may recall The Cities Act was enacted on 2003 and 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3587 

refined in 2005 and 2007. Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

move second reading of The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 which 

continues the practice in the municipal sector to periodically 

refine and update the legislation to ensure it meets local 

government needs. The amendments are a result of ongoing 

consultation with the cities as the Act has been implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this draft Bill address 

the following issues. First, this Bill proposes to enhance city 

authority by reducing provincial oversight of city street sales, 

leases and closures, and improving the tools available to a city 

to collect and enforce property taxes on mobile homes and 

house trailers. 

 

Second, this Bill proposes to provide the option for city 

councils to require criminal record checks in the election 

process. 

 

Third, Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments in several 

areas that improve the effectiveness of the Act on technical and 

administrative matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will serve to strengthen 

the legislation. The proposed amendments support the intention 

of the legislation to grant cities not only greater flexibility but 

also greater accountability to deal with local matters. Many of 

the amendments will help to ensure consistency of intent 

between The Cities Act and other municipal legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take just a few moments to highlight the 

more significant changes that the Bill proposes. The first issue 

I’d like to raise is the provincial involvement in city street 

closures, sales, and leases. Cities raised concerns that the 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure and cities have 

overlapping jurisdiction. Mr. Speaker, both are mandated to 

ensure effective and efficient transportation systems. The 

proposed amendment eliminates provincial oversight for streets 

except for provincial highways within cities. Administratively 

the province remains involved in any title transfer since the 

streets are Crown lands. 

 

The ministries of Highways and Infrastructure and Justice were 

highly involved in developing the amendments relating to 

streets to ensure that the provincial interest, role, and 

responsibility is appropriate. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say 

the amendments enhance administrative efficiency for both 

cities and the province and were considered in the context of the 

government’s responsibility for managing Crown lands. 

 

The second issue I bring forward is proposed to enhance cities’ 

ability to enforce property tax payments on mobile homes. In 

recent years some cities have had difficulties collecting and 

enforcing taxes on mobile homes or house trailers. The Act 

currently allows them to be taxed as improvements under the 

property tax system, however it can be difficult to assess and 

collect taxes from house trailers that rent space in a trailer park 

because they can be more easily removed from the city. The 

amendment will allow a city to seize or immobilize a house 

trailer, just as it would with other goods, as an additional tax 

enforcement option. 

 

The timing is slightly different. A city can seize or immobilize a 

trailer during the year the taxes are due if, for example, the city 

determines the trailer is likely to be moved before the taxes are 

paid. This may not seem like a significant issue, but it 

demonstrates a present inequity in our property tax system and 

a challenge for cities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the next issue I’d like to discuss is described 

more fully in my second reading speech for the new northern 

municipalities Act. It relates to optional criminal record checks 

for municipal elections. Hon. members may recall this issue 

was raised by our northern stakeholders in the review of that 

Act, where it is proposed to allow northern municipalities to 

decide if they would like to include criminal record checks as a 

part of the nomination process for northern municipal elections. 

 

I’d just like to remind the Assembly, the purpose of allowing 

such checks is not to prevent someone with a criminal record 

for running for municipal office. It is to allow municipalities to 

decide locally if they want to require a higher level of public 

transparency in the election process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government appreciates not all municipalities 

have this concern. When this proposal was reviewed, it was 

decided it should be a choice all municipalities should be able 

to make at the local level. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the remaining amendments will help to 

ensure consistency of intent between The Cities Act and other 

municipal legislation by improving the effectiveness of the Act 

on technical and administrative matters. Other proposed 

amendments do not include any significant broadening of 

powers or authorities, but clarify existing provisions and assist 

cities by enabling them to operate more efficiently. 

 

The amendments brought forward today have been proposed 

after careful consideration to ensure our cities are in strong 

positions to meet the needs of today and tomorrow. 

Accordingly I move second reading of Bill No. 108, The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved second reading of Bill No. 108, The Cities 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the minister for the comments that he made, helps 

clarify. And we all know, anyone that has been in this House 

for any length of time — well, I guess, one season — normally 

The Municipalities Act, The Cities Act, these usually make a 

trip, a regular trip through this legislature. And we all know that 

they are substantially larger than the amendments that were put 

forward and handed out. So when you take them home on the 

weekend to do some reading, it’s not always the easiest to look 

back and do some comparison as to what’s being removed and 

what’s being added and what changes are being proposed by the 

minister. 

 

A couple of comments that I would like to add or make on what 

the minister has said or kind of the three or four main points of 

the legislation. 

 

Changing the provincial oversight in city street closures. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s fairly explicit, lays out what can and cannot be 



3588 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

done, what notification has to be done. And also the portion that 

deals with the property tax collection on mobile homes and 

trailers, there’s a number of definitions that are changed, and I 

would hope clarified, for those that are involved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s much easier to read the piece of 

legislation when you have the explanatory notes with it than 

what it is for people in municipalities and cities across the 

province, when they are reading legislation online maybe, 

trying to do an interpretation and to make sure they are 

appropriately interpreting the legislation and applying it 

appropriately in their community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s much easier for us. And I hope that when 

people across the province are looking at the legislation, that 

they find it much easier also and a little more understandable in 

the definitions that are contained in the legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also makes some changes to third party liability 

for the action, for that to be limited to one year. And I see that’s 

consistent with the other Acts also that we will be dealing with 

over the afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But also the minister talked about the optional criminal record 

checks. I’m pleased to see that the minister has made this by the 

legislation optional. And they have included it both in The 

Cities Act and the northern municipalities and the municipal Act 

to make sure that it’s consistent and that it is an option because 

there had been some rumours last year that there was some 

consideration to only putting it in The Northern Municipalities 

Act. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And I think that would have sent a very poor signal, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to many across the province, that we would single out 

northern Saskatchewan for this type of an article in their 

legislation when we have always strove to keep these pieces of 

legislation consistent in areas where they could be consistent, 

wording consistent where at all possible. But also each 

legislation being separate, so it’s not as cumbersome dealing all 

in one piece of legislation, and giving it the ability by being 

separate into The Cities Act, the rural municipalities Act, and 

The Northern Municipalities Act to be able to address the areas 

that are and issues that are specific to the areas that it 

represents. 

 

And consistency of intent. I understand that. And I understand a 

number of areas, we are looking to be consistent and we are 

looking to make some changes. But there is . . . Well it updates 

the language and makes sure that we are consistent right across 

the piece. 

 

But there is one area that the minister didn’t mention, and this 

was section 43, and it’s amended. It’s subsection 43(7) is 

amended by striking out “prescribed in regulations made” and 

substituting “established.” 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we flip over to our explanatory notes 

and we read that the existing provision is in 43(7): 

 

The council may apply for the alteration of the city’s 

boundaries or for amalgamation or restructuring with other 

municipalities in the form prescribed in regulations made 

by the minister. 

 

So what the change does in the Act is just remove “prescribed 

in regulations” and it will now read: 

 

The council may apply for the alteration of the city’s 

boundaries or for amalgamation or restructuring with other 

municipalities in the form . . . [established] by the 

minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, anyone who has had anything to do with the 

municipalities over the last two years will know that there has 

been a number of areas where cities have wanted to annex more 

land to grow their boundaries and expand their city limits and 

that it has been a fairly hot topic in a number of areas around 

the province. And I know that there was even some discussion 

at SARM the other day at the convention. They dealt with a 

number of emergency resolutions, and I have them here 

somewhere in my important papers. 

 

But I know there was one councillor who got up and actually 

spoke to this issue and the whole issue of annexation and what a 

difficult process it has been and that they truly hope . . . The 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board needs some changes was what 

was said at the SARM convention the other day, that many of 

these communities have exhausted all their options. And that 

it’s a fairly onerous spot to be in for many communities when 

they have to go through all of the options that are out there, then 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board will make a ruling — 

maybe. And this is what was asked for, was that it may not 

make a ruling but that it will make a ruling. 

 

I think any of the councillors that have been through this whole 

process feel that they understand the need for a process. They 

understand the need for going through all of the options that are 

there, but at the end of all of that, they would like to have a 

decision by the Municipal Board, not may have a decision by 

the Municipal Board. 

 

And I think everyone is more than willing to pay appropriate 

compensation for any land they are moving or removing out of 

the RM or adding to the city limits — however you want to talk 

about it — that there’s a feel that appropriate compensation will 

be paid. That’s taken for granted in any of these discussions and 

dealings, but there has to be a way for final decisions to be 

made. 

 

So what we’re seeing here, and the minister didn’t touch on it 

whatsoever, so I know there’s a number of questions because 

this has been a hot topic. I know in Swift Current this past 

summer there was still discussions going on and still a number 

of areas of concern. Yorkton was also going through this. 

Estevan had come to a reasonable deal. They had come to an 

unusual deal in the way they had structured their annexation. 

Weyburn also had gone through this. Moose Jaw, my home 

community, had gone through this. It had, thank goodness, gone 

fairly smoothly in the city of Moose Jaw. But I know in a 

number of communities it hasn’t. 

 

And we all know that when you’re dealing with issues such as 

this, they can be quite contentious. And there needs to be some 

type of a solution or some type of an approach taken either by 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3589 

the Municipal Board, and that would be at the minister’s 

direction. So I know in the explanatory notes it states that: 

 

The Saskatchewan Municipal Board (SMB) requested a 

change to streamline the application process for boundary 

alterations, amalgamations or restructuring for the 

convenience of municipalities. It suggested the Cities Act 

could provide greater flexibility in the format for these 

applications. The application form is presently in 

regulation and changes to it must go through the 

regulatory review process. 

 

So what this would do, the change, it would allow the forms to 

exist as a minister’s order and would not require the review 

process. While there’s some value to review processes, and I 

know for expediency’s sake, it’s always nice for a minister to 

be able to just sign off on something and send it along its way. 

But there truly is value in the review process, and we’ll see that 

in a number of instances over this legislative session. We’ve 

seen it previously with legislation that was never dealt with 

appropriately, or in my view or in the official opposition’s view 

was never dealt with appropriately by having a thorough review 

with stakeholders and people across the community that would 

have an interest or be affected by the legislation. So it always 

raises a couple of concerns. 

 

And I know it’s quicker and I know it’s much easier to do. But 

there is a great value in communication and making sure that 

reviews are appropriately done and all of the little issues or a 

majority of all the issues. You don’t catch everything, and 

things do change over time. But it’s always good to have that 

review, to have the input from others who are knowledgeable 

and be able to go forward with, whether it’s a minister’s order 

or change in regulations, to know that you’re putting in place 

the right thing. And that four months or six months or twelve 

months down the road, you’re not going to be going through the 

whole process again because on the first run-through you didn’t 

take the time to have the review and make sure you were 

putting in place the appropriate regulations or however you 

review the piece. So that’s just a word of caution, I guess, for 

the minister. 

 

But it goes to, allows the forms to exist as a minister’s order 

which would not require this review process. And this would 

provide the flexibility for the ministry and the Saskatchewan 

Municipal Board to develop a common form for annexation 

applications that could be modified in a timely way as the need 

arises, which is fine, Mr. Speaker. And this will be something 

that for sure I will look forward to in committee, be able to ask 

the minister questions. 

 

I know there was a number of options that were being batted 

around previously last year when this was a very hot topic. And 

instead of waiting until this is a hot topic — where cities are 

looking to annex land and expand their city limits — to put a 

solution in place now that allows for the Municipal Board, if 

that’s the process you choose, or whether it’s for some type of 

mediation through the Department of Justice, whatever it is. But 

there needs to be something put in place so that we can come to 

a quicker resolve on these issues and that cities aren’t stalled in 

moving ahead with any projects that they have. 

 

But we also want to make sure that the rural municipalities are 

adequately compensated for what is being taken away from 

them or what is being annexed by the city. So I’m a little 

disappointed that the minister didn’t give us a few more 

comments on that section and those changes. I hope they are 

looking to expand the process — not necessarily expand the 

process but make it a more definite process that really gives 

some answers to people right across the province — because 

it’s better to deal with it now when it’s a little bit quieter, little 

bit calmed down. And there has been some solution reached in 

a number of communities, but I think everyone would agree that 

there has to be a better process in place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for a little short Bill out of a very large piece 

of legislation, that’s my comments for now. I know that there 

will be a number of comments that will come later as others 

have worked their way through the Bill and had a chance to do 

an assessment of some of the changes proposed. But for now I 

will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 108, The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 110, The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009. This Bill is the culmination of an 

extensive review of northern municipal legislative needs. 

 

The Act’s review extended a year longer than originally 

expected due to the complexity of northern issues and an 

extensive regional public consultation in the winter of 2008. It 

was extended further for government review of issues that break 

ground for municipal legislation not only in Saskatchewan but 

across Canada. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Just going on the order paper, the Bill 

was called — Bill No. 110 — but I think the Bill that is up for 

discussion is Bill No. 109. Is that correct? I just want to make 

that correction . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . So are you on 

110 then? I just wanted to clarify. Okay. We’ll carry on with 

110 then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With that in 

mind, I would like to take this opportunity to thank New North 

for its partnership, and each of the review committee members. 

I’ll name the committee members: Mary Lou Lavallee, 

councillor for Timber Bay; Louise Baht, administrator for Air 

Ronge; Fred Roy, councillor and now mayor of Beauval; Carl 

Lentowicz, mayor of Denare Beach; Doris MacDonald, 

councillor for Stony Rapids; Marie Lariviere, clerk for 

Patuanak; Beverly Wheeler, administrator for Denare Beach; 

Brenda Janvier, councillor for La Loche; and Joanne Griffith, 

CEO [chief executive officer] of New North. 



3590 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

Mr. Speaker, you may have noticed committee members came 

from communities all across the North. They spent a significant 

amount of volunteer time away from their families to review 

not only the text of the present Act in detail, but also significant 

portions of The Municipalities Act as well to see if southern 

concepts would be appropriate for the North. This was an 

incredible task, Mr. Speaker, and the review committee is to be 

commended for its dedication and thoroughness. In addition to 

the committee, I also recognize and appreciate the significant 

contribution of officials from Municipal Affairs as well as those 

from the Ministry of Justice in this process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members may be confused, as The Northern 

Municipalities Act was just amended last year. This was only 

the first stage of changes to the Acts. Since the entire province 

entered a new four-year property revaluation cycle, a new 

assessment process on January 1, 2009, northern municipalities 

were provided the same tools for property assessment and 

taxation as southern municipalities. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, amendments to the northern revenue 

sharing trust account, now northern municipal trust account, 

provisions were passed in spring 2009 to update the account 

name and parameters to better align with the new municipal 

operating grant program. No changes to either of these areas are 

proposed at this time. The remainder of the new Act is largely 

consistent with the legislation in place for rural and urban 

municipal governments in the South. 

 

[15:15] 

 

A significant portion of the draft Act proposes greater flexibility 

and autonomy for municipalities, similar to that found in the 

South. This includes several key concepts and provisions 

already found in both The Cities Act and The Municipalities 

Act, such as permissive legislation, natural person powers, areas 

of jurisdiction, broad bylaw powers, voluntary municipal 

restructuring, municipality liability, and the role of the SMB 

[Saskatchewan Municipal Board] in certain municipal financial 

approvals. 

 

For the most part the practical day-to-day provisions regarding 

council meetings and procedures, bylaw enactment, financial 

administration and reporting, and assessment, taxation, and tax 

enforcement can be the same for urban, rural, and northern 

municipalities. There’s a good case for consistency, unless there 

are specific situations in the North that do not occur in the 

South, indicating procedures should be different. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some provisions that are specific to the 

North to meet northern needs, and I would just like to take a 

few moments to highlight some of these differences. Mr. 

Speaker, members may recall a terrible news story just a few 

weeks ago about a young child who was mauled by a stray dog 

in Ile-a-la-Crosse. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, this is not an uncommon 

situation. One of the top concerns raised by the review 

committee and consultation participants was about dogs running 

loose in packs and attacking people in northern communities. 

 

To try to address this, authority was increased in the Bill to 

allow municipalities to respond to potentially threatening 

situations more rapidly. Mr. Speaker, this is a situation that has 

no easy solution. Increased municipal authority will not solve 

the problem itself, but we can provide municipalities with the 

flexibility and support to help as much as they are able. 

 

Next, Mr. Speaker, in the North, the minister has a unique dual 

role — this is to act as mayor and council for the district and to 

act as the approving authority for some municipal bylaws. With 

the inclusion of natural person and broad bylaw powers, many 

of the previous ministerial approvals are no longer needed. To 

provide consistency with southern municipalities, where the 

minister makes the decision equivalent to council making a 

decision, approval of that decision is transferred to the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board. This is intended to reduce 

confusion about the minister’s role and increase transparency in 

decision making. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important for us to remember many northern 

municipalities are remote and isolated. One of the unique roles 

northern municipalities see for themselves is the degree to 

which they become involved in economic development. 

Northern municipalities have had the ability to form municipal 

development corporations for economic and social development 

for many years now. 

 

Sometimes the prudence of an Act review is to recognize and 

retain those existing provisions that work well. Some northern 

municipalities have used these provisions successfully to create 

local employment opportunities that might not otherwise exist 

and bring money back into the community. Municipal 

development corporations are another way to raise money 

instead of raising taxes or applying for grants. The review 

committee recommended these provisions be carried forward, 

albeit with greater financial accountability. 

 

Throughout the Act review, we heard many northern 

stakeholders talk about the importance of partnerships and the 

need to be recognized, not only on an individual municipal 

basis, but also at a larger, regional scale. Mr. Speaker, regional 

municipal service district provisions are new to Saskatchewan’s 

municipal legislation and unique to the North. While some 

similar provisions were considered for the South some years 

ago, they did not proceed. The northern situation is different. 

 

The review committee looked at a number of options to enable 

more regional collaboration before making its 

recommendations. The new provisions will provide a voluntary 

framework to enable regional service delivery where two or 

more municipalities choose to share multiple servicers or 

provide services to another party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we already have examples in the North where 

municipalities and First Nations are sharing services that 

require a separate agreement to be negotiated and separate 

volunteer board for each. The new framework being proposed 

streamlines processes and eliminates the need to have a separate 

agreement for each shared service. The provisions are modelled 

on an approach already found in British Columbia and Alberta. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, criminal record checks for people running 

for municipal council was another of the top concerns raised by 

the review committee and participants in the consultations. 

Northerners strongly advocated mandatory criminal record 

checks for everyone running in northern municipal elections. 

Mr. Speaker, this position was out of a concern about public 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3591 

transparency and making information available to the electorate 

so that people are making informed choices about who they 

vote for. The rationale is that these checks would help maintain 

public confidence and respect in those who hold public office. 

 

I must admit, Mr. Speaker, government had not anticipated this 

request and needed more time to consider the processes and 

implications. After consideration, the draft Bill before you gives 

northern municipalities the option of introducing basic criminal 

record checks in conjunction with northern municipal elections. 

The purpose is not to disqualify someone from running for 

office, but to enable people to make more informed choices 

about who they wish to vote for. We believe each municipality 

is in the best position to decide if this is something that should 

become part of their local elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government decided this option should not be 

unique to the North, but should also be extended to all 

municipal Acts. The province will not be involved, except to 

establish parameters about the checks and regulations to ensure 

consistency across the province. This provision is new, not only 

to Saskatchewan municipal legislation, but appears to be new 

across Canada for municipal elections. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, as was the case with The Cities Act and 

The Municipalities Act, the authority to supplement the Act 

with regulations has been included in a number of areas so that 

additional public interests may be accommodated as necessary. 

The existing regulations will be reviewed over the coming 

months in consultation with the municipal sector such that new 

regulations for this Bill will be prepared prior to the Act coming 

into force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to take a moment for some final 

comments. This new legislation modernizes the roles, 

responsibilities, and authority of northern municipalities. It 

balances the flexibility and increased authority found in the 

South, while tailoring many provisions to suit unique 

circumstances found in the North. The changes are consistent 

with good government policy and are responsive to requests 

made by northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank the review committee again for its 

patience, dedication, and innovation to bring forward proposals 

that will help northern municipalities meet the present and 

future needs of northern Saskatchewan. Accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m proud to move second reading of Bill No. 110, 

The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 110, The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think because it’s a nice day outside, the government 

members are waiting for early recess or something. They’re 

groaning every time I, you know . . . And, Mr. Speaker, this just 

points to, we’ve complained, I think for the last two years, that 

they don’t like to do consultations on legislation. What they do 

is just table it in the House and figure everyone’s going to be 

happy. 

 

And I think this just reflects that, Mr. Speaker. They don’t even 

like comments being made by the opposition without hooting 

and hollering. They want everything just to sail through. It’s 

kind of like, I’m right and why would anyone question me. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a duty of the opposition. And 

that’s the role that we play in this democracy, is that we have an 

opportunity to review, add comment to any new legislation 

that’s put forward or amendments that’s put forward in this 

House and programs and initiatives on behalf of the 

government. Oppositions play a very strong role in democracies 

around this world. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s one we will 

continue to do, even though the government members would 

like to be off early this afternoon and don’t want to listen to the 

comments and critique of legislation that they’re putting 

forward. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s just the way it is. And they’re 

just going to have to listen to it, and that’s all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation, The Northern 

Municipalities Act has been in consultation for many, many 

years. It’s been a work in progress. And we did see part of it 

that was initiated last year — last year at this time, I guess it 

was tabled — passed in the spring. And now we are seeing the 

complete Act as it’s been worked on and put forward. 

 

And I, too, want to join with the minister in congratulating the 

review committee. These are people that have lived in the 

North, that have put in a great deal of time and energy in their 

communities, and have taken that dedication to the North a step 

farther in being involved in this process, and making sure that 

what they feel is the best piece of legislation and articles and 

hopefully regulations which we won’t see for a while, but put in 

place that will allow the North to not only grow. But as the 

minister stated, I think provide that flexibility that really not 

only accommodates the North and the difference that we see in 

the northern half of this absolutely beautiful province, but also 

respects the differences that are evident from southern 

Saskatchewan to northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, often I get in trouble because I will talk 

about probably the geographical centre of the province. And I 

think many of us that live in the South, we make a mistake in 

doing this, will refer to Prince Albert being in the North or even 

up north in Yorkton. And, Mr. Speaker, quite often people will 

give you a bit of a look, and they’ll give you a bit of a finger 

pointing and a tongue wagging because that’s nowhere near the 

north of this province. 

 

And for any of us who have had the pleasure . . . I mean there 

we have the member from Meadow Lake. That’s still a little bit 

farther north, but it’s still not north north — not true north, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So for many of us who have had the absolute 

privilege of being able to travel from the southern border of 

Saskatchewan to the northern border of Saskatchewan and east 

and west, it truly is a privilege to, I think, see and understand 

not only the work that’s done, but the people that live in these 

communities. 

 

The people that have made their home, whether in urban or 

rural or northern Saskatchewan, they have a real dedication to 

the province. And it is with a great deal of pride that they invite 

you into their communities. They always want to show off what 

is happening in their city or their community or their village or 



3592 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

municipality. They’re proud of the work they’ve done. They’re 

proud of their area, and they’re always pleased to have us visit, 

Mr. Speaker. So it truly is a privilege what each and every one 

of us are allowed to do here in this Assembly as representatives 

from across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly lengthy Bill, and while it does bring 

in line the areas that can be consistent across the province — 

whether in The Cities Act or The Municipalities Act — this is 

unique to northern Saskatchewan. And it does respect the 

differences that we will find from one area to the next. And it 

brings, I think, many advantages to the North that they have 

been waiting a while for — lays out clearly bylaws that can be 

put forward by the municipalities in the North, also the rights 

that can be expected, lays out the expectations for financial 

reporting and accountability which are always needed. 

 

And as the minister had spoken to, this really is timely when 

you look at the development in northern Saskatchewan. And the 

growth that is happening there has been building for a number 

of years, but especially over the last few years, really makes this 

Act timely. And I think it’s something that people in northern 

Saskatchewan will be very happy once it’s passed and put in 

place because it does a number of things. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I said, to the best of my understanding and 

the people that I’ve had discussions with, there has been some 

very lengthy consultations on this piece of legislation. 

 

The northern Saskatchewan . . . Well the local governments in 

northern Saskatchewan is how it’s referred to — an Act 

respecting — and it also makes consequential amendments to 

other Acts that are affected. But, Mr. Speaker, I know that more 

questions need to be asked by people that we’ve been in contact 

with. And as with that, I know there will be a number of my 

northern colleagues especially who will be anxious to speak to 

this Act. 

 

But at this point in time, I would adjourn debate on The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 110, The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 109, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, this Act provides the 

legislative framework through which Saskatchewan’s southern 

small urban and rural municipalities exercise their powers and 

provide services. Today, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move 

second reading of The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

which, as with The Cities Amendment Act, 2009, refines and 

updates the legislation to ensure it continues to meet its users’ 

needs. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The amendments are a result not only of ongoing consultation 

with municipalities, but also as a result of recommendations for 

changes to The Cities Act that have been determined to be 

beneficial to smaller municipalities as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this draft Bill address 

the following issues. First, the amendments implement 

recommendations from the review committee on road 

maintenance agreements. Second, as in The Cities Act, 

additional tools are provided for a municipality to collect and 

enforce property taxes on mobile homes, excluding vacation 

and recreational trailers. Third, consistent with The Cities Act 

and The Northern Municipalities Act, municipal councils are 

being provided the option of requiring criminal record checks in 

their elections. Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces 

amendments in several areas, consistent with many of those 

proposed for The Cities Act, that improve the effectiveness of 

the Act on technical and administrative matters by clarifying 

existing provisions and improving operational matters. 

 

The proposed amendments will serve to strengthen the 

legislation. The proposed amendments support the intention of 

the legislation to grant municipalities not only greater 

flexibility, but also greater accountability to deal with local 

matters. Many of the amendments will help to ensure 

consistency of intent between all the municipal legislation. 

Although many of the amendments in this draft Bill are the 

same as those proposed for The Cities Act, it is appropriate for 

me to take a few moments to highlight the more significant 

changes that the Bill proposes, particularly in the context of 

small urban and RMs. 

 

The first issue I’d like to raise relates to Saskatchewan’s 

significant economic growth. With rapid growth, there can 

often be conflict between developers and those who are affected 

by development. An example of this is the increased pressure 

on municipal roads from heavy hauling and the escalation of 

road construction costs. 

 

Approximately 18 months ago, a review was initiated on the 

existing provisions around road maintenance agreements. The 

review committee included representatives from government, 

industry, and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities. In brief, Mr. Speaker, road maintenance 

agreements may be entered into with shippers, haulers, or 

receivers if the movement of goods is likely to damage 

municipal roads. The agreements are to compensate 

municipalities for incremental maintenance and loss of road life 

costs from heavy hauls. 

 

The review committee asked government to introduce a 

mechanism to ensure disputes between RMs and industries are 

resolved in a timely fashion. Disagreements may cause industry 

to shut down or prevent an RM from getting an agreement with 

short-term haulers while road damage occurs. Stakeholders 

advise that a legislative process for a third party to rule on 

disputes in a timely manner would be beneficial for all parties 

involved. It’s recommended that the Saskatchewan Municipal 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3593 

Board is the best qualified and logical place for this process to 

occur. 

 

Further, a concern was raised by the municipal sector about 

vehicles and equipment that use RM roads to service oil and gas 

wells and other industries. The road maintenance agreements do 

not currently apply to heavy support vehicles and equipment, 

even though such vehicles can cause as much or more damage 

than actual hauling. This Bill proposes to clarify road 

maintenance agreements also apply to heavy support vehicles 

and equipment. 

 

The second issue I bring forward is amendments regarding tax 

collection and enforcement on mobile homes and house trailers. 

Although cities first raised this issue, it is also applicable to 

towns and villages. The Act currently allows mobile homes to 

be taxed as improvements under the property tax system. It is 

more difficult, however, to collect and enforce taxes on a 

mobile structure. Some municipalities have experienced 

difficulties collecting taxes from house trailers that rent space in 

a trailer park. 

 

Improving the tools available to a municipality to collect and 

enforce mobile home property taxes is recommended. The 

amendments exclude vacation and recreational trailers from the 

taxing provisions. These amendments are proposed for all three 

municipal Acts to ensure consistency in the property tax system 

for all municipalities. 

 

The next issue I’d like to discuss relates to the proposal for 

optional criminal record checks in municipal elections. As I 

described in my second reading of remarks for both the new 

Northern Municipalities Act and The Cities Amendment Act, 

municipalities will be able to decide locally if they want to 

require a higher level of public transparency in the election 

process. The purpose of allowing such checks is not to 

disqualify someone from running for office, but to inform 

electors. 

 

I expect some municipalities may choose to implement these 

checks and some may not. It is the municipalities who are in the 

best position to decide if these checks are something that would 

benefit their communities. It’s important to remember that 

municipalities will have the authority to make this choice at the 

local level. The province is not forcing any particular 

municipality to undertake this. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to 

ensuring smaller urban and rural municipalities have the tools to 

govern effectively in a rapidly changing economic climate. 

Accordingly, I move second reading of Bill No. 109, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 109, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s always interesting to listen to the minister’s comments of a 

piece of proposed legislation because there’s . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s not always interesting. 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, it’s not always interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

but it is always informative because it sometimes raises a 

number of questions in other areas. And as in the last piece of 

legislation in The Cities Act, when we touched on the whole 

changes within the forms for the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board being able to be changed by minister’s order and not be 

in regulations any longer, that raises a number of questions, and 

if there’s other initiatives that the minister is putting forward. 

 

And much the same as that, when I look at The Municipalities 

Act in section 2(e), there’s a clause in here that says: 

 

by adding the following subsection after subsection (1): 

 

So 1(e) I guess, what we have, we had: 

 

“(2) When making a direction pursuant to clause (1)(ee), 

the minister may direct the use of different means of 

determining population for different purposes”. 

 

So I know traditionally we have always used Statistics Canada 

for population numbers, and that has always carried with it a 

number of frustrations. For one thing, Statistics Canada is 

always considerably behind times. When you are seeing some 

changes, you are dealing with numbers often that are a year to 

two years old, and if you are looking for something more 

specific in the province, you would have an even more difficult 

time in some cases being able to pare down the numbers instead 

of being able to parcel out the numbers that you’re actually 

looking for or the subsection you’re actually looking for to 

work with. So there’s a number of cases, but traditionally that’s 

what we’ve always used. 

 

So when you look at the explanatory notes with this, with The 

Municipalities Act, it will allow a provision that specifically 

allows the manner of calculation to be defined by regulation, 

clarifies the authority. It also provides for different ways of 

calculating population appropriate to the purpose, and giving 

examples of ward boundaries, petitions that require a 

referendum, or specific municipalities — RMs and towns. 

 

So I’m curious to ask the minister what other means of 

determining population for different purposes: how would it be 

used? How does he see it? 

 

And I guess it raises the question, something that we had last 

year. When we finally reached a long-term revenue-sharing 

proposal with the municipalities, it was done using populations. 

Quite often, while there’s pools . . . Mr. Speaker, I won’t get 

into the whole long explanation of the various pools but in a 

number of cases we use per capita disbursement of the funds 

from the pools. And there was a number of questions raised 

with me as to populations in Regina and Saskatoon had gone up 

considerably, other communities had grown, some were staying 

the same, some, you know, there’s always fluctuations. 

 

So instead of some of the larger cities being compensated or 

based on a per capita number that was a current calculation 

through population numbers for the influx of new people that 

they had seen, they were based on StatsCan numbers and 

everyone was treated the same as they had in the past. And 

while there was some new money that went into it — which is 

always good, Mr. Speaker; the municipalities are always in 



3594 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

need of infrastructure dollars and programming dollars. There 

was no complaints about the way the calculation was done. 

 

But I’m wondering if the minister has in mind if this would be 

an option for revenue sharing, to be able to use a different 

means of determining population, or if it’s for other specific 

cases that he may have in mind or incidents that he’s run across. 

So that’s something that we’ll be asking, especially when we 

get into committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The minister also spoke, section 22 is amended where clause 

22(1)(c) is repealed and the following is substituted. And it 

really goes into road maintenance agreements, how they’re 

followed through on, interested parties, what happens. And 

there’s also a dispute resolution on the road maintenance 

agreements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wherever we start getting into official agreements, 

there’s always some type of disagreement that may come along 

with it or some type of unusual circumstance which will cause 

some disagreement, and not necessarily a disagreement but a bit 

of a dispute on how it’s divided or what’s compensated, what 

isn’t, what’s covered under the agreement. So it’s a fairly 

lengthy piece in the legislation where the dispute resolution is 

laid out in a fair bit of detail. 

 

And there also, as the minister stated, there is the option that’s 

put in place for optional criminal record checks. And again I’m 

pleased to see that the minister felt it appropriate to put this into 

each of the municipal legislation — whether it’s northern, 

whether it’s municipalities or whether it’s The Cities Act — that 

that option will be there for councils if there is a need to have it 

in place or a feel that it is an appropriate check to be done. 

 

But there’s also a piece that adds a number of options. Section 

97 is amended, and it puts in place some expanded options for 

vacancies to be filled: 

 

“If . . . seats on a council become vacant for any reason or 

if the remaining members of council do not constitute a 

quorum, the minister may, by order, do one or more of the 

following. 

 

So that’s been expanded to what it was previously. And I need 

to do a bit more consultation — and I know my colleagues will 

— as to whether they feel, councils in our communities feel that 

this is appropriate and that if it fits in with what’s needed in 

their area. 

 

Another piece I don’t believe that the minister touched on, and 

it’s actually in all three pieces of legislation. It’s in The 

Northern Municipalities Act. It’s in The Cities Act and also in 

The Municipalities Act. And it deals with changes to public 

disclosure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know that each and every one of us in 

this Assembly has a requirement yearly to disclose publicly any 

of our assets so that we will move away from any fear that there 

is a conflict of interest in any of the decisions we are making. 

 

So we declare to the Privacy Commissioner . . . not the Privacy 

Commissioner. My colleagues aren’t helping me. But anyway 

we have to make a declaration of all of our assets and incomes 

and liabilities. And that’s all done on the form every year to 

make sure that there is no conflict of interest in the dealings that 

we have, either as government members or opposition 

members, and that we aren’t benefiting from the decisions 

we’re making. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this also does, it makes some changes to 

every member of council and the public disclosure statements 

that they are required to submit. And there used to be, if there 

was changes in your disclosure or in your assets or liabilities, 

within 30 days you had to declare and update your statement of 

disclosure. Well what this legislation does, it changes that, more 

in line what an MLA does, where we provide a yearly update to 

our statements and we don’t have that 30-day requirement. 

 

The 30-day requirement, if you were found not to have 

declared, previously I guess what the punishment would have 

been is you could have been removed from office. And there 

was a feel that the punishment was quite harsh for if someone 

actually forgot to make a declaration. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So that is something else that is in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that is being updated and changed. And some people may have 

concerns with that. They may feel that the disclosure statement 

needs to be more timely than being done once a year, but we’ll 

see what consultations we have on this legislation and what 

kind of feedback we get. 

 

Also throughout the legislation there’s a number of areas which 

really gives some clarity to definitions throughout the 

legislation, and it also updates language, updates some of the 

explanations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s also some changes — and I believe this is 

what is currently the practice but I’m not positive, so it’s 

something that I’m going to have to ask a couple questions on 

and see if it is an appropriate move or not — in section 396 it is 

amended in subsection (2) by adding, instead of inspectors 

appointing inspectors, “or the Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

as an inspector” . . . 

 

So I don’t know if that’s a role that the Municipal Board 

members and employees are appropriate to be filling, if it 

causes some problems for them down the road or if it’s 

perfectly fine. Mr. Speaker, that’s something that is included in 

a number of areas that I still need to look more into. 

 

And I know that there are a number of my colleagues that wish 

to make comments on this piece of legislation. But as of now, I 

would adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 109, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3595 

Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant  

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 

The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. 

The Act represents changes that are being made to bilingual 

Acts as a result of the introduction of The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997, The Education 

Act, 1995, and The Interpretation Act, 1995 are the three Acts 

amended in this Bill. All other consequential amendments are 

contained within The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 itself. 

 

The changes being made to these statutes, as in all the other 

consequential amendments contained in The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009, primarily do the following: replaces 

references to The Northern Municipalities Act with references 

to The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009, and updates the 

various northern municipal definitions and other statutes as 

defined in The Interpretation Act, 1995. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 

111, The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2009. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs 

has moved second reading of Bill No. 111, The Northern 

Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act hits on 

the three Bills that the minister has just spoken to, makes the 

changes that are appropriate with the implementation of The 

Northern Municipalities Act. The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act has changed, also The Education Act and The 

Interpretation Act, 1995, just to be brought in line with The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as of yet, of course I can’t comment on the French 

interpretation and the French Bills that are being put forward. I 

will rely on one of my colleagues to check over the 

amendments that are being made there. 

 

And I can tell almost by the smile on your face, you’re glad I’m 

not making comments en français. Mr. Speaker, with that, I 

need to have a closer look at the consequential amendments and 

we will speak again on it soon, I am sure. But with that I will 

adjourn debate on the consequential amendment Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and 

Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment) 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of the traffic safety 

amendment Act, 2009. The Act administrated by Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance outlines the laws regarding road use in 

Saskatchewan. The first proposed amendment I’d like to outline 

is designed to increase safety on Saskatchewan’s roads and 

highways. 

 

Distracting driving is one of today’s most serious road safety 

issues. In Saskatchewan, driver inattention or distraction is the 

most commonly cited contributory factor in all collisions, 

accounting for close to 25 per cent of all factors reported. In 

fatal collisions, it is the second most commonly cited factor. 

 

Cellphones and texting are significant sources of distraction to 

drivers and have been associated with an elevated risk of 

involvement in traffic collisions. Mr. Speaker, driver distraction 

is a very important part of SGI’s [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] comprehensive traffic safety strategy. 

 

A recent study from Virginia Tech Transportation Institute on 

cellphone use while driving found that the risk of involvement 

in a crash by drivers who are texting is 23 times that of a 

non-distracted driver. The risk for drivers talking on cellphones 

is three to six times that of a non-distracted driver. 

 

According to the Canadian Wireless Telecommunications 

Association, cellphone use has grown rapidly over the past 10 

years. It’s also expected the tasks related to cellphone use as a 

source of driver distraction will continue to increase. Given the 

risks associated with these distractions, there is a potential for 

an increase in the number of collisions associated with driver 

distraction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment bans the use of 

hand-held cellphones for talking, texting, email, and surfing the 

Internet while driving. 

 

Under this new law the penalty for using a cellphone while 

driving will be a $280 fine and four demerit points under SGI’s 

Safe Driver Recognition and driver improvement programs. 

Drivers who are not in Saskatchewan’s graduated driver’s 

licensing program will be allowed to use hands-free cellphone 

devices. 

 

However, new drivers — meaning drivers who are in graduated 

driver’s licensing program — will not be able to use cellphones 

of any kind while driving. This will allow them to gain valuable 

driving experience under low-risk conditions which is 

consistent with the principle of graduating licensing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that cellphones are not the only source 



3596 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

of driver distraction, however the research shows the use of 

hand-held cellphones for talking and texting is a growing 

danger. It’s important to remember, Mr. Speaker, that law 

enforcement still has the ability to lay a charge of driving 

without due care and attention to address situations where 

driver distraction is putting road users at risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that SGI will continue to educate 

drivers about the dangers of distracted driving and the new 

legislation. The new legislation will help decrease driver 

distraction and keep the people of Saskatchewan safe on our 

roadways. 

 

The second amendment I’d like to discuss is designed to 

modernize Saskatchewan’s driver’s licence, making it 

consistent with standards adopted by other North American 

jurisdictions. Saskatchewan’s existing driver’s licence is a 

two-part annual licence consisting of a photo identification card 

and a paper driver’s licence. This change means 

Saskatchewan’s driver’s licence will move from a two-part 

annual licence to a more secure one-part, five-year licence. 

 

Changing Saskatchewan’s licence to a one-part licence will 

reduce the chance of identity theft and, again, will make it 

consistent with standards adopted by other North American 

jurisdictions. This will ensure that Saskatchewan’s driver’s 

licence continues to be accepted as valid identification by law 

enforcement and other agencies outside of our province. 

 

The proposed amendment is also another example of how we’re 

making it easier than ever to do business with SGI. SGI 

recognizes that its customers are busy. And by increasing the 

length of the renewal time to five years, customers will no 

longer have to renew their licence every year. 

 

In addition to the convenience, customers will have the 

opportunity to save money. Customers who choose to pay $100 

for the licence at the time of renewal will save $25 from today’s 

cost to renew the two-part licence for the same five-year period. 

 

Customers will also have the option to pay $25 per year for five 

years for the new licence for the total cost of $125, which 

would be the same as now. With this amendment, Mr. Speaker, 

SGI will work with potential vendors to elevate the most 

effective method to offer an improved, secure driver’s licence to 

our customers. That concludes the outline of the proposed 

amendments found on the traffic safety amendment Act. Mr. 

Speaker, I move the second reading of the traffic safety 

amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investment 

Corporation has moved second reading of Bill No. 116, The 

Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic 

Communications Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009. Is the 

Assembly read for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, this is another one of those Bills where you kind of 

wonder how much consultation and discussion has happened 

beforehand. 

 

I was on my way to northern Saskatchewan actually to attend a 

ceremony there. And all of a sudden I heard the Premier on the 

phone saying, oh yes, we think we should do away with 

cellphones, and we’ll be passing it this fall. Well that’s all fine 

and dandy, Mr. Speaker, to make decisions. If you want to 

make kind of quick decisions like that when you are at home or 

in your own household, it works fine. It’s entirely up to you. 

But when you’re the Premier of the province, you always kind 

of wonder if you don’t have a little more responsibility to 

people across the province to explain the decisions you’re 

making, to also be sure that the majority of people understand 

why you’re making the decision and be accepting of the 

decisions that you’ve made. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I always remember a former member of 

this House giving some very good advice one day. And he said, 

you know, a government can pass any legislation they want. 

They can sit down and draft and pass any piece of legislation to 

really do anything they want, if they’ve got the numbers in the 

House to push it through. 

 

Well, but the citizens of the province, first and foremost, need 

to understand why you’re making the decision, and why you’ve 

taken really the tack to implement whatever your decision is. 

They need to have an understanding of that. 

 

So when we talk about reviewing or we talk about 

consultations, it’s not so much as it’s one or the other. It’s kind 

of a process, a combined process of letting people know what 

you’re thinking of as a government and also receiving from 

them feedback and an understanding of what they think of what 

you’re doing as a government. And it can be a pretty painful 

process at times because of course not everyone agrees. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would be a pretty boring world if 

we all thought the same and we all agreed. We wouldn’t have to 

be here the amount of days we are. And we’d be able to just 

maybe have a legislature over the phone. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s not the way it works. 

 

So there is a value in having consultations. And there is value in 

letting people know what your decisions are, why you’re 

making those decisions, and listening to the feedback. And I 

think, first and foremost, it respects the citizens of the province 

and relays to them quite clearly when you take the time to sit 

and listen to citizens of this province, you let them know that 

you respect their opinions. You respect their decisions, and you 

respect the input that they are giving you on a piece of 

legislation. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, so when I hear the Premier say over the phone, 

yes, this is the way we’re going. We think it’s a good thing, and 

we’ll be tabling it in the House. I understand they would like it 

passed. 

 

So here we are. We’re well over halfway through the fall 

session of the legislature. There’s been no consultations done 

on this legislation — absolutely nothing that I have seen or been 

privileged to, anyway. Do many people think it’s a good idea? 

Yes, some do; but not all do. And the government is telling the 

media and telling people that, oh it’ll be implemented January 

1st. So when we’re seeing that they’re planning on 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3597 

implementing this by January 1st, that means they’re expecting 

this piece of legislation to be passed this session. 

 

So we’re over halfway through this session. We’ve got 12 days 

left of sitting in this legislature. We have other pieces of 

legislation that we are dealing with and other issues that we are 

dealing with, but yet the government wants to shove this piece 

of legislation through in less than 12 days and have it enacted 

January 1st. 

 

Could be a good piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

my question is, has it been given a thorough review? Do the 

people of Saskatchewan understand what this piece of 

legislation does? Is there something that the minister . . . I mean 

do they have a whole advertising campaign? Do they have some 

type of initiatives that, if it is pushed through and crammed 

through this session, how will the people of the province know? 

Or will they know when they start getting tickets? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of us are on the highway fairly 

regularly, and you don’t have to wait very long before a car 

passes you by or before you pass someone, and they are 

hanging on the phone. They’ve got a phone up to their ear. 

We’ve all done it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And if we are going to 

change the way people have been used to driving over the last 

number of years — quite a few years in fact, having a phone 

and speaking on their cellphone, using their cellphone while 

they’re driving — there is going to need to be not only a piece 

of legislation crammed through in 12 short days, but there needs 

to be a fairly in-depth and fairly lengthy, I would think, 

education of the population of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, still what it does, it ignores that basic 

premise that you have to respect the people of this province, 

those who have come out to elections and elected each and 

every one of us as members to sit in this House and represent 

their views. That when you go out and do those consultations, 

it’s not only for a review but it’s also respecting the citizens of 

this province, that you value their input and you value their 

opinion and you respect the decision that they made by electing 

you government of this province. And that’s missing. And that, 

I think, has been the most frustrating part. 

 

So where this legislation is going to go . . . Mr. Speaker, I heard 

the minister’s announcement in the rotunda. Nice big picture. 

The government is very good at doing flashy announcements 

and having all of the pictures and the pompoms and the 

circumstance around all of their announcements, which are all 

very nice. 

 

When we look at the replacement and going to a one-piece 

licence . . . And I’m also very pleased that the minister just 

made the point that a five-year, well not only a one-piece, but 

also a five-year licence for the residents of the province. Now 

there’s a number of questions that we will need to ask when it 

comes to if you’re disqualified, how you’re notified — if there 

is some type of an issue over the five years, what type of 

notification will be given. What’s acceptable; what isn’t. 

 

But I’m very pleased that the minister made the comment that 

you would be able to pay $25 a year still for a five-year licence. 

So you’re mailing in your money, I don’t know whether it 

would have to be with a form so they know who’s sending it. 

There would have to be some kind of notification. 

 

So I’m not sure if the five-year licence is more cost-effective, 

whether it should be, I guess, better utilizing each and every one 

of our times that we don’t have to go down to renew licences 

and do the work and the paperwork that goes with it, but it’s 

pretty minimal now. So I’m not sure how this works, and if it is 

saving money, saving time or if it’s just kind of a new idea, I 

guess. That may be helpful also or may be appealing to many 

people. 

 

But I am pleased to hear the minister say you don’t have to pay 

your 125 up front for the five-year licence. You pay it yearly so 

communication still carries on. I guess we’re saving the cost of 

the licence itself for SGI, but I don’t know whether that’s 

actually saving any of the rest of us money or if it’s being more 

cost-effective. So that’s comments and that’s questions that 

we’re going to have to ask as we get into committee and as we 

get farther along. 

 

I know there’s questions otherwise about a number of practices. 

And I guess for many years we have done things kind of a 

traditional way. Are they going to look at changing also licence 

plates? Are they going to be for longer term than what they are 

now?  

 

And I was looking at someone’s vehicle registration the other 

day, and there’s a financial fee on there that is charged monthly. 

Now I’m going to have to go back and look at some of mine to 

see if it’s previous or if it’s something new, but I’ve never 

noticed it before. It’s one of my family members I was looking 

at, and I had never noticed the financial fee previously. I know 

there’s basically an interest payment for the carrying of your 

insurance and your plates. So there’s a number of questions and 

a number of changes I think that have happened through the 

licensing and at SGI. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the big I think contentious piece, I don’t think 

there’s going to be a lot of concern about the five-year licence 

— some minor questions and just some clarifications of kind of 

detail and logistics of how the program will operate. I don’t see 

much problem with that, but I do with the whole cellphone 

piece and restricting use. And like I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

or Mr. Speaker, sorry, it’s not that there’s anything wrong with 

this. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I remember clearly I was coming in — this 

was a few years ago — I was driving into Regina and got a call 

and answered the phone. And before I knew it, I had driven all 

the way down Albert Street. And this was right around noon 

hour. It was very busy. And it was right around Saskatchewan 

Drive where I hung up my phone, so I’d driven a fair number of 

blocks on a very busy piece of Albert Street. 

 

And I realized, as I hung up my phone and set it down, hadn’t 

looked to — I could not remember shoulder checking. I know I 

had changed lanes a number of times, but I couldn’t remember 

if I checked. I could’ve cut someone off. I had no idea. So to 

me, that was a very clear example of why talking on your 

cellphone could cause some accidents — quite easily, it could 

cause some accidents. 

 

So I have since gone to using an earpiece. And I guess it makes 



3598 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

it a little more difficult for those of us who are of a certain age, 

Mr. Speaker. You can’t read your texting on your BlackBerry 

anyway when you’re driving, so there’s no point to even trying. 

So I mean that’s just an aside. But I know for young people 

texting as they drive, it truly does take away your concentration 

from the task at hand. 

 

And I often think, when I’m driving back and forth between 

Moose Jaw and Regina — I commute daily and put on a few 

miles during the year representing the people of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow — but I often think, you know, we put an awful lot 

of faith in these vehicles that we hurtle down the highway at 

110 on the double lanes, Mr. Speaker. And it’s really . . . 

Humans are really trusting people, and we make many 

assumptions. And I think when it comes to public safety, when 

it comes to our safety, when it comes to the safety of others, we 

do need to be more aware that our attention isn’t fully on the 

job at hand many, many times. 

 

But that being said, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of questions 

that I have then. It truly gets back to that basic premise of 

democracy, that oppositions do have a role to play. And I could 

give many, many examples of, over the last two years, where 

there has been no consultation done beforehand of legislation. 

Stakeholders are expected to just suck it up and take what is 

being tabled in this legislature and what is being passed by this 

government. And taking that kind of paternalistic view that 

government knows better than anyone else is not healthy, I 

don’t think, for the province of Saskatchewan. May this be the 

best piece of legislation going forward? Maybe. Do the people 

of Saskatchewan have any opportunity for input or consultation 

on the piece? Haven’t so far. 

 

And if this government expects this legislation, as they’ve 

announced, to be in place and in effect on January 1st of 2010, 

then that means again that it has to pass within the next 12 days. 

We’ve just had second reading today — the first opportunity to 

make any comments towards this Bill. There’s been no 

discussion with the public across the province of Saskatchewan, 

but we are expecting it just to fly right through the legislature 

without any type of scrutiny. 

 

Past practice has been that fall session, legislation was tabled. 

There was a period over the break, when we ended session early 

in December and went back into the spring session in March, 

that you would have an opportunity to speak to interested 

parties. You would have a fair bit of time to sit down in detail 

and hey, anybody across the province, all they have to do to 

look at a piece of legislation . . . They’re not always the easiest 

to understand, to look at the implications and what the intent of 

the legislation is. Then we have to wait to see regulations that 

will be attached to the legislation. So that’s another, well, pretty 

quick turnaround when you look at the regulations are not 

supposed to be drafted until the legislation is passed. 

 

But we’re looking at, as the minister announced the other day, 

implementation by January 1st. So we’re talking 12 days of 

session to push through a piece of legislation which no one has 

seen until very, very recently, and then we are looking at 

regulations being drafted. 

 

Obviously the minister has not looked at vetting these 

regulations with stakeholders and with interested parties 

because we’re going into the Christmas season and we all 

know, Mr. Speaker, that people are not interested in sitting 

down and doing reviews of legislation over the Christmas 

season. They’re interested in being at home with family and 

friends and having an opportunity to enjoy the Christmas season 

and the holidays. I always say, Mr. Speaker, one of the good 

things about this job is the last thing that anyone wants to see 

over the Christmas holidays is a politician. So we, like other 

people in this province, can go home and we can enjoy our 

family and spend some quality time at home. And all people 

need that. 

 

So to expect that we are going to have legislation and 

regulations that are going to be reviewed and scrutinized over 

the Christmas holidays, it’s not going to work. I mean it just 

isn’t going to work. People are occupied with other things. 

They are looking forward, like I say, to the holidays. They’re 

not going to come out or going to make an effort. 

 

So what’s going to happen January 1st when these, you can’t 

speak on your cellphone, you can’t use your text messaging, 

you can’t use any of this electronic gadgets when you’re in your 

car . . . I shouldn’t call them gadgets, Mr. Speaker. They are in 

many cases business tools for many people that travel while 

they work. 

 

But it’s just being pushed through way too quickly. And there 

has been very little discussion, not only with stakeholders and 

with the citizens of the province, but also with the opposition. 

And the time frame for this is not undoable, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not undoable. 

 

But I’m asking, I guess more clearly, in a democracy when you 

need to respect the views of citizens, when you need to respect 

the views of people who are being affected by this legislation, 

it’s not doable in this time frame that the minister has laid out 

and which the Premier has stated in his telephone interview 

where he said, yes, this is a good idea and we’ll be tabling 

legislation this fall. You’re not respecting anyone with this 

process, and you’re least of all respecting the democracy in 

which we live and the process that is in place for dealing with 

legislation and new initiatives. And it’s very limited. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have to see what comments 

we’re getting back as an opposition caucus because it is one of 

our responsibilities to offer critiques, to ask questions, and to 

see what comments we are receiving from citizens and people 

across the province — how they feel they will be affected; 

what’s allowable, what isn’t. And there’s always unusual 

circumstances that come along that don’t quite fit in the 

legislation as it’s laid out. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is many, many more questions 

that will need to be asked on this legislation. And we will see 

how it proceeds through the House, but I know my colleagues 

have a number of questions that they would also like to ask. 

And most of this came up and about when we first heard the 

Premier’s comments on the radio saying, yes, we’re going 

ahead with this and it’s going to be tabled in the fall — pretty 

quick turnaround time for a piece of legislation that’s going to 

change many of the habits of many people. Not arguing for or 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3599 

against, Mr. Speaker, but it’s something that we’re going to 

have to move along through the process that we have in the 

House, and I look forward to a number of questions being asked 

in committee. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn 

debate on this Bill today. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 116. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon to rise in the Assembly and to join in on the 

discussion on Bill No. 104, An Act to amend The Summary 

Offences Procedure Act, 1990. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to be able to read the legislation, 

and also to read in Hansard the remarks from the minister as 

well as a member from our side who responded to the second 

reading, Mr. Speaker, and now I’m pleased to add in my two 

cents on Bill No. 104. Mr. Speaker, this is an Act, an 

amendment to an Act that involves a change to the way that 

tickets can be delivered to individuals here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now here in Saskatchewan, most people here in the province 

are good people, are people who respect the laws or people who 

want to do what’s right for themselves and do what’s right for 

their families. But, Mr. Speaker, there is from time to time and 

perhaps, you know, some members here have found themselves 

in this situation or perhaps we know people that have been in 

this situation, Mr. Speaker, where an individual has done 

something that requires a ticket. 

 

And now a ticket, Mr. Speaker, is one way that we in a 

democracy and as members of a civil society ensure that we 

maintain order in our province and assure that the rule of law’s 

applied, ensure that what is written down in the laws is in fact 

what is carried out on the street, what’s written down is how 

people live their lives and act accordingly. And it’s necessary, 

Mr. Speaker, when there is a law, it’s necessary for people to 

follow it. 

 

And a foundation of our democratic system is that whatever is 

clearly stated in the laws, that when a law’s in place, that there 

needs to be a consequence. And, Mr. Speaker, that consequence 

needs to be enforced honestly. It needs to be enforced evenly. 

And, in fact, it needs to be carried out so that the consequence is 

felt by the person. And the purpose of doing that is to ensure 

that there’s a deterrent so that if an individual has broken the 

law, they won’t go back and do that again, and also so that 

others in society can see the fine or the penalty that an 

individual has had to pay or serve, and that is a deterrent for 

them to not do what’s wrong and it’s an encouragement for 

them to do what is right. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as supporters of our democratic system, we 

encourage all people in Saskatchewan to know the laws, to 

examine the laws, and to obey the laws. And that’s the way that 

we want to structure our society and that’s the way that we want 

to have society ordered. 

 

Now it’s a problem, Mr. Speaker, when an individual does 

break the law and when the penalty is not carried out or, Mr. 

Speaker, when the penalty has been served to that person but 

for whatever reason, Mr. Speaker, they’re not able to or they 

don’t have to pay the consequences. So in less democratic 

systems, Mr. Speaker, we see this happening with high levels of 

corruption and weak enforcement and weak laws. And we see a 

double standard that takes place in society where some 

individuals can get off the hook because of who they know or 

what they can pay or where they’ve been, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s not the kind of system that we want here in 

Saskatchewan. The kind of system we want here is one where 

laws are clearly stated, individuals know these laws, they 

respect these laws, and they obey these laws, Mr. Speaker. And 

when there’s a situation where someone does not obey the law, 

Mr. Speaker, we as supporters of our democratic system, we 

want judgment to be carried out that is fair, that is balanced, and 

that is true to the letter of the law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are some introductory comments I wanted to make, 

Mr. Speaker, when looking at an Act which addresses how 

summary offences are handled. When we look at how the 

delivery of justice is handled, Mr. Speaker, how the mechanics 

of that works, it’s necessary to keep that in mind, Mr. Speaker. 

That while what is on paper might seem like housekeeping, 

what on paper might seem maybe boring to some people or 

what might seem short and of not great significance, we need to 

remember how this fits into the bigger picture of law and order 

and keeping an ordered society that all individuals want to 

belong in and that have a great respect for. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, when individuals lose respect for our 

system of laws, that’s a problem, Mr. Speaker, that we see in 

many countries with a developing justice system, a system 

where there’s not a great rule of law and systems, Mr. Speaker, 

where the law of might is right prevails and simply whoever is 

strongest, whoever has the most money, has the closest family 

ties, Mr. Speaker, those situations, those individuals get off the 

hook. 

 

And I think close on Remembrance Day, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

been a lot of talk about the work that Canada does around the 

world in promoting democracy, in promoting civil society, in 

promoting economic growth, the spread of free markets, Mr. 

Speaker. And Canada has a great role to play in this and it’s 

important that we as legislators and as Canadians, it’s important 

that we remember that. That in countries like Afghanistan what 



3600 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

seems very simple and what we take for granted here in Canada 

is in fact something that many people in Afghanistan would 

dearly love and are pushing for and are fighting for and are 

dying for. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that our Canadian 

soldiers are in fact putting their lives on the line for and many 

are, sadly, dying, Mr. Speaker, for what is — believe it or not 

— in this piece of legislation. And that’s the idea that when an 

individual breaks the law, there’s a penalty and they pay the 

consequence. It’s a basic rule of law. 

 

And so while we look at Bill 104, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act — or an Act to amend it — it’s important to 

keep this in mind, that this is part of a big picture issue. It’s part 

of an issue that cuts to the core of our democracy and to the 

work that we’re doing around the world in encouraging other 

democracies to really take root and to do well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill 104, what this Act allows for is for a 

change in the status quo, from where a ticket can now be served 

by mail. The practice in the past has been that in all situations 

and all instances a ticket needs to be delivered in person. So it’s 

not enough to simply mail it or to go through some other means, 

but you had to show up in person. And, Mr. Speaker, a law 

enforcement officer had to do this. So this is a change now 

where an individual no longer needs to have that visit face to 

face, but there are situations now where it can be deemed 

appropriate where the ticket can be sent by registered mail. So 

this is an important change and I think it’s a change that to me 

in many ways makes good sense. 

 

I know I think the last time I was on my feet speaking to a Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, we were looking at an Act to change The Property 

Act. And much of that legislation at that time, Mr. Speaker, was 

deemed to be housekeeping. It was deemed to be simply a 

modernization of the legislation. And I think my basic 

understanding of Bill 104, that this could be viewed in some 

ways as the same type of procedure, Mr. Speaker. That when 

there are changes that occur in society, when there’s changes in 

the nature of the law, when there are opportunities where things 

can be done in a more efficient manner, it is important that we 

try to do that. And by issuing tickets by mail, no longer 

insisting that an individual needs to be hand-delivered the 

ticket, this is one way where, from my understanding at least — 

I’m speaking for myself here — that this could be a good 

approach and a good means to save time and energy for law 

enforcement officers. 

 

Now we might ask ourselves, why not simply take the approach 

of always insisting that a ticket needs to be delivered in person? 

What scenarios, what instances might arise here in 

Saskatchewan where a ticket could be mailed, where it would 

make good sense to send this ticket by registered mail and not 

require that the ticket be served in the flesh, Mr. Speaker? So 

there’s a few that come to mind. The minister made a reference 

to these in his speech and his comments on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One area that was mentioned was perhaps where there’s a car 

accident or a collision and, Mr. Speaker, and there needs to be 

some type of re-enactment. And the charges or the ticket that 

needs to be delivered, it is not apparent right at the moment 

what needs to be done. Because if any of us have been 

involved, Mr. Speaker, in a car accident, sometimes it’s a 

straightforward. Sometimes it’s a simple fender-bender, a 

rear-end accident or an uncontrolled intersection and you 

clearly know that you’re supposed to yield to the person on the 

right. Sometimes it is cut and dry. Sometimes law enforcement 

officers can issue a ticket right there on the spot. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, sometimes in a car accident, on the scene it 

can be rather complicated. There can be other considerations. 

Perhaps weather was a factor. Perhaps what was going on in the 

car was a factor. Perhaps the experience of the drivers, Mr. 

Speaker, was a factor. So there’s many concerns and issues in 

giving a ticket, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps an individual can’t do it 

right there on the spot. Perhaps there needs to be somewhat of 

an investigation. Perhaps they need to bring in professionals 

and do a re-enactment of the traffic accident. It’s only through 

the re-enactment, Mr. Speaker, that they’re able to determine 

who in fact was at fault; who should pay the fine. So in those 

situations it’s only appropriate that the ticket be given later on. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, in those situations, if the individual, you 

know, if the same law enforcement officer that was at the scene 

of the accident is not available to issue the ticket, that takes 

resources from someone else, Mr. Speaker. Or it takes up the 

resources of someone else that they have to now go and deliver 

this ticket to an individual. And perhaps the individual’s been 

sitting at home, expecting that he or she might get the ticket, 

and receiving it by mail would be completely appropriate. They 

would respond, admitting their guilt and pay the fine or take a 

different course of action. So I agree with the minister that in 

situations where there might be a car accident, there needs to be 

a re-enactment, that could be appropriate. 

 

Another area that was mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that’s important 

to keep in mind why this type of legislation or this type of 

amendment to the legislation would be required, is to do with 

hunting offences. We know, Mr. Speaker, that many people 

here in Saskatchewan love hunting and fishing and it’s a 

lifestyle choice. It’s a recreation choice. It’s a great way to build 

relationships with family. It’s a great way to get exercise if 

they’re out tromping through the bush getting the exercise that 

we all need and want. So that’s an important thing, Mr. 

Speaker, for when people are out fishing or hunting, that that 

might be a situation . . . There might be instances when 

someone is out hunting. 

 

Now many people in Saskatchewan like hunting, but we also 

know there’s many people out of province that come to 

Saskatchewan and hunt and fish. And there’s been a major 

economic force here in the province and our outfitters and other 

private individuals that are welcoming friends and relatives to 

go hunting in the province, that’s a good thing because those 

people come in and spend their resources. That helps small 

communities. And so long as, Mr. Speaker, it’s part of an 

overall strategy for wildlife management, that certainly is a 

good thing. 

 

And the vast, vast majority of people that hunt in Saskatchewan 

follow the law and know what the limits are and know what all 

the regulations and rules are around firearms. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they respect the law just like most people in society 

respect all the laws that are in place. 

 

[16:30] 

 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3601 

But there are instances, Mr. Speaker, where some of these 

people who may be travelling to Saskatchewan to go hunting, to 

go fishing, some of these people don’t follow the laws. And we 

know these stories through speaking with friends and 

neighbours and we know of these stories by reading them in the 

news as well; where there have been offences, when there’s 

been times when people have ignored the limits, have ignored 

the rules, and have broken the law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s only appropriate that the integrity of the system is kept in 

place, that when this occurs, there needs to be fines and 

penalties for those individuals who break the law. So you can 

see in these situations where people have broken the law, if 

they’ve come to Saskatchewan for a visit and later on through 

investigation by peace officers it’s determined that charges and 

there should be a ticket, Mr. Speaker, time may have elapsed. 

And it does make good sense, in my opinion, in these types of 

situations that instead of making the law enforcement officers 

deliver that ticket in person, that the ticket could be mailed to 

them by registered mail. 

 

And I think that’s an important aspect that it is registered mail. 

It’s not bulk mail, it’s not a flyer, but it’s registered mail so they 

know that the ticket has been delivered. They know the person 

has received notice that they’ve broken the law and that there’s 

a penalty to pay, that there is a ticket to deal with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know from the minister’s remarks, he states that this is 

legislation that has been requested by the Saskatchewan 

Association of Police Chiefs. And it is good, Mr. Speaker, that 

if this is in fact the case what the minister says in his comments. 

And of course I’m sure it is, because why would he say 

otherwise? 

 

It’s good to see consultation taking place. Too often, Mr. 

Speaker, we see legislation come forward in this House and this 

Assembly and the first time anybody hears about it, the first 

time anyone has a clue that legislation is going to be introduced, 

is through the introduction of it on first reading, Mr. Speaker. 

But in this situation it would see that this request and change 

has been by the Saskatchewan Association of Police Chiefs. 

 

So I certainly want to give credit where credit is due, that when 

members opposite are actually engaging and dealing with 

stakeholders, that when they’re actually listening to people, 

when they’re actually taking ideas about legislation to groups in 

the community, in the province, getting feedback, requesting 

feedback on issues — I want to say that’s a good thing. So 

that’s a positive thing. 

 

And I, in guessing what the rationale is by the Saskatchewan 

Association of Police Chiefs, why they would request this type 

of change, I’m sure it’s because, as my earlier comments 

indicated, that when there are efficiencies that can be gained 

and these efficiencies don’t undermine the legislation or the 

program in place, it’s appropriate to explore how things could 

be done in a more efficient manner and it’s important to 

implement that. And my guess would be that the Saskatchewan 

Association of Police Chiefs saw that there was an opportunity 

here where they could free up more time for individuals, for 

police officers and other peace officers to be doing the work 

that they really need to be doing in the community. 

 

And certainly, as I said earlier, delivering tickets is part of the 

important work that needs to be done in order to maintain the 

rule of law and maintain a properly functioning society. But if 

there’s a simpler way to do it in a way that saves time, saves 

money and effort by individuals, and allows police officers to 

be doing what I think probably most of them really want to be 

doing — and that’s dealing with crime and the root causes of 

crime in society — I think that’s a positive thing. 

 

I know over the summer, Mr. Speaker, as I had the opportunity 

to do some door knocking in the community, meeting with 

constituents and at events, certainly safer streets and safer 

communities is something that individuals bring up to me on 

the doorstep in my constituency. It’s a concern by many people 

in, well the whole province — in Saskatoon, and certainly a 

concern for many people in Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

There was the very tragic news, Mr. Speaker, I guess a couple 

of months ago now — if not, maybe just weeks — of a young 

woman who was murdered and shot to death in an alley right in 

the heart of Saskatoon Massey Place. A very sad, a very tragic 

incident, Mr. Speaker. And I know when I spoke to constituents 

and people in the community about that, they certainly said, 

well whatever we can do as individuals, as members of the 

legislature, to ensure that there are law enforcement officers on 

the street being able to do the work that they really want to do 

and going after criminals in the way that they really want to go 

after them, Mr. Speaker, when the law is broken, then that is 

something that we in the Assembly need to support. 

 

So if this measure frees up time, frees up the legs and the 

human power to do other types of work instead of simply 

delivering tickets, then from my perspective at least, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that’s a good thing. And I could see why the 

Saskatchewan Association of Police Chiefs would like that, 

would request that type of change, and why we see this now, 

this change occurring in The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 

Bill 104. 

 

I also in reading the legislation, I see, Mr. Speaker, that there 

have been some measures to deal with the situation where 

someone’s been given a ticket but they don’t fully agree with 

the ticket. When an individual has been given a ticket in person, 

Mr. Speaker — whether that’s for something like a hunting 

offence or whether that’s for something like a traffic offence — 

if they don’t like the ticket, Mr. Speaker, when it’s in person, 

the opportunity is there for the individual to state their 

unhappiness with the ticket and how they view the, maybe, the 

situation and the ticket giving should have gone. They’re able to 

voice that at that time. Now that may not change the outcome, 

but there’s still that opportunity. 

 

I see in this legislation now, Mr. Speaker, that when an 

individual has received the ticket through registered mail by 

person, there’s a window of opportunity where they’re able to 

appear before a justice and explain themselves and discuss the 

ticket that they’ve been given in the offence that they’ve been 

determined to have committed. 

 

And so it is good, Mr. Speaker, that even with the mailing, that 

there is an opportunity in place that that person can go to a 

justice and say, to plead his or her side of the story and say why 

they think the ticket is or isn’t appropriate. So I’m happy to see 



3602 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

that that change has occurred, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with this Bill 104, An Act to amend The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990, when there is legislation coming out of 

consultation with the community, when there is legislation 

coming out of a request by an important group in the 

community, I’m encouraged to see the government actually 

engaged in that process because very often that’s not the case. 

And we see legislation being introduced here in the Assembly, 

first time anyone knows about it’s in the Assembly. So I’m glad 

to see the consultation on this one took place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that if this legislation — if it is 

passed, this change — if it does free up the opportunity for 

individuals, law enforcement officers, peace officers to be 

engaged in the work that’s really at the core of their work, 

really at the heart of why they’re doing their jobs, if this does in 

fact free up time, then I do think that’s a good idea. And, Mr. 

Speaker, by reading the comments by the minister, by him 

saying that this request is coming from the Association of 

Police Chiefs, it would lead me to believe that that is in fact the 

case. So I’m pleased to see that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also I’m pleased to see that there is a window of 

opportunity. That now, if tickets are delivered by mail as 

opposed to in person, there still is within 15 days a chance for 

individuals to go before a justice and state their side of the 

situation and state why they think this is or isn’t an appropriate 

ticket, and why they think they may or may not be guilty of the 

offence that they’re charged with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it appears there’s some consultation, and it appears that this 

does make good sense. But as with any piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s important that we hear from everyone who might 

have a say on this. It’s important that due process is followed, 

and that can occur through different ways. It can occur through 

members opposite here having the opportunity to have phone 

conversations with people, to talk about this in the community 

with individuals, to receive feedback through a variety of 

means, whether that’s informally in the community or whether 

that is through the official work through our constituency 

offices. Certainly I know I want to do that as an individual, and 

I’m sure there’s many members here also that want the 

opportunity to do that.  

 

And it’s also appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we have a chance in 

committee to ask questions about this to ensure that t’s are 

crossed, i’s are dotted, and that everything here is well thought 

out, and that the delivery of the changes can be done properly 

and be done efficiently, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, it appears to me that this change to 

the legislation makes sense. But as I said, I wanted to speak to 

some more individuals. And I know other members here in the 

Assembly on my side might have a few things to say about it, 

have a few thoughts. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 104, I 

would move to adjourn debate on 104, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Saskatoon Massey Place has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill 104. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 107 — The Weed 

Control Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to be able to comment on this new piece of legislation 

which will now be referred to as The Weed Control Act. I 

understand that the correct name of the Bill is Bill No. 107, an 

Act respecting prohibited, noxious and nuisance weeds, and 

we’re also going to make consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act. 

 

I’ve had a chance to review the minister’s remarks and also 

review the legislation, and I think it’s fair to say that there are a 

number of questions that the minister’s very brief speech did 

not address. And I think the first question that the minister did 

not address is who has been consulted regarding this major 

overhaul of The Noxious Weed Act, 1984. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears as though this legislation is extremely 

detailed and quite specific in terms of what the expectations 

will now be when it comes to the control and eradication of 

weeds in the province of Saskatchewan. What’s interesting is 

that the minister now gets to appoint or designate weed 

superintendents. And it’s also interesting that 10 persons in any 

municipality can sign a petition and the municipality will now 

have to appoint a weed inspector, and the weed inspector has to 

be appointed by the next council meeting. Now what’s 

interesting is that the municipality will be able to appoint any 

person that the municipality considers to be qualified as a weed 

inspector. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to have a little further 

understanding of what qualifications a person would have to 

have to become a weed inspector. Because that weed inspector 

is now going to be given some very significant powers to go 

onto people’s land, go into buildings, look at domesticated 

animals, look at equipment, go to oil and gas sites, go to 

railroad sites, go into ditches that are the purview of Highways 

or the municipality and make a determination. And they also 

have the ability to not only eradicate weeds, but they also have 

the ability to go onto other people’s land who may have some 

encroachment of those weeds. 

 

And I’m particularly thinking of organic farmers. And we have, 

I think we have, the largest percentage of organic farmers in 

Canada in the province of Saskatchewan. And as all members 

will know, organic farmers become certified because they don’t 

use chemicals and pesticides and fertilizer in the production of 

their organic crops. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So I think there are a number of questions that the minister is 

going to have to address, certainly in committee. And maybe if 

some of the members opposite would like to get up and speak 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3603 

on this Bill, we need to understand what exactly qualifies 

someone to become a weed inspector. 

 

And what’s also interesting in terms of this Bill is, if an urban 

municipality does not appoint a weed inspector, a rural 

municipality that comes up to the urban municipality 

boundaries, that weed inspector has the ability to go into that 

urban municipality and eradicate weeds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are certainly a number of 

people . . . And I happen to live in a constituency where people 

are being encouraged not to use chemicals to eradicate weeds 

and to use natural ways of eradicating weeds because of 

allergies and asthma and some association of these kind of 

chemicals to various health issues. 

 

So I find it interesting that in this legislation, if I’m 

understanding the legislation correctly, that if an urban 

municipality does not appoint a weed inspector, say 10 people 

don’t petition the town council or the city council, there’s no 

weed inspector appointed. And if some rural municipality that 

comes up to the boundaries of that urban municipality 

determines that there might be a weed problem in an urban 

municipality, they have the legal authority according to this 

legislation to go into that urban municipality and eradicate 

weeds. And I’m not sure that we want to go there, given that it’s 

not defined in the legislation what kind of credentials or 

qualifications a person has to have in order to become a weed 

inspector in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The other interesting piece of legislation that’s contained in this 

Bill is that if someone is . . . It’s determined that they have 

noxious weeds or prohibited weeds on their property. And if 

they disagree with this weed inspector — where we haven’t 

really clarified what kind of credentials and qualifications a 

weed inspector has to have — that if they’re ordered to 

eradicate their noxious weeds or prohibited weeds or nuisance 

weeds, Mr. Speaker, they have the ability to go to the rural 

municipality and ask for an appeal. 

 

Now what’s interesting in this legislation is that the rural 

municipality, the rural municipal councillors, can be the appeal 

committee or the rural municipality can appoint an independent 

appeal committee. And what’s not quite clear is what does an 

independent appeal committee mean when you’re being 

appointed by the rural municipal council? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are, given that different people have 

different views on what is a noxious weed, what is a prohibited 

weed, what is a nuisance weed, there’s a great deal of power 

and authority that rests with the minister. The minister can now 

appoint weed superintendents in the province of Saskatchewan. 

The minister can designate every weed superintendent to 

perform duties. And that the rural municipal councillors, at the 

request of 10 voters in their municipality, appoint a weed 

inspector. But we don’t have any definition of what kind of 

qualifications one would need in order to become a weed 

inspector in the province of Saskatchewan. All we know is that 

a weed inspector can be appointed according to, pursuant to 

section 6. And we also know that the minister can designate a 

plant as a noxious weed, a nuisance weed, or a prohibited weed. 

 

Now they’re supposed to publish this information in the Gazette 

as soon as possible. But we note, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government seems to not always get around to publishing 

information in the Gazette. And we also know that this kind of 

information is not necessarily made public. 

 

So the minister, as I said earlier, gave a very, very short little 

speech. The minister told us that this was an outdated Act. He 

told us that this Act no longer meets the needs of Saskatchewan 

residents. The minister told us that this is a modern approach to 

weed and invasive plant control, and this is about applying early 

detection. And the minister also told us that through regulation 

they’re going to fine people, and they’re going to increase the 

amount of money that the municipality can recover from 

landowners for costs incurred as a result of the control measures 

that are being taken during enforcement. 

 

But they haven’t told us who gets to be a weed inspector. They 

haven’t told us what kind of qualifications you have to have in 

order to be a weed inspector in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Now apparently this is all going to be set out in regulations. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, sometimes when you’re talking about going 

onto people’s land and eradicating weeds, and they’re even 

given the ability to farm the land, I think sometimes you might 

want to put some of this into legislation in order that people 

have some understanding of what exactly is going to happen 

when it comes to this new legislation, The Weed Control Act, to 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, apparently the minister contacted the Minister of 

Finance, and the Minister of Finance says, everything’s fine. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these days when it comes to the Minister of 

Finance saying everything’s fine, I have to say this: that we’re 

about to find out in the province of Saskatchewan that this 

government’s overspent by billions of dollars, and in fact 

increased spending by some 33 per cent in the province of 

Saskatchewan since they came to office, and they have over a 

$1 billion deficit. So I’m not sure I’d really be talking to the 

Minister of Finance who apparently has reviewed and analyzed 

the legislation and is satisfied with the financial accounting and 

administrative matters being addressed. 

 

Well I think these days, when it comes to the Minister of 

Finance, when the Minister of Agriculture is telling us that 

everything’s been addressed in terms of the financial 

accounting administrative matters in this Bill, I’m not sure we 

should take that at face value. I think we will want to ask a 

number of questions in order that we have a very clear 

understanding of what this legislation means. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, the Act is going to define three 

classes of noxious weeds. We’ve got nuisance weeds. We’ve 

got prohibited weeds. And we have one other set of weeds, 

which I need to find my Bill: nuisance weeds, noxious weeds, 

and prohibited weeds. 

 

Now it’ll be very interesting which weed is defined as a 

nuisance weed, which weed will be defined as noxious weeds, 

and which weeds will be defined as prohibited weeds. And we 

will want to have that information when the minister goes into 

committee, so I would suggest that the minister needs to come 

well-armed so that we know exactly what kind of weeds that 

they are talking about in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 



3604 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2009 

We will also want to know what credentials or qualifications do 

people need to have in order to become a weed inspector. 

Because the weed inspector has a great deal of power and 

authority according to this legislation, particularly when it 

comes to going onto people’s land, going into buildings. They 

can even go into oil drilling platforms or gas platforms and 

pumping stations and pipeline companies. And they could even 

look at domestic animals in the province of Saskatchewan. So I 

will want to know . . . And irrigation companies and drainage 

associations. So we’ll need to know precisely what 

qualifications these folks have because they’re going to have 

the power to enter buildings and enter land. 

 

Now, they can’t enter your personal home. Private homes can’t 

be entered into by the weed inspector, but they will be able to 

enter onto land, and they will be able to go into buildings, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the one thing that this Bill does do is, if the 

municipality fails to pay the weed inspector, the minister 

through his ministry can pay the weed inspector on behalf of the 

municipality and then get the money back, I guess, from 

revenue sharing from the municipality. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re just about at adjournment. I 

have more things to say, but I would move that we adjourn 

debate on The Weed Control Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 107. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly adjourns 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



November 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3605 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 3476 of Hansard, No. 10A Thursday, November 5, 

2009, in the left column, first paragraph spoken by Mr. Broten, 

the last sentence reads, “He said, I have not said those things 

about them; I said Tommy the commie, Tommy the commie.” 

 

The sentence should read, “He said, I have not said those things 

about them; I said Tommy the comic, Tommy the comic.” 

 

Also on page 3476 in the left column, last paragraph spoken by 

Mr. Broten, the first sentence reads, “Here’s a member on every 

opportunity — there’s not one member over there who could 

deny this — on every opportunity has hurled insults like that 

across the floor, denies it by saying Tommy the commie.” 

 

The sentence should read, “Here’s a member on every 

opportunity — there’s not one member over there who could 

deny this — on every opportunity has hurled insults like that 

across the floor, denies it by saying Tommy the comic.” 

 

The online transcript for November 5, 2009, has been corrected. 

 

We apologize for these errors. 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3573 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3573 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3574 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Northern Drug and Gang Enforcement Unit 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 

 National Medicare Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3574 

 Good News for Saskatchewan 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3575 

 International Day for Tolerance 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3575 

 Martin Glackin Honoured for Years of Service 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3575 

 National Anti-Bullying Week 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3576 

 Movember 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3576 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Livestock Producers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3576 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3576 

 Severance and Present Employment of Former Public Servant 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3577 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3578 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3578 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3578 

 Future of Regina and Moose Jaw Casinos 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3579 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3579 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3579 

 Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3580 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3580 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority Introduces Reusable Bags 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3581 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3581 

 New Funding Standard for Day Programs 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3582 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3582 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3582 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3583 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3583 

 Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3585 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3585 

 



 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3586 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3587 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3589 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3591 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3592 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3593 

 Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009/ 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 

 Bill No. 116 — The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and Hand-held Electronic Communications Equipment)  

 Amendment Act, 2009 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3596 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3599 

 Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3602 

CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3605 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




