




















































Hansard: November 18, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 16A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3671 

 November 18, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corporation. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m very pleased to rise today to welcome some very special 

guests in the legislature. Joining with us today in your gallery 

are members of the Campbell Collegiate chapter of Students 

Against Drinking and Driving, otherwise known as SADD; 

their adviser Jessica Hodsman; Tim Spelliscy, the provincial 

director of SADD Saskatchewan; Darrell Liebrecht from the 

SaskTel Pioneers; and Shannon Ell from SGI’s [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] traffic safety promotion area. Welcome 

to this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the guests are here today to launch SADD’s 

annual Red Ribbon campaign by distributing red ribbons to all 

members of the Assembly. The red ribbons are for people to 

display on their vehicle to show their commitment not to drink 

and drive. And thanks to the financial support of SaskTel 

Pioneers, over 1 million ribbons have been distributed in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, impaired driving is the number one cause of fatal 

collisions on our province’s roads. So today is a very special 

day because it’s also the National Day of Remembrance for 

Road Crash Victims, a day to honour those who have been 

killed or seriously injured. SGI is very proud to work with 

SADD, one of their key safety partners to help raise awareness 

about drinking and driving. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join with me in 

welcoming the SADD members and the other members in the 

legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

join with the minister in welcoming the students, these 

important leaders, to the Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. The 

work that they do to increase awareness about the dangers of 

drinking and driving, and how, Mr. Speaker, drinking and 

driving is a real concern in society. Their work is good work, 

and I thank them for coming today. And I thank them for their 

work throughout the year. So I join with the member in 

welcoming the students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce to you and through you a number of guests that are 

seated in your gallery. Later today I’ll be introducing a 

government Bill that will recognize the importance of hunting, 

fishing, and trapping to Saskatchewan, and that it recognizes 

our heritage and our way of life. 

 

And joining us today, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation — I’d ask you to stand or wave — Ray 

Wild, Darrell Crabbe, Robert Fournier; from the Saskatchewan 

Outfitters Association, Hal Stupnikoff; from the Saskatchewan 

Flyfishers Association, Wayne and Janelle Phillips. From the 

Saskatchewan Trappers Association, Don Gordon; from the 

Saskatchewan Alliance for Wildlife and Agriculture, Joyce 

Lorenz, Helen Young, and Ron Young. From the Saskatchewan 

Black Powder Association, Sam Brailean and Brian Richmond. 

And joining us from the Ministry of Environment today as well 

are Lyle Saigeon and Lin Gallagher. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of our guests also participate on our 

wildlife advisory committee. All the folks that are joining us 

today and the rest of the members of their organizations are 

dedicated to our province and to our environment and wildlife 

management. 

 

And I would ask that all members join me in welcoming them 

to their Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I too would like to 

recognize and welcome the guests from the Wildlife Federation 

and other organizations to the legislature here today. Thank you 

for the good work that you do. And it’s much appreciated by 

obviously the entire province because it’s not always work 

that’s recognized and thanked, but it’s certainly most definitely 

appreciated. So I’d like to welcome the guests to the legislature 

here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

and through you to members of the Assembly a group of 

producers, farmers, from around the province seated in your 

gallery who are here to visit with us in the Assembly. They’re 

farmers who have been caught in the backdraft of the 

bankruptcy, the proposed bankruptcy, of Big Sky. 

 

These are producers who in good faith grew the grain, produced 

it, hauled it to Big Sky, and haven’t been paid. And they’re here 

to listen in on the discussions. And I wish all members to join 

with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And I’d like to talk a 

little bit about that, that the low wages paid to the CBO 

workers, those in the community-based organizations, this low 



3672 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

wage results in high staff turnover. The subsequent lack of 

caregiver continuity has a negative impact on the quality of care 

clients receive. And we know that research demonstrates that 

CBO workers are paid on average 8 to $10 an hour per hour less 

than employees performing work of equal value in government 

departments. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the good city of 

Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of a new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area and has 

had hundreds of signatures for this petition. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition, I see one 

is from the good constituency of Saskatoon Massey Place, and 

the other individuals are from the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you. I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to present 

yet another petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who have yet not heard a word from the 

Sask Party as to any commitment of assistance. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of maintaining quality health care services. And we all 

hope the Government of Saskatchewan recognize the essential 

role of all health care providers as valued members to the health 

care team. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all understand that through the commitment of 

adequate funding and installation of good faith, and collective 

bargaining process would go a long way to doing that. And the 

petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed, Mr. Speaker, by people from 

Clavet, Martensville, Delisle, Saskatoon, Guernsey, and 

Lanigan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing in The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The petitioners note that the vacancy rate for rental 

accommodation in The Battlefords is very low, but the cost of 

rental accommodation is increasing at an alarming rate. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3673 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all residents of Killdeer 

Apartments in the city of North Battleford. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of our 

province as it relates to the unprecedented mismanagement of 

their finances by the Sask Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These are signed by good folks and concerned residents of 

Regina and Kindersley. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Students Against Drinking and Driving 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the young 

people from Students Against Drinking and Driving, also 

known as SADD, who are in your gallery with us here today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

SADD is committed to helping reduce the number of impaired 

driving collisions in Saskatchewan down to zero. A lofty goal, 

Mr. Speaker, but an extremely worthwhile one. Mr. Speaker, 

last year alone, 71 people were killed in Saskatchewan and 

almost 1,000 more were injured in collisions involving a 

drunken driver. These numbers certainly demonstrate the needs 

for groups like SADD who are dedicated to helping make our 

roads safer. 

 

Initiatives like the Red Ribbon campaign demonstrate how 

SADD is a leader in raising public awareness on the dangers of 

impaired driving. Thanks to SADD and the generous financial 

support of the SaskTel Pioneers, well over 1 million red ribbons 

have been distributed throughout Saskatchewan. Each one of 

these ribbons serves as a visual reminder of the dangers of 

impaired driving. I know I will display my red ribbon proudly 

on my vehicle, and I welcome and encourage all members to do 

the same. 

 

These SADD members are indeed a part of a bright and 

impressive generation. Our future is in good hands. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

La Ronge Seniors Club 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to draw attention to 

the amazing work done by the La Ronge Seniors Club and its 

members from La Ronge, Air Ronge, and surrounding area. The 

La Ronge Seniors Club was started 40 years ago by Lyla 

Gibson and Chris Holmstrup in an effort to provide services and 

support to the seniors in La Ronge. 

 

The Seniors Club is non-profit and is mostly run by volunteers. 

The continuation of the club is a testament to the undying spirit 

and hard work done by its members. Although there are only 15 

members, they keep going, running solely on their dedication to 

the club. 

 

The Seniors Club recently had a substantial fundraising drive to 

raise funds for a new building. They raised an amazing 

$210,000 through lunches, exhibition bingos, several suppers 

for different occasions, and carpet bowling. Getting a new 

building was costly, but I am happy to report that it is now 

partially opened. They do have to pay for utilities, but their land 

tax is free, a donation from the town of La Ronge. 

 

The facility is now being used by home care for foot care and 

for fitness classes. They also have regular Friday bingos and 

serve lunches for craft fairs. The services that they provide 

contribute to the strong sense of community in the La Ronge 

and area and are very much appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am asking all members to join me in 

congratulating the La Ronge Seniors Club for their continued 

operation, hard work, and dedication. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday, 

November 17th, five people were invested by Lieutenant 

Governor Gordon Barnhart into the Saskatchewan Order of 

Merit at a ceremony here in Regina. 

 

Harold MacKay, a Regina lawyer, has served with numerous 

organizations and has received many awards and honours 

including the Order of Canada. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Linda Rudachyk, a social worker from Weyburn, has served 

with many groups and has received many awards as well for her 

efforts on behalf of at-risk children. 

 

Lorne Scott of Indian Head is a former provincial Environment 

minister who has served with many organizations dedicated to 

preserving the natural world in addition to his many years as a 

public servant. 

 

Grant Devine, whose hard work led to the diversification of our 

economy, was elected leader of the Progressive Conservative 

Party of Saskatchewan in 1979 and was premier of 

Saskatchewan from 1982 to 1991. 

 

Dr. David Millar, a chiropractor from Regina, is a tireless 



3674 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

volunteer who is currently working on Creative Kids, a 

community-based initiative for helping vulnerable children to 

participate in the arts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the House to join me in congratulating 

these individuals for their great achievements. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Nine-Man Football Championship 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday 

the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association held the 

2009 nine-man provincial football championship in Lumsden. 

The final game saw the Swan Valley Tigers taking on the 

Lumsden Devils. I congratulate both teams and their coaches 

for making it to the final. 

 

Lumsden was trailing early on, but scored 28 straight points 

before half-time, sailing their way to victory. I would like to 

extend special congratulations to head coach Luke Dunville, 

defensive coach Dan McDougall, and special teams coach 

Verne Barber. 

 

The Lumsden Devils were led by no. 12, Jesse Kearly; no. 20, 

Kelsey Peterson; no. 25, Shylo Neumann; no. 66, Joshua 

Taylor; no. 69, Brett Burns; and no. 70, Brian Skidmore. 

 

We all know how important football is to our province as all 

citizens, no matter their political stripes, unite behind the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. I’m sure we’ll all be cheering on 

Sunday as they take on the Stamps. In the tradition of many 

great Saskatchewan football players, perhaps some of these 

talented, young players may one day grace the fields at Taylor 

Field and don the green and white for our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating the Lumsden Devils on their victory, and all 

Saskatchewan nine-man football teams for their dedication, 

athleticism, and sportsmanship. And of course, Mr. Speaker, go 

Roughriders. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Addictions Awareness Week 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is 

Saskatchewan’s Addictions Awareness Week which coincides 

with National Addictions Awareness Week. Communities, 

organizations, and agencies across the province are holding 

various activities to raise public awareness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, addictions do not discriminate. It can affect every 

family. As most are aware, I too was a 20-year drug addict at 

one time. I’m also the founder of Teen Challenge 

Saskatchewan, a long-term, residential addiction treatment 

centre. Past MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] Ted 

Merriman, who I replaced in my riding, highlighted this issue 

with his own daughter Kelly, who was fighting a crystal meth 

addiction. The Ministry of Health provides support for 

Addiction Awareness Week by helping to develop, produce, 

and distribute resource material for the folks of Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government is committed to reducing drug and alcohol use 

and breaking the cycle of all addictions. We recently announced 

the formation of a new addiction advisory committee with the 

goal of creating a provincial addictions agency to strengthen the 

current systems of prevention, education, and treatment 

services. We are moving forward by ensuring people with 

addictions and their families get the support they need and 

deserve. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Dance Students Perform with Moscow Ballet 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, six dance students from Moose Jaw’s Dance Images 

by BJ tried out for the Moscow Ballet’s performance of The 

Nutcracker that was presented this month here in Regina. 

 

There was no guarantee that the six students would meet the 

strict requirements of the ballet company. However Line Kyed, 

Hannah Brown, Cordell Bellrose, Rachael Carline, Riley 

Copeman, and Tessa Gray accompanied the professionals on 

stage at the Conexus Art Centre. The dancers, ranging in age 

from 8 to 15, have been rehearsing in Regina once a week since 

August and continued on this gruelling schedule right up until 

the show. 

 

Being part of the Moscow Ballet’s performance is a big 

commitment, but teacher and owner of the dance studio, Barb 

Jackman, is confident that her students have what it takes to 

shine in their individual performances. 

 

This is not the first year that the dance studio has had students 

participate in the ballet, but to have six dancers this year is very 

exciting. The characters that the dancers have been cast in range 

from a partygoer, to a mouse, to an angel, and one dancer who 

has been given the opportunity to do some pointe work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

these young dancers and Barb Jackman for their dedication to 

the art of entertainment and their contribution, not only to 

international culture, but to Moose Jaw’s cultural heritage. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

8th Annual Home Safe Home Gala 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I had the 

privilege of attending the 8th annual Home Safe Home gala 

dinner in support of Saskatoon Interval and Adelle House. 

Interval and Adelle House provide a safe environment for 

women and their children in times of need. Adelle House 

provides a 12-unit affordable housing program that assists and 

supports a new start. They also provide counselling, referral, 

and advocacy services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cycle of abuse is psychologically complicated 

and often victims of violence will blame themselves and not 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3675 

tell. Dinner speaker, CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 

news anchor Trish Cheveldayoff, grew up keeping the secret of 

what went on behind closed doors in her childhood home. Her 

brave face never disclosed the trials she experienced. 

 

Trish shared her journey, which included facing critical issues. 

She chose spirituality and acknowledged how the love and joy 

of her family provides strength. Trish displays a positive sense 

of humour and the belief that everything will be okay. Trish’s 

journey is a powerful statement to the human spirit. Stories like 

Trish’s inspire the work being done at Interval and Adelle 

House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please join me in applauding Trish for sharing her 

journey, and also thanking Interval and Adelle House staff for 

recognizing and nurturing the human spirit in others. Thank 

you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Farmers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Agriculture. And the minister will know that over 

the last couple of decades, up till 2007, the hog industry in this 

province was growing, flourishing, reaching a peak in 2007. 

And since that time, like much of the economy of 

Saskatchewan, the hog production has been in decline. And in 

fact, last week, Big Sky Farms, one of the largest, or if not the 

largest hog operation, filed for credit protection. 

 

My question to the minister is, in this process many grain 

farmers have been delivering grain to Big Sky Farms. They 

grew the grain in good faith. They fertilized. They harvested. 

They brought the grain to Big Sky, and now haven’t been paid. 

My question to the minister: how many farmers are left holding 

the bag for this credit protection under the mismanagement of 

this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

member opposite, that we certainly also empathize with the 

producers that are caught out there with money owing them 

from Big Sky, as we do with all accounts receivable to Big Sky. 

There’s a number of other businesses out there also caught in 

this process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that as of today Big Sky is 

contacting producers — if they haven’t already, will be 

contacting producers — to update them on the situation. But 

also that contracts are being offered to producers out there who 

have hauled grain in the past to Big Sky, up to 40,000 bushels 

of barley at 40 cents per bushel over the current price, or 35,000 

bushels of wheat at 50 cents over mill price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hope also additionally that producers can 

recover some of the money that they’re owed, if not all of it, 

through the settlement that comes out of Ernst & Young, and 

we are certainly hoping that happens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister will know that 

he has a number of representatives on the board of Big Sky 

Farms. Now let me get this straight. The agreement or the help 

that is being offered is, the farmers who are owed money can 

haul more grain. And their promise is a 40-cent premium on the 

grain that they haul in the future, but no money for the grain 

they’ve hauled to date. That doesn’t sound like a very good 

deal. 

 

And my advice to farmers, to be very careful when dealing with 

this government when they make that kind of promise. I say to 

the minister, in light of the fact that Big Sky is now under credit 

protection and 63 per cent of this company is owned by the 

government and the government has members on the board, is it 

not the responsibility of his government to come forward and 

pay the bills owed to these farmers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think I 

have to remind the member opposite and the Leader of the 

Opposition who got us into this mess. Every taxpayer, every 

taxpayer in this province knows that that NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government was famous for picking winners 

and losers. We saw them put $30 million into Big Sky and 

totally neglect every other part of the pork industry in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, if it wasn’t for the NDP, we wouldn’t be 

having this conversation today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to also remind the Leader of the Opposition 

about Moose Jaw pork, another venture that the NDP put 

taxpayers’ dollars in and went under. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

sure my memory serves me correctly that there was producers 

like we have today that were owed money under that 

government’s investment into Worldwide Pork. Did they get 

any compensation when the NDP was in power? Not one red 

cent, Mr. Speaker. So it’s hypocritical of that leader to be 

saying today, don’t do as I do; do as I say. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member, the minister 

can argue politics with me, but that’s cold comfort for the 

hundreds of farmers, the hundreds of farmers who are out of 

pocket tens of thousands of dollars. 

 

In fact, one of the farmers who is here today is owed $100,000. 

This individual has also contracted a trucker to deliver that 

$100,000 worth of grain and owes the trucking company 

$7,000. Many of these farmers also have taken out a cash 

advance from the Canadian Wheat Board on their grain and are 

expected to pay it back. 

 

My question to the minister is: when will he come to his senses 

and realize that it’s his responsibility and the responsibility of 

the shareholders of the company to pay these farmers? Not a 

handout. This is for grain they delivered to a company that he’s 

responsible for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 



3676 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find this line of 

questioning amazing. They were in power for 16 years. And I’ll 

give you the example of Moose Jaw pork, which you had 

invested in and you did not compensate creditors in that 

situation. But, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got another example — 

Quadra and Community Pork Ventures, 2004 under the NDP. 

And there’s a number of creditors across that area, investors out 

in that area. And did the NDP compensate any of those 

producers? Not one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So for that member, the Leader of the Opposition, to get up and 

say, well now we’re not in power; you should be doing these 

things — after it was them that invested the $30 million of 

taxpayers’ money and lost it — I find very hypocritical once 

again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Question to the minister. Obviously he’s 

unaware of the fact that the federal government has put billions 

of dollars into the auto industry in Ontario, along with the 

taxpayers of Ontario and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

General Motors is now coming out, paying back the debt. And 

that’s how governments in this country operate. And we argue 

and urge this minister to go to Ottawa and get the support for 

the hog industry that other governments have got for their 

industry. That’s what we’re asking. 

 

My question to the minister is this: they argue that they have no 

money left, that they can’t afford to pay the people who grew 

the grain. And yet they have money for Doug Emsley. They 

have money for Garnet Garven. They have money for the 

friends of the Sask Party, but none for the grain producers who 

are left holding the bag. When are they going to change this 

unfair attitude and come to the assistance of these grain 

farmers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last night I had 

the good fortune to go to a pork symposium in Saskatoon. And 

the message was loud and clear from the entire pork industry 

out there: do not continue to pick winners and losers and do not 

continue to support Big Sky at the expense of every other hog 

producer in this province. And they reminded me that actually a 

number of the other hog producers with tax dollars were going 

in to support Big Sky while at the same time neglecting the 

entire industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s go back to some of the other investments this 

NDP government made when they were in power. SPUDCO, 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] does that 

come to mind? $35 million, Mr. Speaker. We could do a lot for 

farmers in this province if we had that 35 million. Navigata, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Members will 

come to order and allow the minister to respond to the question. 

The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

[14:00] 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Navigata alone was a $90 million loss. We could do a 

lot for hog producers and producers like are in the gallery today 

if we still had that. But that government invested it and lost 

those taxpayer dollars. 

 

On top of that, the Agri-Food Equity Fund, the member 

opposite knows well, this was programs to invest in private 

business out there. That NDP government invested 31 million 

in those ventures, lost $22 million. Mr. Speaker, when you add 

that up, that’s in excess of $150 million. We could do a lot for 

farmers in this province if we still had those taxpayers’ dollars 

in the General Revenue Fund. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Criminal Record Checks 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the government has tabled legislation to make public 

any criminal record checks for individuals running for elected 

positions at the municipal level. When asked what type of 

records would be made public, the minister said, and I quote: 

 

It would be a level 1 criminal record check. It makes 

public that there is a record and states what the offence 

was. 

 

There are four levels of criminal record checks in Canada that 

have a range of documents that are made public as a result of 

the check. For example, a level 3 check might tell you that an 

individual has been charged with a multitude of offences, some 

of which were plea bargained away and some of which were 

stayed — that is, put on the shelf but not disposed of finally. 

 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: why does he feel that 

these sorts of charges are not relevant and that other documents 

are? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, and thank you to the critic for her first question on 

this. It’s only taken about three or four weeks to get to an MA 

[Municipal Affairs] question. But I can tell the member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, that the option of having criminal record 

checks was something requested by the northern committee 

reviewing the Act. This was something that they asked for. This 

was something that we were happy to respond to, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s included in the Act. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we found out yesterday 

from the government that they are interested in making it 

compulsory for criminal background checks to be made public 

for people seeking public office as MLAs at the provincial 

level. 

 

The Minister of Justice said, and I quote, “It was a bit of a 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3677 

non-issue for our government because we already included as 

part of the process when a candidate wants to run for the party, 

they have to file a criminal record check.” When asked if there 

was anyone in the Sask Party caucus that had a criminal record, 

the Minister of Justice said, and I quote, “I’m not aware of 

anybody.” He also said on making it mandatory at the 

provincial level, “. . . the more the public knows about a 

candidate before they run for office, the better-informed their 

decision is . . .” 

 

So to the Minister of Justice: is he saying that if a member of 

the Sask Party caucus has a criminal record check that is not 

currently public, does he agree that it should be made public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that I 

can see why the NDP would be worried about criminal record 

checks for members of the legislature being made public, Mr. 

Speaker, with the current predicament that the Leader of the 

Opposition finds himself in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Sask Party, I don’t see how 

that’s within the administrative competence of the government. 

But I can tell, I can tell the House that the Saskatchewan Party 

requires criminal record checks to be conducted for anybody 

looking to seek our nomination, which is not the case for the 

NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on the topic of The 

Election Act and the possible changes that the Sask Party are 

planning on bringing forward, a reporter asked the Minister of 

Justice, and I quote, “If somebody had a drunk driving 

conviction from 20 years ago, would that disqualify them as a 

Sask Party candidate?” The Minister of Justice said, and I 

quote, “No. They file the document, and the party and the 

constituency association would make a determination on it.” 

 

Well the current Minister of Energy and Resources does in fact 

have this issue in his recent past. I have a court document here 

where the minister was charged in 2005 where he, and I quote, 

“. . . did, while his ability to operate a motor vehicle was 

impaired by alcohol, did operate a grey 2001 Chev pickup.” 

And then the minister was also charged with, and I quote, “. . . 

without reasonable excuse, refused to comply with a demand 

made to him to provide samples of his breath.” 

 

My question is: was the Sask Party policy followed? And were 

these charges brought to the attention of the party and the 

Kindersley constituency association? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is nothing but a 

horrible drive-by smear from the members of the opposition. 

They should be embarrassed. And I would ask them to stand in 

their place and withdraw any kind of this kind of accusation. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party has a long-standing practice, since its 

inception, of expecting to have criminal record checks done. 

The information is provided by the prospective candidate, 

analyzed by the appropriate committee, and determinations are 

made whether a candidate is appropriate to run for office. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the members on this side of 

the House are quality candidates, good citizens, good members 

of their community. And, Mr. Speaker, we look at those things. 

 

We make careful and accurate, well assessed determinations, 

unlike the members opposite who have no kind of scrutiny, no 

kind of assessment whatever. And now they have the nerve to 

stand in the House today and make accusations of the members 

on this side of the House. Mr. Speaker, that is going to be a 

strange method of them doing anything, Mr. Speaker. The 

public should have no confidence in that kind of members 

opposite — none whatever. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, just to take a minute to 

examine the possible changes that the Sask Party are bringing 

forward to The Election Act. The charge of refusing to blow in 

the Criminal Code carries the exact same penalties as driving 

while impaired. The two charges are basically considered to be 

identical for all practical purposes. 

 

The charges against the Minister of Energy and Resources were 

stayed. It is exactly these types of charges that would show up 

on a level 3 check, but not necessarily on a level 1 check. And 

it’s appalling that the minister would expect others to live by 

standards that he is not willing to stand up to. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: when it comes time to bring forward 

legislation for people seeking to become an MLA, will it be a 

level 3 check or will he stick with the level 1 check to protect 

people like members of his caucus? 

 

And my question to the minister is: has the Sask Party policy 

been followed and were these charges brought to the attention 

of the party and the Kindersley constituency association? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been a review 

prepared through the Chief Electoral Officer of The Election 

Act. There is a search under way for a new Chief Electoral 

Officer. Various things dealing with the election . . . will be 

dealt with and will be dealt with in due course. Probably in the 

next few months, there’ll be a review taken. There’ll be 

consultation with the members opposite. 

 

And what I would like to invite the members opposite to do is 

consider amending their practice so that they would require 

criminal record checks of their prospective candidates. It’s 

something that is already being done on this side of the House 

and I’d like to challenge the members over there to perhaps start 

conducting that review. 

 

And maybe they would like to start conducting that review 

immediately instead of waiting for the next election, because 

the members over here did it the last election, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3678 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow the 

minister will be releasing his replacement for the most 

irresponsible budget in this province’s history when we see the 

mid-year report. This document will confirm that the minister’s 

budget was based on phony revenue projections, particularly 

those of potash. 

 

Simple question to the minister: what is he now forecasting 

potash revenues to be for this budget year, and how did he get 

this projection so very, very wrong? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know that 

the members opposite are awaiting with great anticipation the 

mid-year report that’ll be released tomorrow, and so I will leave 

it until tomorrow to answer the specific nature of the member’s 

question. 

 

In general detail, I acknowledge that there are some challenges 

in this province with the potash file. That is for sure, Mr. 

Speaker, and that will be made even more clear tomorrow. The 

bottom line is is this province has got two stories occurring in it. 

They certainly have the challenges of the potash story. But there 

also is a very good news story related to all of the things that 

are happening in this province. Mr. Speaker, this government in 

this province has been able to realize $300 million in tax 

savings for the people of Saskatchewan. And that is very, very 

important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of our efforts we’ve taken 80,000 people 

off the tax rolls of this province completely. Mr. Speaker, that 

means for a family of four with $35,000 income that they’ll 

save over $2,600. A single parent with two school-age children 

and a $35,000 income will save more than 2,800. Mr. Speaker, 

this is the good news part of the story of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there are a few distinct 

differences between this side of the Assembly and that side of 

the Assembly. This side of the Assembly chooses books over 

balloons. This side of the Assembly chooses accounting over 

cheerleading. And this side of the Assembly chooses plain talk 

over pompoms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister keeps trying to excuse his phony revenue 

projections by saying nobody could’ve known. Not correct, Mr. 

Speaker. An analyst’s report from Merrill Lynch dated October 

2008 states the effect of falling grain prices. I quote: “Grain 

sell-off pressures fertilizer demand and prices.” Further, a report 

from Rabobank, the world’s largest lender to farmers, dated 

January 7, I quote, 

 

Global prices for fertilizer and agricultural chemicals are 

expected to be “significantly” lower in 2009 . . . driven by 

a fall in demand and the global financial crisis . . . 

A report from the Department of Agricultural Economics, 

University of Illinois, dated January 14, I quote, “Fertilizer 

prices likely to decline in 2009.”  

 

Question to the minister: can he not read? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, when the 

member opposite said there’s a distinct difference between 

members on that side of the House and this side of the House, 

he is absolutely correct. This side of the House believes in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this side of the House 

will accept the challenge of the falling potash revenue and do it 

with a balanced approach, and we will deal with it. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we will also make sure that this side of the 

House recognizes the other side of Saskatchewan’s economy 

which is doing very well, thank you. Sébastien Levoie, the 

Laurentian Bank economist, says, “Saskatchewan and Manitoba 

are breezing through the economic and financial crisis with an 

ease that must make other regions envious.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Dominion Bond Rating Service has given 

Saskatchewan a credit upgrade, saying that particularly they cite 

debt reduction, fiscal prudence, and sound economic 

fundamentals as the reason why they’re giving us the upgrade. 

These are the experts in the field that are looking at 

Saskatchewan in comparison to other provinces and saying 

Saskatchewan is the place to be. The only people who don’t 

realize that are the 20 members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that same bond rating 

agency that the minister refers to, and again he selectively 

plucks statistics, also says that under the Sask Party, their 

economy, our economy is shrinking, and that’s a concern, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The minister continues to try to explain away his unprecedented 

mistake on potash revenues. I wonder how he’s going to explain 

this one. I have here a news release dated on January 5th, 2009 

which says, I quote: 

 

“Toward the end of the quarter . . . worldwide crop 

nutrient sales activity dropped sharply and it is expected to 

remain weak through at least the third quarter”. . . 

 

“Because of these conditions, we are reducing our 

production to manage excess inventories . . .” 

 

These words, Mr. Speaker, these words, where did these come 

from? They came from our own backyard, from Mosaic, one of 

Saskatchewan’s leading potash producers. How did the minister 

miss these comments, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Was the minister too busy listening to the Premier’s empty 

rhetoric and cheerleading to hear and see the storm clouds 

gathering? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3679 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have 

acknowledged and I will certainly further acknowledge 

tomorrow in the mid-year report the challenge of the decreased 

potash sales in this province. That is a fact that is true, and in 

hindsight everyone is looking back and wondering how it could 

have changed so dramatically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not only true of the Ministry of Finance and 

the Ministry of Energy and Resources. It is also true of the 

potash companies themselves. But, Mr. Speaker, those same 

potash companies believe in a very concrete fashion in the 

future of the potash industry because they’re committed to 

continue their capital expansion to the tunes of several billions 

of dollars in this province. BHP Billiton is actively exploring 

the creation of a new mine in the Jansen area. And so those 

sorts of things are going to help us moving forward. 

 

[14:15] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the fact is is that this province’s economy is 

doing very, very well in general and the people of this province 

know that, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Financial Post/CFIB 

[Canadian Federation of Independent Business] ranks five of 

the 10 best cities in the country to do business and five of them 

are in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s good news. And 

people in those cities understand that the economy is doing very 

well as opposed to those members. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in recent days in daily 

newspapers, political and business columnists in articles have 

referred to this minister with many terms. These include 

confused, disingenuous, misleading, incompetent, to name but a 

few. 

 

To the Minister of Finance: after his fine display of fiscal 

incompetence and blunder after blunder, why should 

Saskatchewan people have any trust in this minister or any faith 

in this minister as he tables his mid-year report tomorrow? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been around a good 

many years and I’ve had names called of me by better people 

than the minister opposite, or the member opposite. And you 

learn to get a little bit thick-skinned in this job, Mr. Speaker, 

and, you know, to understand that the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You also 

learn to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. That’s once. Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You also 

learn to understand that the people of this province are very, 

very positive about this government, about this economy, and 

about the direction for the course of the finances. All those 

members opposite have to do is look back last weekend, I 

believe, and look at the results of the two polls that were 

conducted in Saskatchewan to see what the people think of this 

government and what they think of the members of the 

opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before we move on, I just want to 

make this comment. I’m concerned about some of the level of 

questioning, and in particular the one question reflecting on 

individual members. There are certain guidelines. I didn’t 

interrupt today because I want to make sure I’ve got the rules 

understood correctly. I will be reviewing some of the questions 

that were presented today to ensure that members and their 

well-being and personal accusations were not infringed upon. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 117, The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Environment has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 117, The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved first 

reading of Bill 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 



3680 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

Clerk: — First reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 407 through 498. 

 

The Speaker: — 407 through 498 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Plan for Climate Change 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to continue speaking to the motion that’s before the Assembly. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we listened with great interest yesterday as 

the minister brought the motion forward and explained to us 

what the intent of the motion was. We listened in great detail as 

the Premier urged us all to participate in this debate and to 

support moving forward on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan with a plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree. We agree we need to move forward 

with a plan. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my 

remarks, I’m going to move an amendment to the motion that in 

fact will put their own plan forward, Mr. Speaker. It’ll be their 

own plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re urging the government to do is to 

reintroduce their own Bill, Bill No. 95, because we support that 

Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, we urge them to include in that Bill 

their own targets from their own election platform, Mr. 

Speaker, because we also support those. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all we’re asking this government to do is to 

support itself, Mr. Speaker, support its own position in moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker. So at the end of my remarks today, I’m 

going to move the following motion: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following 

words at the end of the motion: 

 

That this Assembly will support the government’s plan as 

follows: 

 

That Bill No. 95, An Act Respecting the Management and 

Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and Adaption to Climate 

Change from the previous legislative session be 

reintroduced; and 

 

That the targets the government campaigned on in the 

election from their platform document Securing the 

Future: New Ideas for Saskatchewan, that is a 32 per cent 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from current levels 

by 2020 and an 80 per cent reduction from current levels 

by 2050, be added as legislative targets into the 

legislation; and 

 

That this legislation shall be passed by December the 3rd, 

2009 giving the minister clear authority and an actual plan 

to present at Copenhagen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re simply taking their own legislation. 

Legislation they put before this House saying they wanted it 

passed, which incidentally they haven’t reintroduced, but we 

want reintroduced today, tomorrow, or as soon as possible so 

we can pass it prior to December the 3rd, 2009. 

 

We want their legislation passed, Mr. Speaker. We want the 

government to have its legislation and direction passed. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we want their targets from their campaign 

platform passed, Mr. Speaker. And we support those targets and 

that legislation. And we commit today to pass it prior to 

December the 3rd, 2009, prior to the minister going to 

Copenhagen, so that there is clear, solid direction from this 

Assembly for the minister to take to the Copenhagen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re not proposing amending anything. 

We’re proposing accepting their legislation as it is. We’re 

proposing to accept their targets as they are from their platform, 

Mr. Speaker. So we’re being co-operative. We’re being 

positive, and we want this minister to have, to have that 

mandate. We want that legislation passed prior to her going to 

Copenhagen on December the 3rd, 2009. And we the official 

opposition will support this. We will support their own 

legislation, and we’ll support their own targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government will live up to their own 

commitments, will actually re-table their own legislation, if 

they’ll walk the talk, we’re there with them. We’re with the 

minister. We’ll support her and we’ll send her off to 

Copenhagen with a unanimous motion supporting that 

legislation, with a mandate, with a real plan with real substance. 

Not just a motion saying we have a plan, but actually with a 

plan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what our amendment is about. 

 

We listened to the Premier yesterday talking about, we need to 

be positive. We need to move forward. We need to have a 

vision for tomorrow that we can all live with, and we need to 

participate in our democracy. And we need to do it in a positive 

way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now had the opportunity to review 

some additional information that was provided, including Bill 

95. We reviewed it in detail, and we support Bill 95. We want 

you to bring it into the legislature, and we want to pass it. And 

we support your targets. We support the 32 per cent by 2020, 

and we support the 80 per cent by 2050. We support your 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3681 

election platform, and we support you bringing it forward. 

 

And we make a solemn commitment today that we will pass 

that legislation with those targets in it before, before the 

minister has to go to Copenhagen. We’ll do that. We’ll take 

your position and we’ll support it and we’ll support you and 

we’ll support the minister going to Copenhagen. We’ll be 

positive. We’re willing to be positive, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And we, to show our true intent, Mr. Speaker, and our 

willingness to co-operate with the government in reaching its 

own legislation — it’s not the opposition’s legislation — and 

their own emission reduction targets, Mr. Speaker, we’ll 

support them both. We’ll support what they had in their election 

platform, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll support their legislation. 

 

And we encourage all members of this House to do just that 

because to do otherwise would be contrary to what our leader 

and Premier said yesterday. The Premier, the head of our 

government, asked us to be positive and co-operative. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re doing just that. We want to be positive. We 

want to be co-operative. And we want to move forward with a 

real plan, a plan that was designed by the government, but we 

will say this: a good plan. It was your plan. We’ll say the 

legislation is good legislation, Mr. Speaker. We’ll say your 

targets in your election platform were good targets — 32 per 

cent by 2020. We applaud the minister for having that in their 

platform, and we applaud the government for putting that 

forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we say we accept that. We accept their 32 

per cent reduction by 2020, and we accept their legislation, Bill 

95. And in combination of their real plan, their real substance, it 

achieves what the Premier asked us to do yesterday, by looking 

forward in a positive manner to really have a vision for 

tomorrow — a vision that looks after both our environment and 

our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we agree with the government. We agree with the 

government. And we believe we can move forward in a 

constructive manner, in a way in which all of us can support, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we spent some time examining in detail the legislation, 

examining in detail the implications of their own targets within 

that legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, we applaud the Minister of 

the Environment for Bill No. 95, for the direction she’s setting, 

for the contents of that Bill, and for the targets that they had in 

their election platform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister has done a wonderful job in putting 

forward this legislation in conjunction with their election 

platform targets. And we’re actually going to say today that we 

will commit, and our motion locks us into a commitment to 

pass that Bill, with those targets, prior to December the 3rd, 

2009. 

 

And we want to send to the Premier a message that, yes, we 

want to be positive and co-operative in dealing with this very 

difficult challenge, perhaps the most difficult challenge that our 

province and the future generations in our province face. It’s the 

combination of dealing with the issue of the environment and 

climate change in coordination and in consideration of our 

economy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we all care. Every single one of the 58 

members in this Assembly, I know, cares about our 

environment and care about our economy. And, Mr. Speaker, 

for those reasons, and taking the Premier’s direction yesterday 

to heart when he asked us all to be willing to move forward in a 

positive way on this issue, we took that to heart. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why today the official opposition is 

prepared to agree to their Bill No. 95 which we would like 

reintroduced immediately so we can actually move forward in a 

positive way. We ask the government to put that Bill back in 

and to simply include their own platform reduction targets, Mr. 

Speaker, and we have what we would call a real plan. 

 

And it’s their plan, Mr. Speaker. But when good work is done, 

you want to actually talk about good work. And if in fact you 

bring forward Bill 95 with those targets in it, Mr. Speaker, that 

is incredible work. It’s the Copenhagen plan from 

Saskatchewan. The minister can go there with the support of all 

58 members of this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, what more could 

the minister ask for? It’s a positive alternative. It’s direction, 

and it’s meaningful. 

 

Now we ask the government to simply introduce their own 

legislation, to simply put their own targets in the legislation, 

and we’re all happy. We live up to what the Premier’s asked us 

to do. The Premier wants us to move forward in a positive way. 

The members on both sides of the House can then support it 

and, Mr. Speaker, I think that we can actually then move 

forward in a meaningful way. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard from the members opposite 

that they want this done. They want this motion passed. They 

want to have a meaningful plan to go to Copenhagen with. 

 

They want the minister to have the endorsement of this 

Assembly, and we agree. And we agree with their plan. We just 

need to put it all together so everybody understands what the 

plan is. It’s theirs. It’s not ours. We’re going to call it, in the 

future we can refer to it as the Copenhagen plan, the 

Saskatchewan Copenhagen plan. And the minister shall have 

the opportunity to talk to her colleagues and say, it’s what we 

want to do. It’s the right thing to do. 

 

We heard in some detail yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that this 

motion had to be passed. In discussions we understand that the 

government has the desire to have the motion passed. We need 

to have a comprehensive plan, that the federal government 

understands it’s a position of this legislature. It’s a position of 

the government, but also supported by the opposition, 

strengthens the minister’s hand and her position. 

 

So on close examination and taking the Premier’s request to 

heart, we spent considerable time reviewing their legislation. 

We spent hours in fact reviewing their legislation, looking at 

their targets from their election platform, and deciding that yes, 

yes, we could support their Bill No. 95, and we could support 

their targets from their election platform. 

 



3682 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

And in conjunction, Mr. Speaker, it makes a terrific plan. It 

makes a plan that the people of Saskatchewan can be proud of. 

It makes a plan that the government can be proud of. It makes a 

plan that the minister can take forward to Copenhagen and to 

her colleagues on the national stage and the international stage 

with pride, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact it does what the Premier asked the official 

opposition to do yesterday. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re proud that 

we were able to compromise and come to a point that in fact we 

are responding to the request of the government, the Premier, in 

a positive way, in a manner in which would allow this issue to 

come to conclusion today. With this amendment, we’re 

prepared to vote on the motion today, and as early as Monday 

or as early as tomorrow, if the government so wished, to pass 

the superseding motion as early as tomorrow, to move to deal 

with this legislation, Bill No. 95, to get it in place so the 

minister has her plan endorsed by this legislature in order to 

move forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, our side of the House is now in a position to 

endorse the government’s positions. And we’re happy to move 

forward with Bill No. 95, to get it reintroduced in the House as 

early as today. We will, if necessary, if the government will 

agree to the motion as amended, I can be the final speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, and as early as later this afternoon, we can introduce 

Bill No. 95. 

 

And we will allow the government, give them leave to do it 

outside the normal process so that we can in fact move forward 

with this very, very important piece of legislation in a 

expeditious manner. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s in the 

interest of all of us. 

 

And as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that 

we want to have the Minister of the Environment have a solid 

footing when she goes to Copenhagen. We want her to clearly 

have a plan that’s endorsed by this legislature. And you know, 

she put forward legislation last . . . on actually May the 11th. 

Unfortunately it was very close to the end of the session. But on 

reflection of that legislation, Mr. Speaker, it is something that in 

fact does put forward a concrete plan. All you have to do is add 

their very own targets, Mr. Speaker, from their own platform, to 

the document and in fact becomes a comprehensive plan. A 

plan in which you can just go to Copenhagen and say, 

Saskatchewan is united — united — both sides of the House. 

 

In moving forward when dealing with the issue of climate 

change in conjunction with, you know, reinforcing the need to 

have a strong economy — meaning to balance the issues of 

economic growth and environmental sustainability — we can 

do that in Saskatchewan because we have a desire to do it. And 

I’m going to say that all 58 members of this Assembly have that 

same desire. 

 

So all we have to do, Mr. Speaker, is take the government’s 

own legislation and their own targets, and that’s their plan. It’s 

not the opposition’s plan. It’s their plan. Mr. Speaker, where 

credit’s due, credit should be given. And we’re going to give 

them credit for Bill No. 95 and their own, you know, 

greenhouse gas reduction targets from your election platform. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m sure they spent considerable time, 

considerable time putting their election platform together before 

taking those promises to the people of Saskatchewan, before 

taking those very detailed promises to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, because we believe the Minister of the 

Environment, then the Environment critic, spent that type of 

time, we’re going to agree to her 32 per cent reductions by 2020 

and we’re going to agree to her 80 per cent reductions from 

current levels by 2050. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to agree 

with the legislation, Bill No. 95, that she introduced in this 

House and gave first reading to on May the 11th, 2009. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the only difficulty we have is getting the 

government to reintroduce their own legislation and get those 

targets in the legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, my amendment to 

their motion gives the framework to move forward. And if they 

agree to our amendment which clearly, clearly puts us in a 

position that we will pass this by December the 3rd, 2009, the 

last day of this fall sitting of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, so she 

will have that in hand to go to Copenhagen. 

 

And after listening yesterday to an appeal by the Premier that 

we be co-operative in this issue, that we work together in the 

interest of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, we spent 

considerable time reviewing Bill No. 95. And we’ve come to 

the conclusion we’ll live with Bill No. 95. 

 

You know, to say it’s absolutely perfect, you know, there are 

things that could be improved in Bill No. 95. But because it can 

be introduced quickly and passed by December the 3rd with our 

support and our help, we’re prepared to accept the Bill as it was 

tabled with the targets which they promised the people of 

Saskatchewan, which they campaigned upon, and are their 

targets, Mr. Speaker — the 32 per cent reduction by 2020 and 

the 80 per cent reduction by 2050. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the people of Saskatchewan 

could expect or should expect any less from their government to 

keep their own targets and pass their own legislation. I think 

that’s a reasonable expectation from the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan that the government would in fact pass its own 

legislation, keep its own targets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, their targets . . . We realize that targets aren’t 

always attainable, but they’re targets. And it means that we may 

be, in some people’s minds, reaching for more than is 

attainable. 

 

But as we’ve often heard from the members opposite, you have 

to have hope in the future. You have to have vision. You have 

to reach for the stars. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ll support them in 

doing that. We’ll support them in their targets and we’ll support 

them in their legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, all we’re asking is 

they support our amendment, an amendment that in fact brings 

forward their own legislation, their own targets, puts them in 

place, and becomes a comprehensive plan that we can actually 

pass prior to December 3rd, 2009. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is a very, very, very, very important piece 

of legislation, Bill No. 95, because it’s actually the plan. And if 

we pass Bill No. 95, we then have a concrete plan that we’ve all 

been able to see and examine, that we will have the opportunity 

to debate in the House over the next few days, hopefully. I will 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3683 

undertake today, on behalf of the official opposition, to see the 

introduction and the speedy debate on this issue, such that we 

can get this very, important piece of legislation passed prior to 

December the 3rd, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier stood with a great deal of 

sincerity yesterday, asking for our co-operation, asking for us to 

work with the government to give a mandate to the Minister of 

the Environment. And, Mr. Speaker, yes we can do that, 

because we accept their own emission reduction targets from 

their election platform, Mr. Speaker. We will accept the 32 per 

cent by 2020 and we will accept the 80 per cent reduction by 

2050. And, Mr. Speaker, we will accept their legislation, Bill 

No. 95, as they wrote it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said a few minutes ago, it’s not perfect. With 

every piece of legislation there are things that each individual 

may be concerned about, but in its entirety the Bill and those 

reduction targets formulate a real plan, a plan of substance. And 

it’s what they campaigned on. It’s what they brought before this 

House. And now the Premier yesterday implored upon the 

official opposition to co-operate and work with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard repeatedly from the Premier, a 

promise made, a promise kept. He promised the people of 

Saskatchewan that they would reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

by 32 per cent for 2020, Mr. Speaker. Now that promise of 

course would take many years, till 2020, to keep. We don’t 

expect today to see the actual outcome. It’s 11 years from now. 

We’d all have to work together and co-operatively to reach 

those targets. But, Mr. Speaker, they are their targets. They 

passed, they brought forward legislation this spring that is a 

plan to move forward to reach those targets, Mr. Speaker, in 

combination. It is a real plan with real substance, and gives 

Saskatchewan something to move forward with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the attitude and the direction of the Premier 

yesterday which we’re now, upon review, prepared to help him 

reach his own targets, we’ll pass their legislation. We’ll help 

them bring it in and, Mr. Speaker, we can all stand, hopefully 

before December 3, 2009, and say, we, by working together, 

have achieved a great deal. 

 

It’s not for us, Mr. Speaker. It’s for future generations. It’s for 

our children and for our grandchildren. We should all be more 

concerned about our children and our grandchildren and the 

future of our province. And by working together we can achieve 

more than by working against each other. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier asked for that co-operation yesterday. 

Today, on behalf of the official opposition, we’re extending that 

olive branch. We’re willing to work together. We’re willing to 

support the Minister of the Environment. We’re willing to work 

with her. We know that she wants to do the right thing because 

she in fact brought forward Bill No. 95. She in fact was the 

author of their reduction targets, Mr. Speaker. So the minister 

wants this because they’re her own targets. It’s her own 

legislation, and by working together we can achieve this. 

 

And they have showed a strong commitment through their 

campaign, saying that these targets were achievable and that 

they were theirs. And we are committed to help them achieve 

those targets. We’re committed to helping them pass their own 

legislation, Bill No. 95. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what 

more the Premier could have meant by his request yesterday for 

us to work co-operatively together. We’re prepared to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all we need is for the amendment, the amendment 

that the members of this Assembly, the official opposition, is 

putting forward, which isn’t our, it’s not our plan. All we’re 

putting forward is their plan. We’re putting forward their ideas. 

We’re putting forward their targets, their legislation, the things 

that they have been promoting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we’re prepared to put forward the olive branch and 

support the minister, support the minister in a real plan, and Mr. 

Speaker, all we need is a commitment that they will pass their 

own Bill and their own targets in the Bill prior to December 

3rd, 2009, the last sitting day this fall. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will wait with a great deal of anticipation 

to hear the response from the government to their own plan. It’s 

not a response to our plan. It’s their plan. I can expect, I think, 

the only thing we can expect is a very loud and resounding yes 

that they agree. And if in fact that’s the response, Mr. Speaker, 

look, we can vote this motion off, and we can even try to get 

that legislation in the House as early as today. 

 

Let’s give it a try. How many people agree with us here? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Yates: — You’re hearing it obviously from the official 

opposition. We’re agreeing with their reduction targets. We’re 

agreeing with their legislation. I’m not hearing such a hearty 

response from the government about their own legislation and 

their own targets, Mr. Speaker. But hopefully that’s just simply 

because they’re a little tired and they haven’t taken time to 

consider all the opportunities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the opportunity to 

continue talking about the attributes of their legislation, Bill No. 

95, and the quality of their reduction targets as contained in 

their election platform that the current Minister of Environment 

championed, that the Premier championed with the people of 

Saskatchewan through an election. And in his famous words, a 

promise made is a promise kept, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going 

to help them do that. We’re going to give him the opportunity to 

do just that. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say this: the Premier 

yesterday asked us for our co-operation. I’m going to take him 

at face value with great sincerity. And in fact he wanted that 

co-operation. In that light, we’ve spent considerable time 

reviewing their legislation, the difficulties and some of the 

pitfalls in it, but on balance decided we can live with that 

legislation because we need a solid plan to move forward. 

 

We decided we could agree with their targets. The targets aren’t 

perfect, Mr. Speaker, but once again, we can live with those 

targets. We can work co-operatively together in this province to 

try to achieve for our children and grandchildren a real plan — 

a plan that the minister can then take forward to her colleagues 

across the nation and actually work to achieve. 



3684 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what else we could do. It’s 

only through working co-operatively can we move this forward 

in the time frame in which we need to have a comprehensive 

plan for Copenhagen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister taking forward that the plan as 

being articulated in her amendment should make her proud. She 

should be proud of the fact that she will have unanimous 

support of the legislature of Saskatchewan. How many 

ministers going forward to their national colleagues and to the 

Copenhagen conference will have the unanimous support of 

their governments and their oppositions? Not many. I would 

suggest it would be very few, if any. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how many oppositions across 

Canada and perhaps around the world would be courageous 

enough to actually put forward the government’s own plan and 

say that we’re prepared to accept their plan. But this opposition 

is prepared to do that. The Premier called upon us to be 

positive, to act responsibly, to act in the interests of future 

generations, Mr. Speaker. And this issue is too important to 

neglect. It’s too important to our children, our grandchildren, 

and the future to not take forward in a meaningful way. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re prepared to do that. We are prepared to work 

with the government. We’re prepared to accept their legislation 

and their targets, and we’re prepared to move forward together, 

unified with all 58 members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend a few minutes talking about 

what’s contained in the legislation for the people of 

Saskatchewan who may not be aware. Mr. Speaker, this was 

Bill No. 95 and the government can reinstate this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. I know and I understand, Mr. Speaker, it will require a 

motion and unanimous consent to do so. Mr. Speaker, I commit 

today, on behalf of the official opposition, we will give that 

consent. We will let this legislation be reinstated, although it is 

outside the time frames for our own rules, Mr. Speaker. Now 

that can be done in Assembly with unanimous consent, Mr. 

Speaker, and we undertake to give that unanimous consent. 

 

I don’t want there to be any impression that we will put up any 

roadblock, any roadblock at all to the reintroduction of this 

legislation. We don’t want a rule, that was put in place to make 

sure that there was responsible management of the House, to 

stop this Bill from coming forward. Because, Mr. Speaker, as 

you well know and as the members of the House know, we can 

in fact do things with the unanimous consent of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill contains . . . and it’s a Bill entitled the 

climate change Act, its short title, the climate change Act. It 

talks about the fact that there will be emission targets. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the targets are simple. They’re the targets that the 

government brought forward in their election campaign, that the 

Premier told the people of Saskatchewan were his targets — 32 

per cent by 2020 and 80 per cent by 2050. Pretty 

straightforward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about an advisory council and how it’s 

established, Mr. Speaker, to help the government and the 

minister in dealing with the issues of climate change. It talks 

about an office of climate change, Mr. Speaker. It talks about 

the properties of the office and the activity of the office of 

climate change. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that has substance and structure in 

which to accomplish the goals of which the government has 

brought forward. Mr. Speaker, although as I indicated earlier 

it’s not 100 per cent perfect, no piece of legislation is in its 

initial form. As members of this House will know, many times 

pieces of legislation are amended year after year in order to 

improve them because little things come up during the course of 

the administration of an Act that need to be amended or 

modified in some way. Mr. Speaker, we all understand that a 

year from now, we may have requirements to modify 

legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, it is a framework. It is substance. 

It is a plan. Mr. Speaker, that is what the government said they 

needed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t need to look any further than 

their own legislation. They didn’t need our help. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re thankful that we’re able to help them. We’re thankful that 

the Premier asked us yesterday to be helpful, Mr. Speaker. But 

their legislation provides that framework, provides that plan 

moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about a technology fund, Mr. Speaker, that 

we’ve had talked about by the minister. We agree. We agree. 

We agree with your legislation. We agree with your Bill. And 

we want to help you in moving forward in your comprehensive 

plan. 

 

Talks about a foundation, Mr. Speaker — we agree with the 

Climate Change Foundation. We agree with the structures 

proposed in the minister’s legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we need that Bill before this House. And we 

are prepared to give unanimous consent for the immediate 

introduction of that Bill and make a commitment in our 

amendment to the motion that will, in fact, pass this legislation 

with their targets, Mr. Speaker, in place prior to December the 

3rd, 2009. So this minister can have a true mandate and a true 

plan to go to Copenhagen, not just a motion without substance 

that people don’t know what it means. Mr. Speaker, not a 

motion without substance that people wouldn’t know and 

understand. Mr. Speaker, we have a piece of legislation here, a 

real plan with real substance, and we are prepared to support 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again we listened carefully to the Premier 

yesterday asking for us to work together in co-operation on this 

very important issue, and we are. And we are prepared to do 

that. We are prepared to work with the government. We are 

prepared to accept their legislation and their targets. It’s not our 

plan, Mr. Speaker. It’s theirs. And I think they should be proud 

of their plan because it deals with the very issue that they want 

to deal with. Mr. Speaker, it has the substance that you need to 

have in a plan so that people can have confidence of how you’re 

going to achieve the outcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, with any plan it doesn’t always work 

perfectly. Over time there is always, like I said, improvements 

that are made. Mr. Speaker, the first targets are now 11 years 

away — 32 per cent by 2020. Still 11 years away, and we’ve 

got a great deal of work to do. Collectively we have a great deal 

of work to do, and we have a collective responsibility to future 

generations and the people of the province of Saskatchewan to 

make it work. And, Mr. Speaker, make it work we shall. We 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3685 

shall work together to achieve this. There are not many 

alternatives to working together in a positive way once we 

make this commitment. And, Mr. Speaker, this commitment 

shall be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could spend hours talking about the important 

elements of this legislation, the anticipated outcomes of their 

targets, emission reduction targets, Mr. Speaker. But I think at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of allowing many, many 

of my colleagues who’d like to speak . . . Unless the 

government is prepared to accept today our amendment. Then 

we’ll pass the motion immediately, and we’ll wait for the 

Government House Leader to bring forward Bill 95, including 

their targets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can all work together in a co-operative 

manner to achieve what the Premier asked us to do yesterday, 

which is to take the plan forward, give the minister a solid plan 

to go to Copenhagen with a plan that all 58 members of this 

legislature should be able to accept. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move at this time, officially, that the 

motion be amended by adding the following words at the end of 

the motion: 

 

That this Assembly will support the government’s plan as 

follows: 

 

That the government Bill No. 95, An Act respecting the 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and 

Adaptation to Climate Change from the previous 

legislative session be reintroduced; and 

 

That the targets that the government campaigned on in the 

election, from the platform document, Securing the Future 

New Ideas for Saskatchewan, that is, a 32 per cent 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from the current 

levels by 2020 and an 80 cent reduction from current 

levels by 2050 be added as legislative targets into the 

legislation; and 

 

That this legislation should be passed by December 3rd, 

2009 giving the minister clear authority and an actual plan 

to present at Copenhagen. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment before the Assembly, 

presented by the member from Regina Dewdney, reads that: 

 

The motion be amended by adding the following words at 

the end of the motion: 

 

That this Assembly will support the government’s plan as 

follows: 

 

That the government’s Bill 95, An Act respecting the 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and 

Adaptation to Climate Change from the previous 

legislative session be reintroduced; and 

 

That the targets that the government campaigned on in the 

election from the platform document, Securing the Future 

New Ideas for Saskatchewan, that is, a 32 per cent 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from the current 

levels by 2020 and an 80 cent reduction from current 

levels by 2050 be added as legislative targets into the 

legislation; and 

 

That this legislation should be passed by December 3rd, 

2009 giving the minister clear authority and an actual plan 

to present at Copenhagen. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 

of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to say a few words about the opposition’s amendment to our 

motion. I find it first of all pretty interesting, Mr. Speaker, that 

the NDP motion today actually contradicts what their leader 

said out in a scrum yesterday afternoon. 

 

And this is the thing that I find so very interesting about the 

NDP’s attempt to have a position on environmental issues. I 

was trying to explain to my colleagues this morning what their 

current position was and, Mr. Speaker, it’s so convoluted I 

actually gave up trying to explain it because you can’t even 

keep it straight from day to day, let alone from hour to hour. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition was out in a scrum yesterday after 

question period, and he said a few things that were interesting, 

things that contradict their motion today. He had said, Mr. 

Speaker, that we should actually be looking at what the 

Americans are going to be doing. He said, and I quote, “I think 

to do something other than the Americans is going to be very, 

very difficult.” 

 

[15:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few interesting things about that. 

First of all, the American targets that are being proposed 

currently through the Waxman-Markey Bill are a 17 per cent 

reduction. That’s less than the targets that this government has 

adopted. It’s about half of what the NDP are asking us to do. 

So, Mr. Speaker, they present a motion today asking us to adopt 

targets that their very own leader is apparently not even in 

support of. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, also while he was out there giving his scrum 

on the environment . . . And I know the Leader of the 

Opposition hasn’t been in our province very long, Mr. Speaker, 

and he might not be aware of what the NDP have said in the 

past. But when he was asked about targets, Mr. Speaker, about 

the 20 per cent reduction that this government has adopted, he 

said, I think that’s a minimal target. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are now asking us to adopt a 32 

per cent reduction in emissions, should not 32 per cent be the 

minimal target that they are going for? Mr. Speaker, apparently 

the Leader of the Opposition thinks a 20 per cent target is a 

minimal target. That’s great. We could maybe try to achieve 32 

per cent, but let’s start with 20. It’s what he said yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So their very own motion today completely contradicts what 

their leader is out there saying. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 



3686 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

if it’s because he’s not briefed on the file or if he has another 

position that he hasn’t told his members about. I think probably 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it’s the latter, that the NDP actually don’t 

have a plan on this. 

 

And I found it interesting as well, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday, 

about the exact same time that their Environment critic was in 

this House speaking to the government motion, the NDP 

opposition leader was outside scrumming, and they were 

contradicting themselves at exactly the same time. This is how 

confused they are on this file. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the Environment critic was in this 

House yesterday talking about the NDP plan, she was praising 

it. She said, and I quote, when we look at the original plan that 

the NDP had put into place, this was a wonderful plan. Guess 

she’s pretty supportive of it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, at exactly the same time, the NDP 

opposition leader was out in a scrum, and guess what he had to 

say about the NDP plan? Apparently there isn’t one, because he 

said about an NDP plan, and I quote, “My view is that we will 

watch as this develops and through our policy forums come 

forward with our proposal.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, apparently the 2002 climate change discussion 

paper that the NDP released, I’m pretty sure that the member 

for Regina Douglas Park was not in the province in 2002. I 

don’t think he was. And then, Mr. Speaker, again in 2007 the 

NDP put forward their glossy brochure on climate change. And 

they stand, at least their Environment critic stands in the House, 

and now the member for Regina Dewdney, praising the NDP 

plan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently their leader doesn’t think they 

have one. They’ll get to it. They’re going to have these policy 

forums somewhere in the future. They’re going to discuss the 

environment. They’re going to discuss climate change. And 

then perhaps at some point they’re going to come up with their 

proposal. Not my words, Mr. Speaker, that’s the NDP 

Opposition Leader and that’s from yesterday. 

 

So somewhere between yesterday in the scrum and today at 

about 3 o’clock, they’ve come up with this motion, but I don’t 

know if they passed it by their leader or not because according 

to him we don’t have a plan. He says the 20 per cent target is a 

minimal target that we should be achieving. But then while he 

says it’s a 20 per cent target we should be achieving, we should 

also look at the American plan which is a 17 per cent reduction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you can understand my difficulty this morning 

when briefing my colleagues on where the NDP are in this 

issue. We don’t know. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think they know. 

And so as far as this motion goes, if they had something 

concrete to bring forward, I suppose we could have a discussion 

about it. But, Mr. Speaker, as far as I can tell, the only 

consistency in the NDP approach to environmental policy is 

their inconsistency. So, Mr. Speaker, you know it’s a nice 

attempt to try to have a position on this, but I don’t think 

they’ve done a very good job of actually articulating what their 

position is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that the Opposition Leader 

had said is, you know, we shouldn’t have a patchwork approach 

across the country. That’s not going to work. North America or 

Canada are shared jurisdictions. We should not have a 

patchwork approach. Well, Mr. Speaker, to adopt the NDP 

targets would put us in a more of a patchwork approach than 

what we’re currently at because, Mr. Speaker, we have adopted 

the federal targets. That puts us pretty much on the same line. 

They’re almost identical to what the US is proposing. So we’re 

kind of all on the same page, and the NDP are the ones who are 

now promoting the fact that we move towards a more 

patchwork approach than what currently exists in our country. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP Environment critic said yesterday 

in her speech that this wonderful plan that the NDP had was 

researched. I find it interesting because, Mr. Speaker, when I 

became Minister of the Environment I had asked the ministry 

for their cost analysis, their impact analysis on our economy for 

the NDP targets at 32 per cent reduction, and I didn’t get any of 

them. There was nothing that showed up on my desk. So if it 

was researched, I’m not sure who it was researched from. 

Maybe the researchers in their opposition office, I’m not sure. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we were examining the targets and the 

impact on our economy, we actually did research. We 

contracted Jaccard to do an impact analysis and a cost analysis. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the NDP stand up today and say that they 

want us to adopt different targets, that . . . [inaudible] . . . really 

has no impact, that we should just do this. And, you know, 

we’re all going to be fine. We just have to work together. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we did that, the difference on the impact 

on our economy between 2010 and 2020 is $700 million. And I 

know that the Minister for Public Safety has a long list of the 

things that the NDP has wasted money on. The Agriculture 

minister was up today with another list. So apparently in the 

NDP’s world, $700 million is nothing. You can just throw that 

away. Well, Mr. Speaker, the $700 million in Saskatchewan, 

that would be borne almost exclusively by SaskPower. So guess 

what that means. It means SaskPower ratepayers are on the 

hook for an additional $700 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the NDP want to promote this idea, I would 

challenge them to go out and promote the idea that they are fine 

with putting SaskPower ratepayers, the residents of this 

province, on the hook for an additional $700 million. But, Mr. 

Speaker, apparently they aren’t very interested in that because 

the former Environment minister, the member for Regina 

Lakeview said, and I quote, “And this is one area where people 

can contribute, is to actually pay . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were fine charging the people of our province 

for these targets. Well as I said, we did the cost analysis. We 

did the impact analysis and, Mr. Speaker, we have said from the 

very beginning that our position is to balance the economy with 

environmental protection. And when it comes to the economics, 

although the NDP Environment critic said, talking about 

economics, when we’re talking about the environment as a red 

herring. We don’t agree with that. We think it’s a very 

important discussion. And those economics affect the residents 

of this province, Mr. Speaker, and we are not going to put them 

in jeopardy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix ran an editorial earlier this 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3687 

year, talking about the NDP’s approach to climate change and 

SaskPower rates. And it says, and I quote, “For years under the 

former regime, Saskatchewan was accused by environmental 

groups of being the country’s worst laggard in acting to cut 

emissions.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out when he’s talking about 

the country’s worst laggard, it’s the NDP government, not our 

government, that they were accused of being the country’s 

worst laggard in acting to cut emissions. It goes on to say, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s “. . . an irony that can’t be lost on anyone . . . that 

it’s a fool’s game to believe that this province can reduce 

emissions without cost.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it will cost our province. We did the analysis. And 

we don’t think that a $700 million hit to SaskPower ratepayers 

is something that the people of this province are going to 

accept. 

 

And as I stated yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the percentage of 

emissions coming from Saskatchewan is about 9 to 10 per cent 

of the country’s emissions. Canada is 2 per cent of global 

emissions. And so, Mr. Speaker, we are a fraction of 1 per cent 

of global emissions. We are fully committed to doing our fair 

share, but we will not do it at the expense of our economy, and 

we will not do it by dipping into the pockets and the wallets of 

the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, the NDP opposition leader, 

apparently a little confused on targets and where we should be 

going. And contradicting their motion today with where we 

should be going and saying we shouldn’t have a patchwork 

approach, well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we are trying 

to avoid. We are trying to avoid a patchwork approach. We 

have targets that are in line with the federal government. We 

have targets that are virtually in line with the US [United States] 

government’s proposals. And, Mr. Speaker, I know that I read 

this into the record yesterday, but I would like to restate a 

comment made by the federal Environment minister Jim 

Prentice. And he said, and I quote: 

 

If we do more than the U.S., we will suffer economic pain 

for no real environmental gain — economic pain that 

could impede our ability to invest in new clean 

technologies. But if we do less, we will risk facing [new] 

border barriers into the American market. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we are currently at a 20 per cent reduction 

by 2020 over 2006 levels. We are completely in line with the 

federal government and very much in line with what the US 

government is doing, Mr. Speaker. So I think we have found 

that balance between doing our fair share and making sure that 

our economy is protected. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, just a few more points as to the NDP’s 

position. I think they would have a little bit more credibility for 

two reasons, Mr. Speaker. One, if they’d actually done 

anything. In 1998, the NDP put together an advisory group on 

climate change. That’s fantastic. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it took four years for them to release their 

first discussion paper on climate change in 2002. And around 

that time, the former leader of the NDP Lorne Calvert had said 

this, Mr. Speaker: “From day one . . . this government has made 

it clear . . . we do not object to taking on the challenge of 

greenhouse gas emissions.” 

 

Again fantastic. Except they didn’t do anything. So that was in 

2002. 

 

It took them another five years and they released yet another 

paper, in 2007. Releasing papers doesn’t do anything, Mr. 

Speaker. It doesn’t reduce emissions. It doesn’t put legislation 

in place. It doesn’t put regulations in place. It doesn’t get us 

equivalency agreements with the federal government. It does 

absolutely nothing. And that is all they did, Mr. Speaker, for a 

decade. They sat on their hands — well, other than releasing 

papers, they sat on their hands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 18 months, this government drafted legislation. We’ve done 

extensive consultations. We’ve tabled legislation which will be 

re-tabled this fall. We have signed an agreement in principle 

with the federal government. And, Mr. Speaker, we have 

restructured the Go Green Fund to make sure that we have 

quantifiable outcomes for the money that we invest. Mr. 

Speaker, 18 months. 

 

They waited a decade; did absolutely nothing. So if they’re 

going to lecture us on our position, I don’t think they have the 

credibility to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other point I would like to make is their ongoing 

contradictions. The Opposition Leader, it was noted in the 

Leader-Post today that he said that when it comes to SaskPower 

and energy efficiency targets, a 300 megawatt  in energy 

savings fall short. 

 

Well again, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Opposition Leader 

has not been in our province very long, and he’s missed a whole 

chunk of time. And in that chunk of time, he’s kind of missed 

what’s been going on. Because in the 2007 paper that the NDP 

released, Mr. Speaker, it says, and I quote, this is the NDP 

paper, “Develop a conservation program to reduce SaskPower’s 

electricity load by [how many megawatts?] 300 . . .” 

 

Exactly what he said yesterday wasn’t good enough. The NDP 

thought it was good enough two years ago. Apparently maybe 

they’re going to discuss this more at their policy forums that are 

going to happen sometime in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a whole list of contradictions that happen 

when the NDP Environment critic was talking in the House 

yesterday while her leader was out in the scrum. They can’t get 

their stories straight when they’re talking at exactly the same 

time, and they want us to take their advice on a position that our 

province is going to present to Copenhagen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like I said, if they had any credibility on this file, 

that might be something that we would take into account. But I 

think I’ve pointed out that increasing our targets back to the 32 

per cent would be detrimental to our economy. It would make 

our SaskPower ratepayers pay and, Mr. Speaker, I just don’t 

think that is the approach that our government wants to take. 

 

I don’t think it’s the approach that the people in our province 

want to take. And, Mr. Speaker, to go back to the 32 per cent 



3688 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

returns is to a patchwork approach that they say we shouldn’t be 

doing. 

 

They’re contradicting themselves at every turn, Mr. Speaker. 

They have no position. They have no credibility. And I’m pretty 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that my colleagues will agree with me that if 

and when the amendment on our motion, the NDP amendment 

on our motion comes to a vote, Mr. Speaker, we will not be 

supporting it because we will be supporting Saskatchewan’s 

economy, Saskatchewan jobs, and the ratepayers of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could ask the members 

to join with me in welcoming . . . With leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the members 

giving me leave to introduce a special guest, Sandra LeBlanc, 

who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Sandra has worked hard 

and long in the oil industry in Calgary. She’s presently working 

with Westdev International and has formerly worked with Burj 

Petroleum, but also was one of my directors on the Canadair 

business council for a number of years. And I just want to say 

to Sandra, welcome to the Assembly. 

 

She represents a broad base of the oil industry in Calgary. Her 

father was very much involved in the construction work in the 

oil field in Western Canada right across the piece. In fact, 

Sandra has a very interesting background, not only having 

worked in the oil patch, but actually as a catskinner for a while, 

and has worked her way up to an impressive position with the 

oil industry, and in an international way also has served Canada 

well on a number of international organizations. 

 

So welcome, Sandra, to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[15:15] 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Plan for Climate Change 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to rise today and speak to the amendment that was put 

forward by the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

The amendment put forward simply substantiates what the 

expectations are of the people of this province with respect to 

what this Sask Party government should be doing in addressing 

issues of climate change in the province. 

 

Now the Minister of the Environment has quite frankly what I 

would almost deem as an obsession in talking about what the 

NDP had done in the past and what the NDP’s intentions are 

and what the NDP plans should be right now. But it seems to be 

that the minister currently doesn’t understand that she’s actually 

sitting in the government benches, Mr. Speaker, and that the 

onus is on the government to come up with a plan and actually 

have something concrete to offer the citizens of Saskatchewan 

in terms of addressing the issues around climate change. All 

we’ve had so far, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of hot air. That’s it, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s only contributing to the issue of greenhouse 

gases in this province quite frankly. 

 

So it would be a real welcome change if we could get a plan 

from the minister. Something that’s actually on paper; 

something that actually has targets. Something that actually has 

some measure against a baseline in terms of what can be 

measured for the citizens of this province to really know what 

this government is doing to address what, in the Premier’s own 

words, is one of the most serious issues that not only 

Saskatchewan is dealing with, not only Canada is dealing with, 

but the entire world. 

 

The entire global economy is dealing with the issue of how to 

address the issues around climate change. And it would be very 

nice if this government, the Sask Party government, actually 

came up with a plan with some concrete targets that they would 

actually stick to, versus the empty promise they made in their 

election platform, and then had to break that promise because 

they decided to adopt something from the NDP, the former 

administration. And yet had absolutely no concept, no concept 

whatsoever, as to how they were going to achieve those targets 

that they adopted from the NDP into their election platform. 

 

Now in case they had forgotten what they put in their election 

platform, Mr. Speaker, I thought it would be extremely 

important for me to read from their document, from the Sask 

Party election platform. It’s called Securing the Future. It’s got 

a nice shiny picture of Premier Wall on the front of it and on 

page 38, it says: 

 

Meeting Saskatchewan’s Greenhouse Gas Emission 

Reduction Targets. 

 

It says: 

 

A Saskatchewan Party government will invest in 

environmental innovation and energy conservation 

measures while working with industry and the province’s 

Crown Corporations to meet the province’s greenhouse 

gas emission reduction target to: 

 

Stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010; 

 

Reduce greenhouse gases by 32 per cent from current 

levels by 2020; and 

 

Reduce greenhouse gases by 80 per cent from current 

levels by 2050. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this was their promise, their promise to the 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3689 

citizens of this province in November of 2007. That’s a mere 

two years ago, and they’ve already said, guess what? We can’t 

meet that promise because we had no plan. We simply adopted 

this from the NDP. We thought we would simply take over 

what the NDP did and keep promising it to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But what did they do? They had no plan and instead of simply 

continuing on with the plan that the NDP had already put 

forward and had set in motion, plus the $320 million that it had 

dedicated to the issues of climate change, what did the 

government do? What did the Sask Party government do? They 

decided to completely gut the plan that the NDP had, 

completely gut the fund that the NDP had set aside. They took 

that fund from $320 million down to $40 million — we’re not 

even sure what they did with the 40 million — and the rest of it 

simply got eaten up in the General Revenue Fund to fund their 

exorbitant spending habits that this government has. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow we’re going to see 

dismal, dismal, dismal news come forward in the mid-year 

report, the mid-year financial report. 

 

So that’s what they had promised the citizens of this province 

and did not deliver on. Now the minister likes to talk about the 

fact that the NDP didn’t want to talk about how the economy is 

going to play into the issue of the environment and dealing with 

the issues of climate change. Well guess what? Her own 

experts, her own experts — in terms of the work that she had 

commissioned — told her this: that yes, it would be a cost of 

approximately $700 million to the Saskatchewan economy over 

the years up to 2020. And yes, the majority of that would be 

borne by one large emitter, which would be SaskPower. 

 

But what else did they tell that minister? It’s a salient point that 

she forgets to make today. It’s something that she has never 

mentioned because it’s an embarrassment to her excuse as to 

why they couldn’t continue on with a 32 per cent reduction and 

had to move, or wanted to move to 20 per cent to, you know, be 

in line with their federal cousins in Ottawa, the Harper 

Conservatives. 

 

That difference to the ratepayers of SaskPower, that difference 

to SaskPower ratepayers would have been anywhere between a 

point five to 2 per cent. The reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions to 20 per cent — which is what they’ve reduced it to; 

they broke their promise and they’ve gone to a 20 per cent 

reduction instead of 32 per cent — is costing the SaskPower 

ratepayers approximately 20 per cent in increases over the next 

10 years. Had it stayed at 32 per cent, it would have been 

anywhere from 20 to 22 per cent over the next 10 years. 

 

So that is a disingenuous excuse that is being used by the 

minister currently, the Environment minister, as to why they 

couldn’t proceed with their 32 per cent reduction in greenhouse 

gases. And simply, she says, because it was based on issues 

around the economy. It doesn’t wash, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 

wash at all. 

 

SaskPower ratepayers were looking at an extra point five to 2 

per cent increase on their rates and continuing on with their 

expending, glad-handing — I mean how should I say — 

overspending with respect to the capital projects that they want 

to currently do. It looks as though the SaskPower ratepayers are 

going to potentially be paying even more than that just to fund 

the shortfall that this government is incurring in their financial 

situation at this point already. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the minister thinks that it 

warrants an expenditure of almost $25,000 — $24,700 to be 

precise — in terms of the written question that was responded 

to by the opposition. The minister thinks that it’s warranted to 

spend $24,700 to send herself and maybe one or two officials to 

the climate change conference in Copenhagen. To do what, is 

what we would like to know, Mr. Speaker. We want to know 

what the return of it on our investment is. We want to know 

what the minister is going to do in Copenhagen. 

 

Because right now all we can see is that the minister’s going to 

go there and say, gosh, golly, gee, I’d like to have a plan. We 

broke our promise on greenhouse gas reduction targets. But we 

don’t have one and we’re hoping you’ll still like us anyways 

because, you know, we’re hoping to do something in the future. 

May or may not, as the minister said yesterday in her response 

here in the question period. She’s not even sure what she’s 

going to do because it’s a may-or-may-not situation. 

 

So we’re wondering what the minister’s going to do in 

Copenhagen, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. Despite the fact that, 

you know, she’s wanting to cheerlead for Saskatchewan, which 

I understand. We all like to be proud of our province and be 

able to cheerlead Saskatchewan wherever we go and whatever 

we do. But, Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious conference on 

the global issues around climate change and she has nothing to 

offer. 

 

Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s why they came forward 

with this motion in the House yesterday, was because they have 

nothing to offer. They want to somehow substantiate their 

position by having the opposition support whatever it is they 

want to do in the future, but we’re not sure exactly what it is 

they want to do. But somehow they wanted to substantiate that 

by going to Copenhagen and saying, but you know what? We’re 

going to be unanimous in our position in Saskatchewan. The 

opposition agrees with us. Well we’d like to agree with them if 

we knew what the heck that plan was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we’re putting forward this 

amendment today — so we have something to understand as to 

what the Sask Party government is actually going to be selling 

in Copenhagen, and what they are going to be promoting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, despite the urgent calls for action from 

Saskatchewan people and reports from the international panel 

on climate change, from the International Energy Agency, and 

from numerous environmental organizations like the Pembina 

Institute and the David Suzuki Foundation, the Saskatchewan 

Party and their federal cousins, the Harper government, are 

failing to deliver meaningful action to reduce carbon emissions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth annual report from the international 

panel on climate change released in 2007 confirms the need for 

meaningful action to reduce carbon emissions — a plan that 

entails binding and serious cuts, targets to reduce climate 

change, a plan that covers and accounts for all industries, and a 

plan that does not delay action on the government’s 



3690 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

responsibility to reduce coal-fired emissions by introducing 

cost-proven and cost-effective renewable energy projects. 

 

The international panel on climate change, a scientific body 

established by the United Nations, provides regular assessment 

reports at regular intervals for the state of knowledge on climate 

change. The latest one is Climate Change 2007, the fourth 

IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] assessment 

report. It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the reports and 

publications of the international panel on climate change follow 

strict procedures agreed by the panel. The work is guided by the 

international panel’s Chair and the working group and task 

force Co-Chairs. 

 

Hundreds of experts from all over the world contribute to the 

preparation of IPCC reports as authors and reviewers. The 

compositions of author teams reflect a range of views, 

expertise, and geographical representation. Review by 

governments and experts are required elements of preparation 

of IPCC reports, and as such, reports from the IPCC represent 

the consensus of scientific information concerning 

human-induced climate change, the impacts of human-induced 

climate change, and the options and adaptations and 

mitigations. 

 

Within the most recent assessment, the fourth assessment, 

published in 2007, the international panel on climate change 

observed that: 

 

Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now 

evident from observations of increases in global average 

air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow 

and ice and rising . . . average sea level. 

 

Which is from the synthesis report in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Average Northern Hemisphere temperatures during the 

second half of the 20th century were very likely higher 

than during any other 50-year period in the last 500 years 

and likely the highest in at least the highest in the past 

1300 years. 

 

Another quote: 

 

Observational evidence from all continents and most 

oceans show that many natural systems are being affected 

by regional climate changes, particularly temperature 

increases. 

 

And this is also from the synthesis report in 2007. The 

international report goes on, Mr. Speaker, to say: 

 

There is high agreement and much evidence that with 

current climate change mitigation policies and related 

sustainable development practices, global greenhouse gas 

emissions will continue to grow over the next few 

decades. 

 

It also goes on to say about weak mitigation policies, like that 

of the Conservative Party government in Ottawa, that “Even if 

the concentrations of all greenhouse gases and aerosols had 

been kept constant at year 2000 levels, a further warming of 

about 0.1°C per decade would be expected.” 

This means, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party’s plan, adopted 

from the federal Conservatives after the Sask Party decided not 

to live up to their election promise to have aggressive carbon 

reduction targets, now have a so-called plan, or what is a really 

a public relations plan, Mr. Speaker, that will not take 

meaningful action to reduce greenhouse gases and therefore will 

not significantly reduce warming. 

 

And as the Minister of Environment should know, the Prairie 

Adaptation Research Collaborative’s report entitled Climate 

Change Impacts on Canada’s Prairie Provinces concludes the 

Prairie region is warming at a comparatively faster rate, 

suggesting increased climate variability, more frequent extreme 

events, including a greater frequency of flooding and severe 

drought and the increased likelihood of extreme rainfalls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the members of the Sask Party 

government that have been quoted many times over — and 

many of my colleagues I’m sure that are going to speak are 

going to be quoting again in the future — who still have 

skepticism that global warming is a reality. Mr. Speaker, there 

is no question in the eyes of the United Nations and the various 

panels that it isn’t reality and hence the importance of this 

climate change conference that’s taking place in Copenhagen in 

December. 

 

Going back to the international panel on climate change report, 

the international panel finds that, “Climate change is likely to 

lead to some irreversible impacts.” Finally the international 

panel finds the following about adaptation and mitigation 

options: 

 

A wide array of adaptation options is available, but more 

extensive adaptation than is currently occurring is required 

to reduce vulnerability to climate change . . . There is high 

confidence that there are viable adaptation options that can 

be implemented in some sectors at low cost, and/or with 

high benefit-cost ratios. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government and the 

Environment minister like to talk about the fact that we’re not 

worried about the economy. Well it’s completely contrary to 

that. The green economy, Mr. Speaker, in the province of 

Saskatchewan has huge opportunities . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

[15:30] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3691 

through you, seated in your gallery, I’d like to introduce two 

guests that are here today. My apologies to our Environment 

critic who’s delivering an excellent presentation here today. 

And in fact I know the individuals who are in the gallery here 

today will be greatly interested in the presentation and the 

deliberations here today. 

 

But I’d like to introduce a constituent, Mr. Clinton Kleisinger. 

Clinton is also one of the co-coaches with myself for the 

Rosemont Outdoor Hockey League site. He’s pretty quick out 

there but sometimes I’m a little tougher in the corners, Mr. 

Speaker. And all in all we have an excellent cast of coaches in 

Rosemont. 

 

Clinton’s also done extensive work in the film industry here in 

our province, Mr. Speaker. And he’s done a good job of 

recruiting, Mr. Speaker, because he went on travels about a year 

ago and he travelled the world and he met Ms. Camilla Pakka 

who joins us here today from Stockholm, Sweden, is on her first 

visit to Canada and first visit to Regina and is here today in our 

Assembly. And it’s a pleasure to have Camilla join us here 

today. We would urge her to visit often and thank her for 

coming here today. And I ask all members to join with me in 

welcoming these two guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Plan for Climate Change 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No apology is needed 

for the member from Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has huge concern for how the economy’s 

going to be affected by the issues surrounding global climate 

change. And so much so in fact, Mr. Speaker, that we were 

willing to place the amount of money that we had placed, which 

was $320 million, into a fund which would address the issues of 

climate change. And one of those, Mr. Speaker, would be the 

issues around green technology and how one can further the 

issues of green technologies in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Pembina Institute just recently said that 

there was an opportunity in this province to increase 

employment by 50,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker. Now given the fact 

that under the Sask Party government in the last month alone 

we’ve seen a decrease of 10,000 jobs, an increase in this 

province through a greening of the economy of 50,000 jobs as 

the Pembina Institute has stated would be welcome, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is something that we have huge concern for 

and certainly are huge advocates of in terms of moving our 

province forward on the green technology front and the green 

initiatives front. 

 

Saskatchewan people have always been very resourceful and 

very innovative, and I have no doubt that we can prove 

ourselves to the rest of the world in terms of the green 

technologies and innovations that we can come up with as this 

society and as this province. 

 

Now I want to quote again from the report, and that is: 

 

Both bottom-up [meaning just technological-dependent 

changes] and top-down studies [meaning studies that 

assess economy-wide potential for mitigation of carbon 

emissions] indicate that there is high agreement and much 

evidence of substantial economic potential for the 

mitigation of . . . [greenhouse gas] emissions over the 

coming decades that could offset projected growth of 

global emissions or reduce emissions . . . by current levels. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, reducing greenhouse gases and the 

prosperity of our economy and our provinces are not separate 

like the Sask Party likes to assert. They are  mutually exclusive. 

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions to mitigate the effects of a 

warming earth ensures a more stable natural environment so 

that we can continue to be prosperous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s reliance on 

megaprojects and technology does not provide a comprehensive 

solution to climate change at this point anyway. There must be 

significant reduction targets to be met by polluters. And as the 

international panel on climate change reports, “No single 

technology can provide all of the mitigation potential in any 

sector,” Mr. Speaker. That doesn’t mean that the NDP is 

opposed to any one technology, as the Minister of Environment 

likes to state over and over again because as I said, I think she 

still thinks she’s sitting in the opposition benches versus 

actually sitting in the benches where something could be 

undertaken, which is in the government benches. 

 

So as I said, no single technology is going to be the silver 

bullet, Mr. Speaker. All the different technologies that are 

available and the technologies that are being developed are all 

part of a toolbox or a package that are going to need to be used 

to address the issues around climate change: 

 

The economic mitigation potential, [for instance, taking 

into account social costs and benefits] which is generally 

greater than the market mitigation potential, [for instance, 

those plans based on private costs to consumers and 

companies exclusively] can only be achieved when 

adequate policies are in place and barriers removed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this means that the Sask Party government 

narrowly focused on only private cost while failing to consider 

all the impacts of taking action to reduce carbon emissions, fails 

to really understand the scientifically proven requirement to 

have aggressive targets like those they put in their campaign 

platform and that they adopted from the former NDP 

government, which clearly they have so quickly forgotten, or 

had no plan in place and now had to break that major promise. 

 

And my colleagues are encouraging me to read their promise in 

their campaign platform again, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps at 

some point I will. But I think it should still be fresh in the 

memories of everyone, given that I had just read it into record. 

 

Emission reduction targets they have now abandoned and 

belatedly replaced with a watered-down, do-little approach are 

of cold comfort to the province of Saskatchewan and are of cold 



3692 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

comfort quite frankly to the country of Canada and the rest of 

the global economy. 

 

I quote from the international panel on climate change again, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Many impacts can be reduced, delayed or avoided by 

mitigation. Mitigation efforts and investments over the 

next two to three decades will have a large impact on 

opportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels. 

 

Delayed emission reductions significantly constrain the 

opportunities to achieve lower stabilisation levels and 

increase the risk of more severe climate change impacts. 

 

And I want to quote from another paragraph: 

 

In order to stabilize the concentration of . . . [greenhouse 

gases] in the atmosphere, emissions would need to peak 

and decline thereafter. The lower the stabilization level, 

the more quickly this peak and decline would need to 

occur. 

 

Quote again: “Impacts of climate change are very likely to 

impose net annual costs, which will increase over time as global 

temperatures increase.” 

 

On this note of annual costs, I would like to remind the Sask 

Party government of the fact that most economists are already 

awake to the reality that climate change will certainly be the 

greatest threat to prosperity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Sir Nicholas Stern, the former chief economist of the World 

Bank, in his self-titled report of 2006 concluded that “. . . by the 

end of the twenty-first century global warming [if not abated] 

will cause a massive drop in the annual gross domestic product 

of up to twenty per cent.” Stern estimated that the costs, risks of 

uncontrolled climate change are equivalent to a loss in global 

gross domestic product of, at the very least, 5 per cent and up to 

20 per cent loss or more, now and forever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In other words, the cost of doing nothing, as we’ve seen from 

the Sask Party government so far since they were elected in 

November of 2007 — which means that they’re already into the 

third year of their mandate — in other words the cost of doing 

nothing, the long-standing approach by the Sask Party 

government and the cost of the new do-little approach that is 

just brought forward, equally as hazardous, will create more 

harm to our province’s future economic prosperity than taking 

meaningful aggressive action now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Sir Nicholas Stern’s compelling description describes the 

economics of climate change as “. . . the greatest mark of failure 

the world has ever seen.” Sending the message that 

governments and businesses have to account for the carbon they 

use. 

 

Back to the final points elaborated by the international panel on 

climate change in their fourth report, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Climate sensitivity is a key uncertainty for mitigation 

scenarios . . . [for] specific temperature levels. 

 

Choices about the scale and timing of greenhouse gas 

mitigation involve balancing the economic costs of more 

rapid emission reduction now against the corresponding 

medium-term and long-term climate risks of today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the international panel on climate change is not 

alone in its scientific assessment that aggressive action to 

reduce greenhouse gases is absolutely required, Mr. Speaker. If 

an organization like the international panel on climate change, 

an organization where hundreds of scientists and many 

governments carefully review and weigh all evidence before 

coming to a consensus, can agree that aggressive action is 

needed, full-cost accounting of climate change is best and the 

dependence on technology alone is a losing approach, then it is 

equally surprising to have International Energy Agency concur 

with these sentiments. 

 

The International Energy Agency is a body established from the 

Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 

Development or known as the OECD. The OECD is not 

typically a friend to environmentally progressive policies, but 

like the other economic focused organizations, it has come to 

view climate change as a threat to economic prosperity. 

 

In their 2009 report, the international agency stated: 

 

. . . some impacts of the increased greenhouse gas 

concentrations may be slow to become apparent since 

stability is an inherent characteristic of interacting climate, 

ecological, and socio-economic systems. Even after 

stabilization of the atmospheric concentration of CO2, 

anthropogenic, for instance human-induced warming and 

sea level rise would continue for centuries due to the time 

scale associated with climate processes and feedbacks. 

Some changes in the climate system would be effectively 

irreversible. 

 

They also quote that: 

 

. . . given the long lifetime of CO2 in the atmosphere 

stabilizing concentrations of greenhouse gases at any level 

would require large reductions of global CO2 emission 

from current levels. 

 

In the recently released report entitled Climate Leadership, 

Economic Prosperity by the Pembina Institute and the David 

Suzuki Foundation, a close look is taken at the federal 

Conservative government’s emission reduction targets. The 

David Suzuki Foundation and the Pembina Institute 

commissioned the leading economic modelling from none other 

than M.K. Jaccard and Associates Inc. to conduct an in-depth 

study of federal and provincial government policies to meet the 

Kyoto requirement of a 2 degree Celsius reduction to reduce 

greenhouse gases by 25 per cent below the 1990 level by 2012-

20 and the Conservative’s new target. 

 

They found the Government of Canada’s current greenhouse 

targets of 20 per cent below the 2006 level. The position 

adopted by the Sask Party government “. . . is a much more 

modest reduction of just three per cent relative to the 1990 

level.” 

 

This is despite the broad scientific evidence that more 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3693 

aggressive greenhouse gas reduction to avoid a dangerous level 

of climate change is warranted. The analysis of M.K. Jaccard 

and Associates: 

 

. . . shows that with strong federal and provincial policies, 

Canada can meet the 2
o 

Celsius emission target in 2020 

[which is the Kyoto target] and still have a strong growing 

economy, a quality of life higher than Canadians enjoy 

today, and continued job creation across the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is what the study says about the more 

aggressive targets like the binding targets of the Government of 

Canada in international agreements: “Copenhagen negotiations 

in December, 2009 our governments are to hammer out the final 

Kyoto-type deal.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also note that the study also states that in 

addressing in its modelling “. . . disproportionate increases in 

household energy costs in target regions, inter-regional 

financial flows, and . . . international competitiveness . . .”  

 

And this is what the studies say about the Conservative 

government’s targets — federal government: 

 

The analysis also shows that the federal government needs 

to implement far stronger policies than it has proposed to 

date, even to meet its current target to reduce Canada’s 

emissions to three per cent below the 1990 level by 2020. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as this study indicates, even with less aggressive 

targets, like the federal Conservative government and their 

cousins the Saskatchewan Party government, more work is 

required. And, Mr. Speaker, more work is required, and less 

work is what the people of Saskatchewan are getting from this 

Sask Party government. All we get from, like I said, the 

Environment minister is a lot of hot air. A lot of, we are talking 

about this in the future, we’re hoping to bring this forward. And 

yesterday she said, may or may not achieve certain targets. 

 

The fact that they’re in government means that they are 

supposed to come forward with a concrete plan, something that 

has been consulted with not just industry but also with 

environmental organizations and environmental groups, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s exactly the opposite of what this Sask Party 

government is doing. They seem to think that they only need to 

consult with business on this issue. They’re forgetting the fact 

that environmental agencies and groups have great expertise 

and knowledge that they can bring to the table as well. 

 

They seem to forget that the people of Saskatchewan counted 

on the promise that they made in their election platform to reach 

the aggressive targets they did , so that Saskatchewan could be 

a national leader on this front, Mr. Speaker, because that would 

have placed us as national leaders on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Having reduced their targets to meet their federal cousins of 20 

per cent reduction of greenhouse gas emissions is simply not 

acceptable, Mr. Speaker, especially in the light of the fact that 

they should have had something in place to meet the promise 

that they made during the election campaign. And simply 

saying that they can’t meet that target because it’s going to 

negatively affect the economy in such a way that would be 

disastrous for the province is not entirely truthful, Mr. Speaker. 

Matter of fact, it’s downright disingenuous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

We know that the majority of that cost is going to be borne by 

SaskPower, according to the minister’s own experts. We know 

that the cost borne to SaskPower ratepayers would be anywhere 

between point five and 2 per cent because the current increase 

under the Sask Party government by 2020 is going to be 

approximately 20 per cent to SaskPower ratepayers. And we 

know that had they stuck to the 32 per cent reduction target, it 

would only have increased by another potential 2 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. So the Sask Party is being very disingenuous in their 

position on why they reduced their climate change reduction 

targets from 32 per cent to 20 per cent. And being just as 

disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, about having a plan. 

 

I want to remind anyone that’s currently tuned in that the Bill 

95 that the Sask Party government came forward with in May 

literally came forward in the eleventh hour of the spring 

session. It didn’t even receive second reading, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s how disingenuous that this Sask Party government is 

about the issue of climate change. They don’t present a plan 

until the eleventh hour of the spring session. They don’t present 

a plan until just before we ended the session in May of 2009. 

They didn’t put it through second reading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So far this session, they have not reintroduced that Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. This Sask Party government is completely 

disingenuous when it comes to issues of climate change. No 

plan, no sincerity with respect to how they’re treating the 

situation and the issues of climate change in the province. And 

quite frankly I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the 

minister and her officials are going to Copenhagen is going to 

be somewhat of an embarrassment for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are hoping that the Sask Party 

government is going to support the amended motion that my 

colleague from Regina Dewdney put forward today. And at 

least there would be something that people could understand, 

that we are going to be moving forward with in a concrete 

fashion in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, by this time I think many in this 

Chamber but especially many who are watching the activities 

here in the Chamber across the province and, maybe for others, 

on the Internet, they’re wondering, what’s all the fuss about? 

What’s going on here? Why is this discussion taking place here 

in Saskatchewan at this time? 

 

Mr. Speaker, my take on this, after listening to a number of 

comments from the members opposite and also looking at the 

kind of amendment that our party has brought forward to try to 

help the government get themselves out of this mess, my 

assessment is that we’re dealing with a leadership vacuum, both 

at the national level in Canada and at the provincial level. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to spend some time explaining why I 

say this. 

 



3694 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

What has happened over the last three to four years nationally is 

that this is an issue that the federal government doesn’t seem to 

want to deal with. And because of that, Canada’s reputation has 

been dropping like a stone on the international scene. 

 

We know that just a few weeks ago when our federal Minister 

of Environment, the one that our provincial Minister of 

Environment intends to travel with to Copenhagen, we know 

that when he got up to speak at a conference, 80 countries, 

representatives from 80 countries left the room. Why? Because 

they were basically fed up with listening to Canada — Canada 

who has had a long reputation in the international field of being 

somebody who can come forward with reasonable common 

sense, maybe like what we’d like to say on the Prairies, you 

know, people who have the long-term vision because they can 

see a long ways. That kind of position is not the position that 

Canada has been presenting on an international scene. 

 

Now in Saskatchewan we have some huge issues around our 

own per capita production of greenhouse gases, and we have set 

out some of the ways that we’re going to try to deal with these. 

But in a broader perspective, we need to have leadership at the 

national level, and then we need to provide leadership at a 

provincial level. 

 

When the provincial government, who is the people that are in 

power now, brought forward a plan to the people of 

Saskatchewan which basically said, trust us; we have a better 

plan for managing the economic success of the province, one of 

those areas where they said trust us was, we will go forward 

with the goals and the targets that have been set out by the 

previous provincial government. Well, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t 

take very many months before that went sideways. And then 

since then, we really don’t know what the plan is. 

 

Yesterday the Premier was speaking to the main motion around 

the discussion we’re having today. And he was asked across the 

floor, what is the plan? Well we thought maybe we’d get a 

chance to hear what the plan was. What we heard from him was 

almost word for word the simple words of this motion, but 

nothing more. There was no explanation of how it was going to 

be done. There was no explanation of what kinds of work was 

going to be done to go forward with that plan. It didn’t exist. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s like many issues that we deal with in 

this province. The Premier has some words, but they’re about 

an inch deep and a mile wide. And when you actually puncture 

through that surface, there’s nothing there. Now some people 

use that as a description of balloons. You know, we were 

hearing lots about balloons and pompoms in this legislature. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to this issue of what’s 

happening with climate change in our province, we can’t afford 

leadership like that. That’s leadership at the senior level. And at 

the ministerial level, similar kind of thing — we get back words 

and words and words at such a pace that nobody can understand 

what’s being said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue here is, what is the long-term future for 

our children, our grandchildren, and our great-grandchildren as 

they live here on the Prairies but also on the Earth? And, Mr. 

Speaker, what we attempted to do when we were in the 

government was to work towards some of these long-term 

plans. And one of the ways that our present Premier used his 

ability with words to assuage the concerns of people was to say, 

well we’ll just go along with what the previous government was 

going to do, and that’s our plan. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s been 

thrown out, and now there doesn’t appear to be any plan. 

 

Now why are we concerned? Well, Mr. Speaker, no matter what 

happens on the Prairies and around the Earth, but especially 

here on the Prairies, we end up having to deal with a pretty 

serious problem. The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel 

on Climate Change has projected that in the absence of 

interventions, the concentration of carbon dioxide under most 

scenarios will rise to the extent that it will trigger the average 

world temperature to increase by two and a half degrees Celsius 

by 2100. Now that’s 90 years. Most of us won’t be around. 

Extreme weather events, new deserts, agricultural failures, 

large-scale population movements, and mass starvation could 

result. 

 

In Saskatchewan, climate change is expected to affect forestry, 

fisheries, agriculture, water, energy, and transportation — 

virtually all aspects of our life. Now what exactly will happen? 

Well the high levels of greenhouse gases already in the 

atmosphere, primarily from the developed nations, will remain 

and will continue to affect our environment for many years to 

come despite actions that have been taken already. 

Saskatchewan is already a little drier and warmer on average 

than it was decades ago. If trends over the past century 

continue, Saskatchewan will likely experience earlier springs 

and later falls. Average night temperatures in winter may 

increase by up to 10 degrees Celsius and summer temperatures 

may increase by up to two degrees. There will likely be more 

extremely hot days. 

 

Now this week we’re obviously seeing that 10 degree Celsius 

change in November weather, and we end up asking ourself, 

well, you know, why is this happening? What is it that’s 

happening? Well we have very capable people in 

Saskatchewan, both in Regina and Saskatoon and other parts of 

the province — in Regina at the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative, in Saskatoon at the Saskatchewan Research 

Council, in Prince Albert at the Saskatchewan forestry centre — 

and together with observers and people across this province, 

they’re saying that we need to adapt to this change that’s 

happening in our community. And, Mr. Speaker, that adaptation 

is just one piece of a broader response to what’s happening in 

the world, but it’s our response here. 

 

What we’re talking about today is, what are we going to present 

as a Saskatchewan perspective, as part of a broader Canadian 

perspective, to the international community that’s already very 

skeptical of what Canada is saying? And, Mr. Speaker, the 

motion that we got from the government was pitiful. It didn’t 

say anything. The explanation we got from the Premier was 

thin, as I said before, extremely thin. And we’ve been looking 

to try to find out what it is that this minister and this Premier 

intend to say on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now my colleague, the member from Regina Dewdney, 

brought forward the amendment today to try to add some 

substance to what they’re talking about which is based on their 

own election platform two short years ago. And it also reflects 

some of the things that can be done that were based on the work 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3695 

that’s been done over quite a number of years here in 

Saskatchewan by the experts that we have and also people from 

other parts of Canada and other parts of the world. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, ultimately the question comes down to the 

leadership. And frankly, I think that’s where the problem lies. 

There’s no leadership that we can tell on this file at the 

ministerial level and now at the Premier’s level. 

 

Now we have quite an interesting situation this week where one 

of the more difficult financial reports is going to be coming to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And what does the Premier do? He 

goes off to Washington to talk about climate change. Well he 

wouldn’t even tell us in the House yesterday what he’s going to 

do about climate change. And so then he runs off to 

Washington. 

 

Now I was thinking about this last night and I thought, you 

know, maybe about 50 or 60 or 70 years from now, they will be 

having tunnel tours in Washington, DC [District of Columbia]. 

And anybody who’s been to Washington, DC, knows that the 

tunnels of Washington are a very interesting place to go. Those 

are the tunnels from the House office building and the Senate 

office building and some of the other government departmental 

office buildings that all lead to the Capitol building where many 

of the decisions are made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, maybe this is not dissimilar to 

the kinds of tours we have in Moose Jaw for the tunnels there. 

Because about, oh, 80 years ago there was a fellow, when 

things got hot in Chicago, he’d hop on the train and he’d go to 

Moose Jaw and hide out in the tunnels. Well you know, maybe 

80 years from now there’ll be somebody giving a tour in 

Washington about well, when things got hot in Saskatchewan 

their leader, their Premier went down to Washington to hide out 

in the tunnels. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about here 

is the Premier won’t tell us what the plan is in the House, but he 

sends out a press release, says he’s going to Washington to talk 

about our climate change plan. Look, that’s what’s causing the 

problem. There’s a vacuum here at the level of leadership, both 

the Premier’s level and at the minister’s level. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know at the national level, Mr. Jim 

Prentice is the federal minister. And I have respect for Mr. Jim 

Prentice. I’ve worked with him on a number of files when he 

had his previous portfolio. And I know that last week, or 

actually it was just a few days ago on November 15th in the 

Calgary Sun, there was an article that talked about the 

Copenhagen climate talks being nothing but hot air. 

 

And what they talk about is how Mr. Prentice, as the Minister 

of Environment for Canada, who is an experienced negotiator, 

they talk about how he was smart enough and willing enough to 

get together a team of people who could work on this whole 

area so that they would actually have a strong presence when 

they got to the Copenhagen meeting. And so what they did, 

without lots of fuss, they created a special climate change unit 

which was outside the normal bureaucratic channels in Ottawa, 

and it was devoted exclusively to planning one of the biggest 

and most complicated negotiations that the Conservative 

government has faced. 

 

Today, as of the 15th of November, this high-powered federal 

group includes dozens of senior government officials from 

different departments and even more key recruits from the 

private sector. They even brought in Deirdre McMurdy, who’s a 

former business journalist, as their national think tank 

management or communications manager around this 

Copenhagen meeting. No effort or expense was spared. And I 

think that kind of preparation and that kind of work is what we 

want ministers to do. And I say with a great deal of respect that 

Mr. Prentice has that kind of skill himself to want to be 

prepared. 

 

But now what they’re saying is that this whole exercise may 

have been for naught. With only about three weeks to go until 

the opening in Copenhagen, this “. . . supposedly historic 

negotiation to save the planet is already being written off as an 

11-day exercise in futility.” 

 

Now the federal government is sticking to their perspective that 

Canada intends to play an active and constructive role with a 

view to achieving an effective and fair agreement for fighting 

climate change. But what this reporter says from Calgary is that 

“even the ordinarily optimistic [Mr.] Prentice now spends his 

time trying to lower public expectations, clearly convinced that 

nothing of much substance will come from [this] . . . summit.” 

He said, you know, it doesn’t look very promising, this 

conference. 

 

Michael Martin, who is Canada’s chief climate change 

negotiator, he admitted, “We are clearly a long way from a 

treaty.” One senior federal official who obviously didn’t want 

to be quoted, puts it more bluntly. He says the only strategy 

that’s occupying these people in this special unit now is how to 

get in and out of Copenhagen without being blamed for what’s 

not going to happen. 

 

So none of this should come as a big surprise to this journalist, 

Mr. Greg Weston, because basically those officials and Mr. 

Prentice have been meeting with their counterparts and they are 

in a situation where they can’t get an agreement amongst 

themselves as to what should happen. And this kind of 

frustration, but also this sense of a lack of a position from 

Canada or a diminished position over the last few years — 

going back to my earlier comment about lack of ultimate 

leadership — has basically diminished Canada’s perspective in 

the world as it relates to these issues. 

 

And I know that practically this also makes it quite amazing in 

a way that our Saskatchewan minister and some of her senior 

people who I know, and I know they’re capable people, it 

makes me wonder why they would end up wanting to spend the 

money to go to something like this if it doesn’t appear that 

anything is going to happen. 

 

So it’s a comment from Mr. Prentice just on November 17th, 

which is yesterday. He says that it may be a few years before 

Canada tables regulations to cut greenhouse gas emissions. And 

he basically is saying the world has to first negotiate a new 

climate change treaty and Canada, the United States must finish 

their continental agreement on the same issue. 



3696 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have talked to quite a number of our 

American colleagues over the last six months on many issues, 

but this whole issue of climate change, the Americans really do 

ask us a lot of questions about what we’re doing in Canada. 

And it’s whether they’re from Missouri or from Kansas or from 

Idaho or from Washington or from Maine, whatever, people are 

curious about two things about Canada. One — always number 

one — is health care, but number two is climate change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the frustrations for the people in the 

United States who are working on this policy is that Canada 

seems to have gone to mush on having a position. Once again, 

I’m going back to this leadership vacuum. So rather than 

Canada coming forward and saying, here’s some good ideas 

that can be put into how we deal with this, they appear to have 

just sort of stepped back and said, well we’re going to wait and 

see what the rest of the world does and then we’ll just take it or 

we’ll complain about it. But there’s no question, we’ll just take 

it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a major problem for us here in 

Saskatchewan. It’s a major problem for our country as a whole, 

but it also begs the question of what our Premier’s doing in 

Washington today and tomorrow and the next day. It begs the 

question of why some of our people from Saskatchewan would 

be going to this meeting in Copenhagen. To basically, I think, 

enjoy Denmark and Copenhagen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have absolutely nothing against 

Copenhagen. In fact, I love that city. I’ve spent many, many 

days there and in fact, before I got into politics, I used to be the 

consul for Denmark for Saskatchewan. And I was regularly part 

of promotion of travel to Denmark, as well as all the other 

consular activities that you have. And quite clearly, Denmark is 

the country of happy Danes. I have their latest, you know, 

Denmark. And you go to Copenhagen. It’s the liveable, 

loveable Copenhagen, or as they say in Denmark, København. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Copenhagen, they call themself capital 

of the happiest people in the world. 

 

But why is it that they call themselves that? Well perhaps 

quoting from this magazine that says: 

 

Perhaps it’s the relaxed, easy-going Danish lifestyle, or the 

social and environmental consciousness that touches every 

aspect of life in Denmark, or the incredible feeling of 

hygge — a warmth, coziness and security so unique to 

Denmark that it can only be expressed with a Danish 

word. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the reasons that the world 

wanted to go to Copenhagen for this kind of a meeting was 

because of their environmental record. The kind of thing that, 

you know, maybe that five or ten years ago they might have 

said, let’s go to Canada. But I don’t know if they would do that 

now with 80 people walking out on our international 

representatives. 

 

But Copenhagen has tried to deal with the fact that they have, 

you know, very little resources. Their highest point in the whole 

country is 100 feet, and they like to take you there. You know, 

it’s hard to tell where it is. But they have taken resources. They 

have taken and developed wind power. They have basically 

created liveable space where people can walk and ride bicycles 

and live in a way that has as little impact on the earth as 

possible. 

 

So when I say I’m wondering why some of our Saskatchewan 

representatives would go to Copenhagen, one of the positive 

sides may be to actually see some of the good things that 

Denmark has done and learn and bring some of those things 

back here. 

 

But on the policy side, they can use some of the motion that we 

brought forward to amend the empty motion that we got 

yesterday or the day before, and we can end up in this situation 

actually having something of substance that they can take with 

them and maybe help out the national government in Canada. 

 

Now when one deals with these particular issues, it’s not only 

frustrating for politicians or for people that observe politics 

when there are vacuums in leadership at a national and a 

provincial level. It also is extremely frustrating for business. 

And we know that there will be a lot of frustration and . . . well 

there already is a lot of frustration registered with this 

government’s business record as it relates to the managing of 

the finances of the province. But there is also a whole issue 

around management of environmental issues and not having 

clear rules or clear plans about what you’re going to do. 

 

And as a lawyer, as somebody who in previous parts of my 

career would sit down to advise people as to what to do, I know 

that right now, lawyers who specialize in environmental law are 

almost at a loss as to what to advise people as to what are the 

rules going to be this year versus next year versus three years 

from now versus 10 years from now. And the economy and 

business can’t operate when there’s so much flux or so much 

mush — I don’t know what the right word is — in dealing with 

what the rules are. And what they are saying in the United 

States, what they’re saying in Canada, is give us the rules that 

we know what we can do and how we can plan, and we will 

work with them. 

 

When you look around the world at the economies where they 

have clear rules on the environment, they — the businesses — 

are able to sit down, make plans and set up business plans, and 

actually go ahead and build and develop new industries and 

new things to do. 

 

Unfortunately in Canada we are in this situation where we don’t 

have leadership at a national level and, unfortunately, at quite a 

number of the provincial levels because these things are so 

intertwined that lawyers who are giving advice, people who are 

trying to invest money in new businesses, in new developments, 

in new buildings, are saying, what are the rules? Where do we 

go? 

 

Now we end up wondering if this is a deliberate effort to muddy 

all this stuff, or if in fact it’s just that there’s a lack of 

understanding of the importance of making some of these 

decisions. Now I know that it’s much easier to wait for 

somebody else to make a decision for you. But I think I respond 

to some of our American colleagues in saying, what we should 

be doing as Canadians is sitting down and sharing all of our 

ideas and all of our plans with the people who are developing 

policy both at a national level and a state level in the United 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3697 

States so that they can understand where some of the things that 

we would want to do would be similar to what they want to do. 

We may even have — and I think we do probably have — some 

good ideas that they could use. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But unfortunately the policy at the national level, maybe at the 

provincial level, in that area is no, we’re going to wait and see. 

And Mr. Jim Prentice said yesterday, well we’re going to be a 

few more years before we decide what to do; we want to wait 

and see what everybody else is going to do. Also what he said, 

you know yesterday, is that Canada is pursuing a continental 

climate change accord with the United States that would include 

a cap-and-trade system for greenhouse gas emissions. And that 

must be completed before Canada tables any regulations to 

dictate how much Canadian companies will need to cut their 

own emissions. So basically the whole discussion is tied in with 

what’s happening in the States. And that’s not a bad thing. 

 

Now I know that the Premier’s come out with some fairly 

definite statements, but he doesn’t seem to have a plan to back 

those up, but he has come out with some fairly definite 

statements on the whole issue of cap and trade. What we know 

in Saskatchewan — and I think maybe it’s probably true more 

for the people on this side of the House than over there — what 

we know about Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan business, 

Saskatchewan people is that we can trade with and compete 

with anybody in the world. And we will continue to do that. 

 

If there’s a new market that involves trading of carbon credits, 

well we’ve already got some experience with many of our 

farmers being involved, our forests being involved, other 

places. But tell us what the rules are internationally and we will 

figure out how to compete and how to trade in whatever the 

description of the commodity is, because that’s how we as 

Saskatchewan people survive. 

 

I thought it was quite interesting yesterday where the Prime 

Minister of Canada noted that the trade that was happening with 

India from Canada, almost half of all the trade that is made with 

India right now comes from the province of Saskatchewan. 

Now, you know, we’re proud of that. I think it’s probably based 

on statistics from two years ago because they don’t have the last 

two years in place, but what it shows is that Saskatchewan 

people will be able to compete anywhere. 

 

What’s frustrating as we deal with this file, and why we’re 

bringing forward the amendment that we are to the 

government’s motion, is that there doesn’t seem to be a plan 

that’s available for Saskatchewan people or Saskatchewan 

business as we move forward. 

 

Now the other part of our suggestion as to how to fix the 

government’s original motion relates to government Bill 95, 

which was introduced last year — well I guess earlier this year, 

but in the last session just a few months ago — and still hasn’t 

shown up here. That Bill, which is called An Act respecting the 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and 

Adaptation to Climate Change, had some, I think some pretty 

important parts to it. And it had the ability, with the appropriate 

amendments, with some good advice from those of us on this 

side, to actually provide a solid basis for the minister and for the 

Premier to go out and do some of the work around this issue, 

and maybe eliminate what I call this leadership vacuum. 

 

And so people wonder, well what was this Bill about and kind 

of where did it come from? Well basically it comes from work 

from many people who have been studying this area and 

working with this area over quite a number of years. And the 

purpose of the legislation obviously, was to put into words the 

simple promise that was made in the Sask Party election 

platform, which was based directly on the plans that were set 

out in the energy and climate change plan of 2007 of the 

previous government. And this legislation was to follow on that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it ends up I think falling a little short — and 

maybe this is why it hasn’t been reintroduced yet — because it 

had a place where you could just insert the words that are part 

of the election promise of the Sask Party which was a 32 per 

cent decrease in greenhouse gas emissions. You insert the word 

there. But what they did in this one, which is probably why we 

would have spent a long talking about it, is they said, oh we’ll 

let cabinet to set the baseline for this, and we’ll also let cabinet 

set the reduction target. And we’ll let them do it as often as they 

want, change it when they want, just to basically reflect 

whatever the mood is, I guess, of the Premier and the cabinet. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. It’s not good 

enough for business. It’s not good enough for people of 

Saskatchewan, it’s not good enough for the people who are 

concerned about how our climate is being done. So, you know, 

kudos to the minister. She withdrew this one for a little more 

work. Now what we’re saying is let’s put the numbers in there 

that you had in your election platform and the numbers that we 

had. And we’ll end up at least then having for our public the 

guidelines that we intended. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it also in this legislation has a part III which 

has a good title and basically it’s called the “Responsibilities 

and Powers of Minister.” And so it basically says, “The 

minister is responsible for all matters not by law assigned to any 

other minister or government agency respecting greenhouse gas 

emissions, climate change and adaptation to climate change.” 

 

And then it goes and it lists out all the different things that a 

minister can do to fulfill these responsibilities. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we should remember what this word is — 

responsibility. There’s somebody who has this job, whose job it 

would be to be responsible for dealing with the issues. 

 

And so you look and see, well what are the things that are to be 

done? Well they’re supposed to “. . . guide, promote, 

co-ordinate and implement policies, strategies and programs 

respecting greenhouse gas emissions, climate change and 

adaptation to climate change.” 

 

Well that’s a very positive thing. It would be nice to have 

somebody doing that. They’re also supposed to “. . .undertake 

planning, research and investigations and make forecasts 

respecting greenhouse gas emissions, climate change and 

adaptation to climate change.” 

 

Another very good thing. The next one is installing, operating, 

maintaining, “. . . or cause to be installed, operated or 

maintained, devices to measure greenhouse gases.” 



3698 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

Well that’s obviously a very good thing and I mean I know we 

are doing some of that already, but obviously this is a 

responsibility. 

 

And minister’s responsible for obtaining and collecting “. . . 

data respecting greenhouse gas emissions, climate change and 

adaptation to climate change.” That’s another important thing. 

 

Next responsibility is, “provide information to the public” 

obviously based on the data collected from the places that have 

been set up, and make sure that there are “. . . programs of 

education, awareness and demonstration . . . [projects around] 

greenhouse gas emissions, climate change and adaptation to 

climate change.” 

 

Another area for the minister is to do the whole promotion of 

“. . . reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and sequestration of 

greenhouse gases.” Well those are good things as well. And 

further to maintain records so that we can actually see whether 

we’re progressing or not as it relates to these things. 

 

It also says that the minister’s responsible for recommending 

“. . . targets for reductions of greenhouse gas emissions.” And 

it’s also, a job would be to “establish and maintain registries of 

offsets.” Now, Mr. Speaker, all those things are very important 

as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it goes on for a few pages about the 

importance of the minister taking responsibility for doing the 

various things that are set out in this legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the proposal that the opposition has 

made in their amendment to this main motion goes a long ways 

to giving the minister something to take with her to the 

beautiful, friendly city of Copenhagen. And also with the 

appropriate activity, we could even have it in the Premier’s 

hands before some of his meetings tomorrow afternoon down in 

Washington, as long as he finds his way out of the tunnels. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that there are a whole number of 

ways that we can assist the government as it works on this file. 

They have been quite strange in their response to what should 

be their responsibilities dealing with this legislation. They 

weren’t really able to tell us yesterday or today what their plan 

is. So, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that they agree with the 

amendments that we are proposing, as this will give them a 

great deal of help as they move forward. So I speak in favour of 

the amendment to this motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m also 

quite pleased and honoured to enter into the debate in reference 

to the non-action on the environmental file, in reference to the 

Sask Party and most recently some of the statements made by 

the Minister of the Environment in relation to her trip to 

Copenhagen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the things that we ought to point out right 

away when we talk about the environmental challenges and the 

climate change that people of Saskatchewan and the world are 

currently experiencing, one of the things that I find a bit 

disheartening is that when I listen to some of the words of the 

scientists and I listen to some of the words of the professional 

people and some of the words of our own civil servants, when 

they say words like we have to adapt to the climate change. And 

to me, I think that particular word is a bit disconcerting. Why? 

Because it almost seems as if we’ve given up on the fight to 

combat this whole notion of the greenhouse gas emissions, the 

warming of the Earth’s atmosphere, and the list goes on. 

 

And I don’t think we have enough passion. I don’t think we 

have enough action on this whole file when it comes to the 

environment. And I think what’s really important is that we also 

see a huge vacuum of leadership. And that leadership, Mr. 

Speaker, is so important for people to hear and for people to 

listen to and for people to learn from. 

 

And one of the reasons why I’m entering the debate today — 

and I listened to some of the comments and some of the 

positions stated — I really want to pay a particular note to the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood when he spoke about 

his discussions with his young grandchildren and some of the 

people in and around his community. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

question that he raises, that are the young kids a lot more aware 

of the challenges that we face as a society and as humanity? The 

obvious answer, I think, yes. I think the young people are 

feeling the effects, and they’re feeling much more the pressure 

that something ought to be done to address this concern. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And one of the things I think is really important is that I served 

as minister of the Environment for a number of years under the 

previous administration. And I learned quite a bit from a 

number of different groups and from a number of different 

people. And one of the things that I really, really didn’t like as a 

minister of the Environment, I absolutely detested, was the 

word “balance.” And the reason why I didn’t like the word 

“balance,” Mr. Speaker, is because to me I think it really 

highlighted the point that people out there thought we were 

balancing the economy and the environment in a very equal 

way. And, Mr. Speaker, the answer is, we’re not. We are not 

balancing the needs of the environment and the economy in any 

way, shape, or form. 

 

Clearly the balance is in favour of industry. It’s in favour of 

continuing on burning up the atmosphere, continuing on 

burning up our resources with no action from us as a province, 

and no action from this particular government. And in 

particular, this particular minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you ought to ask yourself the question on the 

possibility: as a Saskatchewan people, can we build a green and 

prosperous economy? That’s the big question we have in 

relation to this particular Bill and some of the things that we 

brought forward when we were in government. And the answer 

is, yes we can. Absolutely, yes we can. But it’s going to take 

some vision. It’s going to take some innovation. It’s going to 

take some excitement. And above all else, it’s going to take 

leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that people ought to know is that we, as a 

New Democratic opposition party right now, we’re telling the 

people the reason why we’re debating this Bill is not to stop 

progress on the environmental front. We’re not trying to stop 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3699 

the minister from taking her trip to Copenhagen to have a good 

old time with the climate change conference. 

 

The problem is, Mr. Speaker, is that we need leadership on this 

file before we go off on a trip to Copenhagen. And that is what 

the fundamental flaw and the problem is right now here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be at the peril of any 

government and any party that does not address the climate 

change problem that we are facing as a province, as a country 

and as the world. The people of Saskatchewan and the people of 

this entire world are actually having less and less patience with 

politicians that are not responding to the critical problem of 

climate change. 

 

If they continue sitting on their hands and saying, well we have 

a balance between the economy and the environment, well I say 

as a former minister of the Environment, ministers of the 

Environment should not use the word “balance” when they’re 

talking about the environment and the economy. Why? Because 

they have an obligation to do, number one, an obligation is to 

protect the interests of the environment above all else. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that minister ought to know that when you 

sit around a cabinet table and you’re Minister of the 

Environment, no other minister can come there and say, no 

you’re not going to do this particular environmental initiative 

because it’s going to hurt our economy. Above all, ministers of 

the Environment in cabinet have much more of a say on the 

environmental issues and cannot be overruled by other 

ministers for economic reasons. They have to protect the health 

of our world. They have to protect the water. They have to 

protect the air, the ground, and all parts of the environment that 

are critical to sustaining human life and of course other lives as 

we interact with nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the city here we had a former 

minister named Lorne Scott. Lorne Scott of Indian Head, as you 

know, worked very hard and was finally recognized for some of 

his work in terms of trying to protect Saskatchewan’s 

landscapes and to try and protect some of nature’s greatest gifts 

to us as a people. And I want to point out . . . And I quote from 

Mr. Scott’s acceptance speech of the Order of Merit, and the 

quote is: 

 

“It’s a huge honour to be selected to receive this 

prestigious award,” Scott said. He noted despite his efforts 

and those of others, more work is needed to preserve 

natural heritage, something that can be done without 

hurting the economy. “We have a great natural heritage 

and we’re losing it on an annual basis. Everybody can do 

something to help,” he added. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we as a government set the aggressive target 

of trying to reduce greenhouse gases by a full third — as a 

government by a full third, approximately 32 per cent — we 

thought it was a laudable goal, that it was an achievable goal. 

The same people that are advising that government now also 

advised us. So when we as a government and as a party adopted 

a 32 per cent reduction target, people believed it was a good 

target. It was achievable. And some people said we should do 

more, but you obviously have to learn to walk before you run. 

Well as soon as the Sask Party came into government they said, 

well we want to adopt what the NDP have proposed, so 

therefore we’re going to do that as well. So they promised it to 

the people of Saskatchewan, and rest assured there’s a lot of 

groups out there that did indeed listen to some of the comments 

and some of the commitments in reference to greenhouse gas 

reductions. There was some hope that these guys, the 

Saskatchewan Party, would actually pay attention to this file. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, no longer did they assume office, they turn 

around and they broke that promise. They said, no, we’re not 

going to do that. No, we’re not going to do that. We’re going to 

go down to 20 per cent reduction target, which is a national rate 

that the Conservatives have adopted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again today we’re still seeing no Bill 

presented as to what their plans are. So the people out there that 

are listening to the debate right now, we tell them a number of 

things. Number one is that we ought to not accept lesser 

standards when it comes to trying to reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions from any government. Any government should not be 

able to get away with it, and this government is trying to do it. 

 

The second thing is, is that ministers of the Environment need 

to stand up in cabinet, and they need to stand up in many, many 

other venues and start professing what needs to be done to try 

and turn the tide against the mounting evidence that greenhouse 

gas emissions are creating some significant problems 

throughout the world. Mr. Speaker, if we have to get up on the 

highest mountain in Saskatchewan, from any podium, from any 

road, from any community, from any playground, from any, any 

venue of communication, we ought to be doing that every single 

day. 

 

And what have we heard from this minister? Absolutely 

nothing. Absolutely nothing, and, Mr. Speaker, that is a shame. 

That is a shame because we want to see leadership on this file. 

We want to see some action. We want to see some movement. 

And what happens? They first of all adopt our reduction targets. 

Then they say no, we’re not going to do that, after they got 

elected. Then they went down to 20 per cent of their plan, 

which matches the federal plan. Well they’re not going to do 

that either. 

 

So we say, well where is the Bill? Where is the Bill that shows 

us the progress that you’re going to make? And, Mr. Speaker, 

there is no Bill. And that’s the fundamental flaw that I see right 

now with this whole debate is there’s never, ever commitment. 

 

And I know on many occasions the Minister of Environment 

was probably overruled in cabinet by simply told no, we’re not 

going to adopt those targets. I don’t know whether it’s the 

minister of industry or resources or the Minister of Agriculture. 

We’re not going to adopt those targets because that’s going to 

hurt our economy and that’s going to hurt our political chances 

of being re-elected in a few years. And, Mr. Speaker, when you 

start really not defending what your primary goal and objective 

are as an environmental minister, then you ought to simply step 

aside and let other people that have a better view, and certainly 

the determination to provide leadership on this particular file 

and make sure that things are happening. 

 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, there is no action. When you start 



3700 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

seeing in northern Saskatchewan the effects of acid rain, when 

you start seeing the effects of water quality from some of the 

activity of oil and gas in Alberta, or you start seeing some of the 

forest fire situation go unchecked, and you start laying off some 

of your workers that protect the communities and some of the 

workers that monitor the health of the ecosystems in the North, 

you start slashing some of those jobs, you start cutting back 

some of those programs, well that’s not commitment to the 

environment at all. That is not commitment to the environment 

at all. And you’ve got a minister, former ministers like Lorne 

Scott, receiving recognition for his work saying, we need to do 

more. We need to do more. 

 

It’s more than a trip to Copenhagen. This is a trip that we ought 

to take as a people to simply tell people out there, far and wide, 

that you should not use the argument of balance, because there 

is no balance. And if you think for one minute, for one minute, 

that we can’t afford to do this — the people say you can’t afford 

it; you’re going to hurt the jobs — well, Mr. Speaker, the young 

people will tell you, we cannot afford to ignore this problem 

any more. You cannot afford to ignore this problem any more. 

 

And we know there are people across the way there, people 

within cabinet that have this position, an opinion that there is no 

global warming. There is no global warming. This is a big 

conspiracy. Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the small minds across 

the way, I will not take their word one little bit compared to 

some of the professional people out there, the experts, and the 

people that tell you, here’s your mounting evidence. Here is 

your mounting evidence that the world is changing because of 

human activity and the introduction of greenhouse gases. 

 

And yet people are still ignoring the problem. They’re still 

ignoring the problem. They got their head stuck down a hole, 

hoping all this goes away magically on their own. Why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because they’re looking at a four-year political 

timeline called elections. And that is sad and that’s the part that 

really detests myself as a member, when I hear that kind of talk 

and that kind of attitude prevailing over there. And I say to 

them today that we need, we need leadership more than ever. 

 

Now Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan can provide that leadership. 

We are one of the largest emitters in Canada. We have to accept 

that inevitable fact. We are one of the largest emitters in 

Canada, as a province, of a province of 1 million people. We 

emit a lot of greenhouse gases and we ought to provide the most 

leadership if we’re doing the most damage. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that if the minister and the 

Saskatchewan Party government does not respond to that 

problem, does not respond to that fact and that truth, then 

what’s going to happen is the people of Saskatchewan are going 

to say, enough of that; we don’t want that kind of weak 

leadership on the environmental file. We need some good 

proactive measures and measures that’s going to make a 

difference and make all of us in Saskatchewan sleep a little bit 

better at night knowing that we have an action plan to address 

greenhouse gas emissions as a people and as a province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve read a number of books on this 

particular file and one of the books I think is very interesting. 

It’s written by a doctor named Helen Caldicott, and the doctor 

basically does a number of things here. She looks at a number 

of the issues and, like a doctor, what she does is she assesses the 

health of the planet and she says to us, here are some of your 

health problems as a planet, and as a doctor I want to prescribe 

to you how you can heal this planet. 

 

And this doctor, while she had some opinions that I don’t share, 

in particular on uranium development, she’s got some very 

good, very good information for people and they ought to read 

this. And the book is really called If You Love This Planet and 

it’s a plan to heal the Earth. And there’s some very, very good 

points that the kind doctor makes in relation to human health 

and the health of our ecosystems, and the list goes on of some 

of the things that she talks about. 

 

So I go back to my earlier point, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about 

inaction, inaction on the part of this particular minister. Because 

one of the things that’s fundamentally wrong with the approach 

that she has is that you can’t set a target, get people to vote for 

you based on that target, turn around and destroy that target and 

say we’re not going to do it, accept a lesser target, and then not 

even accept a lesser target later on and not even present a Bill in 

this House for us as an opposition and for people and for 

stakeholders to look at. 

 

One of the things that ought to be done is we ought to have a 

blueprint of action. What is your action? What is the plan? But 

you can’t have all these pompoms. You can’t have all these 

pompoms and these balloons saying, this is our plan. We need 

real plans. We need smart people to sign on to those real plans. 

 

We need to engage agriculture. We need to engage the Water 

Corporation. We need to engage the producers, the private 

sector, the people, the people that are really active with the 

environment. We need all these people in our tent to try and get 

something done to address the whole issue of global warming 

and the introduction of greenhouse gas. 

 

Now many people, as we speak, Mr. Speaker, you can go out to 

the Assembly here and walk around and by the end of this 

week, and you can still probably walk around in shorts. Why? 

Because it’s so warm out there today. And this is evidence once 

again that there is some severe weather pattern changes and it’s 

affecting a lot of people. And many, many people are talking 

about this. And the one thing that they want is they want 

leadership. What kind of leadership can we get to ensure that 

the whole issue of climate change is finally addressed? 

 

And I propose and I say to the people of Saskatchewan that that 

leadership is not coming from that area in any way, shape, or 

form — none whatsoever. Not only have they broken their 

election promise, they have now reduced their emissions target, 

and now they’ve completely skirted the whole issue by not even 

introducing a Bill in the Assembly. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I go back to the book by the kind Dr. 

Helen Caldicott, she speaks of some troubling trends. And she 

does a lot of research, and typically doctors have a . . . pretty 

sharp people. They know exactly what type of research to look 

into and really go after the issues and learn from it. And the 

book talks about a number of things that we ought to watch for. 

And she appeals to a lot of the young people in this book 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3701 

because she makes it easy to read. And she provides some very 

startling evidence. 

 

And the young people of the province of Saskatchewan, they 

have more awareness, much more awareness of what is 

typically ailing our environment. They’re more in tune to some 

of the waste, and sometimes they say, you older guys aren’t 

cool when it comes to worrying about the environment. That 

you don’t have a clue what you need to do to change things. 

You made a mess of the environment and yet you’re still 

skirting the issue. So maybe you ought to get out of the way and 

let young people come along and start changing the world for 

the better because the mess that you’ve left behind is probably a 

mess that’s going to take years to fix. 

 

So when I hear the whole notion of, well we can’t change it; we 

can’t reverse the damage; we have to adapt to it, I think that’s 

not a very good, sound strategy to take because it discourages 

people. And when you hear the word “balance” from the 

Minister of the Environment, well that’s again a discouraging 

type of language. And when you hear the fact that, well we’re 

not going to accept the lesser ways of getting rid of greenhouse 

gases by reducing our targets, again it’s discouraging. So 

everywhere you look, discouraging, discouraging, discourage, 

the same old, same old. There’s no action, no innovation, no 

excitement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the whole point that we have to make, 

and our former premier spoke of this and I was quite pleased 

that he did, when he spoke of developing a green and 

prosperous economy, what’s wrong with that notion? Why can’t 

we as a people and why can’t we as a province, a province 

that’s built on innovation, a province built with some good 

pioneers in a number of different fields — in particular health 

care — why can’t we now adopt the new health care issue of 

2009, and that health care issue is the health of our 

environment? Why can’t we adopt that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And the reason why we can’t adopt it because their mindset has 

been made across the way, and that there’s no leadership 

whatsoever. 

 

And I point out that northern Saskatchewan is feeling the 

effects of some of the climate change. We are feeling the 

effects. Because you look at some of the activity next door in 

Alberta and you look at some of the acid rain problem and you 

look at some of the deforestation that’s happening, you look at 

some of the rivers and the streams that are being contaminated, 

and there’s no action on that. 

 

You ask, what’s the action plan for northern Saskatchewan? 

There is zero. Oh, we’re monitoring the water flows into 

Saskatchewan. Well what does that do? Are you monitoring the 

quality? Are you monitoring the health of our forests? Are you 

monitoring the water quality in all the rivers that come in from 

Alberta? None of that is occurring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we’re going to go to Copenhagen to try and go there 

and become leaders. Well maybe, perhaps a good idea is maybe 

you should start providing leadership in Saskatchewan land as 

opposed to going out to Copenhagen to pretend to lead the 

environmental file because, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan, as our leader said, all we’re seeing from this 

Sask Party government is a bunch of pretenders. And people of 

Saskatchewan have finally begun to realize what exactly they’re 

about. And one of the biggest failing grades that they have is 

action on the environment, action to address the greenhouse gas 

emission problem. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I looked at some of their issues that they 

raised: carbon capture, sequestering carbon into the ground, and 

that will get us more oil. And I look at some of the other things 

that they’ve done — yes, the representative area network. The 

monitoring at the . . . They talk about it in terms of the health of 

the ecosystems. Well, Mr. Speaker, all of that was done under 

the previous administration. 

 

And I don’t want to diminish the argument or importance of 

that particular work. I’m saying that that work was there. And 

you should come along as a new government and provide some 

innovation, provide some excitement, provide some new plans 

to address the environment. Nothing. Absolutely nothing. All 

they did was say to the people, we’re going to adopt the NDP’s 

goals and some of their strategies. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that was just the first step that we had 

planned. There’s much more and many more steps that people 

ought to take. And quite frankly, what we’re seeing is this 

particular government has stopped. They have not moved any 

further. 

 

And for us to stand here and say, yes, we’re going to support 

this notion on climate change; yes you can go to Copenhagen 

and pretend to have an answer for some of the problems that we 

have as a province — well we don’t buy that and we don’t 

support that notion. 

 

And I’ll say it as loud and clear as I can. The people of 

Saskatchewan will not tolerate a government that does not 

respond to the environmental problems, the greenhouse gases, 

and the degradation of nature and of our land and of our people 

at the rate that we’re seeing right now. It’s affecting many, 

many aspects of who we are and what we are as a people 

because we are refusing to deal with the issue of environmental 

change to our landscape and to our lands. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I challenge and I’m imploring the 

current minister and that government to get on the bandwagon. 

What many young people are saying, it’s time for action. Park 

their speeches, park their pompoms, and park their parades. We 

need action on the environment and we need it now. We need to 

put some good resources. We need to find out what other 

provinces are doing. We need to reach out to other provinces to 

build a consensus. 

 

But the more important thing is we need to, as a province, put 

together a plan that we would, as a province, address climate 

change — because we’re one of the largest emitters — by doing 

this, this, this, and this and by identifying that very clearly, very 

clearly, and putting into that action plan some resources and 

some very, very good, sound people to make sure we follow up 

and follow through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is nobody monitoring the water quality 

throughout Saskatchewan. There is nobody doing that, Mr. 

Speaker. There is nobody monitoring the health of our forests, 



3702 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2009 

Mr. Speaker. Nobody’s doing that as we speak. There’s nobody 

looking at alternative energies to reduce our dependency on 

coal. Nobody is doing that, Mr. Speaker. The clean coal 

technology, will that help? I don’t know. I don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker, but we need more emphasis on trying to find out those 

answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even on the nuclear issue, is there a better benefit 

to us environmentally if we looked at that option? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are not allowed to make 

that informed choice because the Sask Party politicized that 

process and tried to ram it down the people of Saskatchewan’s 

throat. And that was a great disservice to that particular 

industry. But does it find, does it find . . . Is it going to be part 

of the matrix of solutions for the people of Saskatchewan? I 

think it may have, it may have had some possibilities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my earlier point. Can we 

develop a green and prosperous economy? You bet we can. The 

people of Saskatchewan have the courage. They want to see that 

happen. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve proven it in the past that as a 

province of a million people, we can provide solution. 

 

So my message to the Minister of the Environment is you need 

to get off those aircrafts to different venues around the world, 

pretending to know what you need to do when it comes to the 

environment. The first thing you ought to do is show leadership 

at home — leadership at home — by stop putting that word “ 

balance” into your vocabulary, and start talking about your 

primary responsibility which is the protection of the 

environment when it comes to clean air, clean water, and clean 

land. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the previous administration looked at a 

number of different factors when you talk about the energy mix, 

when you talk about protection of water, protection of land, 

protection of air quality. The list goes on. And this document is 

fairly significant. But it has attached to it a number of strategies, 

and it has attached to it money. It has money. 

 

It talks about things like strength and value. It doesn’t talk 

about balance. It really talks about protecting water at source. It 

doesn’t mention balance. It talks about the healthy ecosystems 

within the forest. It doesn’t mention balance. Their primary 

focus at the time — and I commend them — it’s all about the 

environment. 

 

So when people across the way use the word “balance” and 

other people say, oh there’s no such thing as a greenhouse gas 

problem in the world, well I don’t know where they’re from, 

Mr. Speaker. Because the vast majority of people in the world, 

the professional people, the educated people, the young people, 

the scientists, they’re all telling us we’re on a collision course 

with nature. And unless and until we start realizing this and 

changing our ways, we are going to find ourselves in deeper 

trouble and very quickly. 

 

And the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood made a very 

good point when he said, it’s not going to affect me as much as 

it’s going to affect my grandchildren. Those were his words 

and, Mr. Speaker, he’s absolutely right. He’s absolutely right. 

Because as we put money away for our grandkids’ education or 

we help our children with their mortgage payment to get them 

going or we get them a beaten up old car to help them get 

around when they’re off to school or we pay their rent — 

whatever we do to help them — we do it because we have 

compassion and care for our grandchildren and our children. 

 

Now why can’t we do the same when it comes to the 

environment? The air that they breathe, we need to invest in it. 

The ground that they walk on, we need to invest in that. The 

water that they drink, we need to invest in that. So what’s the 

use of putting money away in an education fund when you have 

mass problems when it comes to their health as a result of some 

of the problems we have in the environment? It doesn’t make 

any sense. 

 

So the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood is absolutely 

right, is absolutely right. You are just borrowing this land from 

your grandchildren. You didn’t inherit it from your forefathers. 

You are borrowing it from your grandkids. 

 

And it’s time that this minister finally stand up, finally stand up 

and stop blaming the NDP for all the problems and stop looking 

for leadership from us and stand on her own two feet and start 

demanding of her government action on all these files. On every 

single file that we talk about, she needs to stand up and start 

demanding action. Because if she doesn’t demand action, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are going to react and 

they’re going to get rid of her and the Saskatchewan Party 

government. 

 

Because they, quite frankly, are not the champions of the 

environment as evidence of their reduction of their goals and 

certainly as evidence of the fact that they never even brought a 

Bill into this Assembly to address the climate change and the 

problem we have with the environment. There isn’t even a Bill 

presented to us, and yet they want us to arbitrarily say, yes, trust 

us; we’ll take care of those problems. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t trust them one bit. We don’t have 

no confidence in their ability to address the climate change 

issue that’s affecting all of us because half of them don’t 

believe it’s going to occur and the other half are not committing 

to the process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate what the member said from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood that we didn’t inherit this world or this 

Earth from our forefathers. We are simply borrowing it from 

our grandkids and our grandchildren. So if you’re prepared to 

put money away for their education or to help build a house or a 

home for them or to help them go to school or to ensure their 

health, shouldn’t we look after the environment as well? And 

that’s what the people of Saskatchewan are asking loud and 

clear. 

 

We need action. We need action on the environment. We need 

it and we need it now. And people out there are getting sick and 

tired of waiting for these guys to grow up and stop blaming the 

NDP for all their problems and provide that leadership. And if 

you can’t provide that leadership, if all your strategy is blame 

the NDP, then get out of the way and we’ll do it. At least, at 

least you’ll have somebody to blame. So maybe you guys ought 

to grow up. Maybe you ought to grow up and stand on your 

own two feet and stop blaming the NDP for your lack of 

leadership and your inability to lead. 



November 18, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3703 

So if you guys don’t want to provide that leadership, and you 

don’t realize that this is a very, very serious matter — it’s a 

very serious issue — if you don’t provide that leadership, then 

the people of Saskatchewan are going to punt you out of that 

office. We’ll come in there and we’ll make a real difference. 

And we’ll show you guys how it’s done. We’re not just going to 

protect the wild horses, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to protect 

every source of living creature in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And we’re going to provide solutions that balances a green and 

prosperous economy for the health of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Being the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

is adjourned till tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3671 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3671 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3671 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3671 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 3671, 3688 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3690 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3671 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3672 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3672 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3672 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3672 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3672 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3673 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Students Against Drinking and Driving 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3673 

 La Ronge Seniors Club 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3673 

 Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3673 

 Nine-Man Football Championship 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3674 

 Addictions Awareness Week 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3674 

 Dance Students Perform with Moscow Ballet 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3674 

 8th Annual Home Safe Home Gala 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3674 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Farmers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3675 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3675 

 Criminal Record Checks 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3676 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3676 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3677 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3678 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3678 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3679 

 Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3679 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3680 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Plan for Climate Change 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3680 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3685 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3688 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3693 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3698 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


