




















































Hansard: April 29, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 55A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 29, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2877 

 April 29, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

introduce to you officials from the Pacific NorthWest Economic 

Region, PNWER, who are visiting Regina as one of the several 

provincial and capital visits during the year. As Saskatchewan 

is a new PNWER member and also the upcoming host of the 

legislative academy and winter meetings in November, the 

leaders are interested in learning more about Saskatchewan and 

our interest in their organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce — and if you would 

please stand — Senator Lesil McGuire from Alaska. Senator 

McGuire is the incoming president of PNWER. Jeff Morris, 

representative from Washington state and a past president of 

PNWER; Matt Morrison, executive director of PNWER, from 

the Seattle office; and Wendy Baldwin from the Canadian 

Consulate in Seattle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that we welcome these, and I would 

also like to recognize Melinda Carter from protocol who is 

making sure that we‟re showing them the best of Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet, it‟s also 

a pleasure for me to introduce to you a young gentleman who 

will be working with myself this summer, and particularly 

spreading the PNWER word and to our private sector 

community. Reagen Reece is just finished his first year of 

Commerce at the University of Saskatchewan, and Reagen will 

be working with me both in Regina and in our home 

constituency. So I would ask that we welcome Reagen to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join in with 

the member opposite in welcoming the guests to Saskatchewan. 

We‟re very pleased to have these people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think our member from the southwestern part of 

Saskatchewan, the Cypress constituency, isn‟t here today, but 

we always like to say that Wallace Stegner, the American 

writer, is one of our favourite sons because he spent a good part 

of his . . . I guess up to age 12 living in Eastend, Saskatchewan. 

And he always talked about being Western North Americans or 

Western Americans, and basically that was because he‟d lived 

in North Dakota; Saskatchewan; Salt Lake City, Utah; 

Washington state, and then spent the end of his life in 

California. And whenever you look at a writer like that, what 

you see and what you feel is this sense of comradeship that we 

feel when we work with the PNWER people. 

 

And so what I want to say is that you are part of our extended 

family, and we very much appreciate having you here. Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to the members of the Assembly, I‟d like 

to introduce eight guests from the Canadian Paraplegic 

Association who have joined us on the floor of the Assembly 

this afternoon. 

 

With us today we have Del Huber. He is the president of the 

Saskatchewan chapter of the Canadian Paraplegic Association. 

We also have Don Shalley, director of fund development of the 

Saskatchewan chapter. 

 

We have four members of the CPA [Canadian Paraplegic 

Association]. There‟s Miranda Biletski, who is a competitive 

wheelchair rugby player and was recently named to a 

tournament all-star team in Vancouver. We have Clayton 

Gerein, who is a member of the five national champion 

wheelchair rugby teams from Saskatchewan, and is a 

seven-time paralympian and multiple medallist in wheelchair 

racing. 

 

We have Sean Smith who also plays wheelchair rugby, was a 

co-founder of the multiple-award-winning Poverty Plainsmen 

country music group, and helps manage the band and still sings 

with them on occasion. We have Doug Tratch who learned how 

to skydive so he could set a significant example of the CPA‟s 

message from their campaign, “The sky is the limit for people 

with spinal cord injuries and physical disabilities.” 

 

We have a volunteer with the CPA, Cheryl Huber, and one of 

the CPA staff, Sheila Flasko. Could everyone please join me in 

welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of all the 

members of your loyal opposition and all members of this 

House, I would like to join the minister in welcoming these 

folks from the CPA here today. I understand there are some 

interesting news that we‟ll be hearing more about, and we all 

appreciate when they can come out and see the proceedings of 

the legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



2878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to this Assembly I‟d like to introduce a couple 

of friends of mine, Ron and Colleen Kostiuk from Foam Lake. 

Give them a wave, folks, or stand up, if you would. Ron is a 

former colleague and also both are very good friends, and I‟d 

ask all members to please give them a warm welcome to their 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I just 

wanted to make note of Mr. Clayton Gerein. He‟s not only very 

adept at the sports that were mentioned already; he was also an 

opponent of mine in a fundraiser for abled skiers. And 

unfortunately he beat me and my team, but it was a very good 

competition and I certainly enjoyed it. So he‟s also a very 

accomplished skier as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce to you, through you, and to 

all members of the Assembly some guests that are seated in 

your gallery. And they are seven students from Riffel High 

School here in Regina, accompanied with some other folks as 

well, and perhaps they could stand as I call their names. There 

is Lacie Ripplinger, Braxton Entwistle, Angelica Jackson, Eden 

Timm, Kaitlyn Juba, Caitlynn Beckett, and Miranda Dipaola. 

These students are doing a magnificent job in the community of 

the Northwest, not to mention the entire community of Regina. 

 

They are accompanied here today by two of their teachers. 

These students are part of the grade 11 advanced placement art 

class, and their teacher in that program is Karen Luzny. And 

with this particular project that they‟ve undertaken, this other 

wonderful teacher, Karen Lach, has accompanied them and 

assisted them. She‟s an English teacher from Riffel High 

School. 

 

Unfortunately the principal for Riffel High School, Sharon 

Bender, wasn‟t able to make it today, but she‟s very supportive 

of the project. But two very, very supportive parents are also 

here in the audience with them today, and that‟s Art and Debbie 

Timm. And I‟d like to welcome them to the legislature. 

 

They are currently working on a project to raise awareness of 

the water situation and the world crisis that exists. They are 

raising consciousness of water issues regarding conservation, 

commodification, and global responsibility. They have a display 

of their artwork in the rotunda today, so if all the members 

would like to take a few minutes and view the artwork, it‟s on 

display in the rotunda. 

 

And a few of the students are actually going to represent their 

high school and Regina in Montreal in a few weeks to discuss 

issues around water further. So please join me in welcoming 

them to the Legislative Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to all members of the Assembly, it is my 

pleasure to introduce a group that is seated in your gallery, a 

group of individuals that have each earned graduate degrees and 

that chose to live and work in Saskatchewan. I would like to 

specifically recognize, and I ask each upon recognition to wave 

or stand, Dr. Kristi Wright, Dr. Laurie Sykes-Tottenham, Mr. 

Nick Carleton, Dr. Regan Hart-Mitchell, Dr. Allisson Quine, 

and Ms. Bridget Keating. 

 

These individuals, Mr. Speaker, are but a small sample of 

professionals that possess graduate degrees and that utilize their 

education to support vital needs and vital support to our 

province as a whole. They enrich our province. I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join in offering our kind welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure today, 

and indeed my honour, to present a petition in support of 

changes to The Highway Traffic Act, to be referred to as the 

Gallenger amendment. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, 

to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment, which 

would require all vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres 

per hour when passing a snowplow with their warning 

lights activated on Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today‟s petitions are predominantly from Regina. I 

so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition that speaks to the need of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, that they need to recognize the essential role of 

all health care providers as valued members of the health care 

team, and that government needs to realize that the utilization 

and the value of a full range of professional skills offered by 

health care providers is promoted through the address of 

retention and recruitment issues and by ensuring safe staffing 

levels. And such promotion can only be achieved through a 

commitment to adequate funding and the installation of good 

faith in the provincial collective bargaining process. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2879 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of members of SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union] West and the citizens 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to present a petition in 

support of indexing the minimum wage. As we all know, 

indexing minimum wage would ensure the minimum wage 

earners would be able to maintain a standard of living as the 

cost of living increases. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Moose Jaw. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the low wages paid to the workers who work for 

CBOs, the community-based organizations here in 

Saskatchewan, results in high staff turnover. And the 

subsequent lack of caregiver continuity has a negative impact 

on the quality of care clients receive. I‟d like to read the prayer, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from Melville and Kamsack. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions are signed by the good residents of Rosthern, 

Waldheim, Duck Lake, and Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions in support of needed expansion to the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



2880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

Avenue Community Centre for Gender & Sexual Diversity 

Annual Awards 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 17 the 

Avenue Community Centre for Gender & Sexual Diversity held 

its annual gala awards. My colleague, the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin, and myself were able to take in the 17th 

annual event. Through these awards the Avenue Community 

Centre recognizes people who have made significant 

contribution to a strong, vibrant, and healthy LGBTT [lesbian, 

gay, bisexual, two-spirit, and transgender] community. 

 

The winners for the Community Service Award were Herb 

McFaull and Tony Bidulka. Herb has been a long-time board 

member while Tony is the well-known author of the Russell 

Quant series featuring a Saskatchewan queer detective. 

Currently they are involved in establishing Camp 

fYrefly-Saskatchewan, a four-day leadership summer camp for 

LGBTTA [lesbian, gay, bisexual, two-spirit, transgender, and 

allies] youth that aims to give youth a stronger sense of identity. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Judy Krause was also recognized as a tireless volunteer doing 

what she can to strengthen the Saskatoon Diversity Network 

Pride events. 

 

Becoming well known to Saskatoon as the voices on Rainbow 

Radio on CFCR, adding their special spin on queer life and 

queer culture in Saskatoon, Dwight Austin and Brian Bogdan 

were recognized as well. 

 

I was very happy to see the Special Merit Award go to Blooms 

Flowers and Box Office Video, a business in my own riding. 

 

Neil Shaw and Maynard Rust have always been huge supporters 

of Pride in the Gala Awards. They are very well deserving of 

this special award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

these special people who go above and beyond in supporting 

diversity in Saskatoon. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Spinal Cord Injury and Physical Disabilities 

Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to rise today to inform the House that our government 

has proclaimed the month of May as Spinal Cord Injury and 

Physical Disabilities Awareness Month. 

 

According to the Canadian Paraplegic Association, about 900 

Canadians sustain a spinal cord injury each year. More than 40 

per cent of those injuries are caused by motor vehicle accidents. 

Other common causes of spinal cord injuries in Canada are 

diving and other sports-related injuries and falls. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a large percentage of spinal cord injuries are 

sustained by Canadians under the age of 34 — young men and 

women in the prime of their lives who are suddenly confronted 

with life-altering disabilities that will affect them for the rest of 

their lives. The mission of the Canadian Paraplegic Association 

is to help persons with spinal cord injuries and other physical 

disabilities achieve independence, self-reliance, and full 

community participation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to 

join with the CPA to help raise awareness about spinal cord 

injuries and other physical disabilities through this important 

proclamation. Our government also remains committed to 

investing in support of people with disabilities to ensure that 

they are able to live safe, secure, and meaningful lives. I ask all 

members to join me in recognizing May as Spinal Cord Injury 

and Physical Disabilities Awareness Month. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Remembering Peter James Bear 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, in my life I have been blessed 

to meet many great people and make many good friends. And, 

Mr. Speaker, one such great friend was Peter James Bear of 

Sandy Bay. Peter, more commonly known as PJ, was a 

dedicated person that cared for his family, his community, and 

his people. 

 

We need to appreciate good friends each and every day, Mr. 

Speaker. I valued my time and friendship with Peter, and last 

month Peter was tragically killed in a vehicle accident. The 

entire North was shocked and mourns the loss of one of its 

community leaders. 

 

Peter and his wife, Mona, were blessed with 10 children — the 

youngest one being two. And yet Peter devoted time to serve as 

an alderman for his community of Sandy Bay. Peter was an 

employee of SaskPower and also served as a member of the 

first responders team in co-operation with the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] for 10 years. He served on numerous 

boards such as the Mikisew preschool board and Northern 

Lights School Division, just to name a few. 

 

PJ Bear was a relatively young man, and yet he had 

accomplished so much for the people of his community and the 

people of the North. There were numerous times that Peter 

would go above and beyond to help as many people as he could 

— and Peter helped many, many people. 

 

We laid Peter to rest, and I want to thank his family for sharing 

him with all of us. I would like to thank his community, and I 

thank you, the Creator, for giving us time with PJ Bear. May he 

rest in peace as his work on earth was well done. Until we meet 

again, my good friend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2881 

Foam Lake Company Active in Biodiesel Industry 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today it gives me great pleasure to bring to the attention of this 

Assembly the accomplishments of one of the very dynamic 

businesses in Foam Lake, Milligan Bio-Tech. 

 

In the past I have spoken about the accomplishments of 

Milligan Bio-Tech, the company that began when the Foam 

Lake Marketing Club investigated the possibility of finding a 

non-food use for distressed oilseed crops. 

 

In 1996, Milligan biodiesel demonstrated the usefulness of 

biodiesel in agricultural equipment. That same year, Milligan 

Bio-Tech Inc. was incorporated. In 1998, there was a pre-pilot 

canola oil crushing plant built at the seed plant in Foam Lake. 

In 2001, after investing financially in continuous research and 

testing, Milligan met the North American and the European 

biodiesel standards and the first sale of biodiesel happened. 

 

Over the years, Milligan Bio worked with the federal and 

provincial governments and departments and researchers on 

many successful pilot projects. They have proven that canola is 

the top feedstock for the biodiesel use in cold weather. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to announce that in the last year, 

Milligan Bio-Tech has increased their staff from 16 to 25. They 

will soon be beginning the local production of biodiesel in their 

new 10-million-litre biodiesel optimization plant. This company 

is truly a story of innovation and success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d ask the members of this House to join with me 

in congratulating Milligan Bio-Tech, their vision, hard work, 

and optimism in their area of expertise. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Riffel High School H2O Our Life Fundraiser 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

evening I had the great privilege of attending an event at Riffel 

High School in Regina entitled H2O Our Life. The event was 

hosted by seven students of the grade 11 advanced placement 

art class — in partnership with the Canadian Wildlife 

Federation — who were challenged to research the water crisis 

in the world. Their goal was to increase awareness, raise at least 

$300 to provide a family in India with a shower and a toilet. 

 

The organization which they have chosen to work through is 

Charity: Water. Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent of the proceeds 

provided to Charity: Water goes directly to building new wells, 

rehabilitating wells, constructing water towers, and other related 

projects. This activity takes place in places such as Kenya, 

Ethiopia, India, Bangladesh, Liberia, and Tanzania. 

 

In the words of one of the students, “The most important job is 

to inform people that there is a water crisis. Before this project, 

none of us in this class even knew that there was a water crisis.” 

 

The students used their creative talents to paint amazing pieces 

to display their feelings about the world water crisis, 

accompanied by oral presentations. “Art has no limits and no 

boundaries. There are no language barriers.” 

 

The message that these students conveyed was very powerful. 

“The perception of water as a commodity started with the 

privatization of municipal water and then was encouraged when 

water was defined as a good in trade agreements.” “I believe 

water should be a human right. When water is privatized, 

communities and individuals lose their freedom to food, health, 

and basic survival.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students raised $1,300 last evening and, 

much more than that, educated all of the guests who were 

present. I would like to ask of my colleagues to congratulate 

them on their effort to date and wish them the best with their 

future endeavours. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Member Wins Woman of Excellence Award 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise today in this Assembly to offer my sincere 

congratulations to a fellow MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and 18 other Saskatoon women. These women were 

recognized as women of excellence at the Saskatoon Mayor‟s 

Prayer Breakfast where I was fortunate to bring greetings on 

behalf of the government this past Saturday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland is 

certainly deserving of this recognition. Years ago as a young 

woman, she aspired to be a paramedic. She was told, we do not 

hire women. Eventually she found an ambulance service that 

agreed to hire a woman, but only on the condition that she work 

part-time and was not allowed to drive the ambulance. 

 

The member was one of the first women to graduate as an 

emergency medical technician, and as an EMT [emergency 

medical technician] she became Saskatoon airport‟s first female 

air crash rescue firefighter. 

 

Longing for more personal contact in her profession, she joined 

the Saskatoon Police Service and was one of only 10 female 

officers at the time. The member was one of many female 

pioneers in our province who entered the field of emergency 

services. 

 

Wanting to become more involved with positive change and to 

have the ability to affect social policy, she entered provincial 

politics and is serving her first term as an MLA for the Sask 

Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would . . . [inaudible] . . . our MLA from 

Saskatoon Sutherland as definitely a woman of excellence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 



2882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

Northern Hockey Star a Machine on Ice 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Like 

many youth from the North, Jordan Iron left his home to do 

what for many is but a dream. For Jordan, his dream began with 

a three-hour trip to Prince Albert from his home in Meadow 

Lake. From this point on, Jordan would be away from his 

family every winter. 

 

At age of 14, Jordan left home to play hockey for the Beardy‟s 

triple A Blackhawks. Since this time, Jordan has excelled in 

hockey. His scoring record was consistently amongst the 

league‟s top 25. At 17 years old, with one year left to play in 

triple A, Jordan was recruited by the junior A hockey league‟s 

La Ronge Ice Wolves. 

 

Today Jordan, now 18 years old, is a strong, fast, and intelligent 

player. Mr. Speaker, he has to be; he‟s 5 feet 8 inches tall. But, 

Mr. Speaker, Jordan is like a machine on ice — always pushing 

forward — and this makes Jordan an irresistible force. So much 

so that his brother, Brian, who is also a hockey player, will ask 

his parents to take him to watch Jordan play rather than play his 

own game back home. 

 

It has always been hard to stand in the way of Jordan and 

hockey. When he was five, he came home and said he was 

going to play. Since that time, Jordan‟s parents, Shelly and 

Gordon, have worked hard to support both Jordan and his 

younger brother, Brian, to achieve their dreams — in hockey 

and in life. 

 

The Werminsky family and Iron family and myself are very 

proud of Jordan and as they say in Cree, Ahkamīyimo which 

means be strong and determined. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Support for Graduate Students 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I‟d like 

to share some stories that explain how the so-called grad 

retention program is harming Saskatchewan‟s ability to attract 

and retain the talented people that are so critical to a modern, 

knowledge-based economy. 

 

Many students chose to live in Saskatchewan because of the 

NDP‟s [New Democratic Party] graduate tax exemption. One 

writes, and I quote: 

 

I received my Ph.D. in 2007. At that time, I along with 

many others was approved for a five year tax exemption 

for 20,000 each year (not specific to past tuition costs but 

a complete exemption). The exemption was one of several 

factors that led me to choosing Regina over Idaho State 

which was also interested in hiring me. 

 

To the minister, given that it was obviously working, why did 

the Sask Party change the graduate tax exemption program? 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

opportunity to talk about the significance of our graduate 

students here within Saskatchewan. We know that both the 

University of Saskatchewan and University of Regina play such 

important roles in helping to develop and refine the talent. 

 

Professor Richard Florida, now at the University of Toronto, 

has said there are a number of variables that people look at 

when they are looking at communities. This is in his latest 

book, the Who’s Your City? Canadian edition. He can relate to 

the quality, the talent, the brains, the lifestyle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, I think what‟s important is we can look 

at the past track record of the previous government where 

35,000 people left the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 

we can stand that in stark contrast with the 15,000-plus that 

have come to Saskatchewan over the last year, Mr. Speaker, and 

we can see which program is working better. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister‟s penchant to 

oversell his flawed policy as opposed to fixing it is 

disappointed. Another student writes, and I quote: 

 

I am a working resident of Saskatchewan who chose to 

return to university to upgrade my qualifications. When I 

started my program in 2006, it was with the understanding 

that I would qualify for the Graduate Tax exemption, 

which was in effect at the time. That consideration played 

a very real part in my decision to enrol in a program that 

ultimately cost me over $10,000. 

 

To the minister: why did the Sask Party decide to break 

something that didn‟t need fixing and replace it with a program 

that excludes and alienates master‟s and Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] students? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we have about 3,900 

graduate students here in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, about half of these students continue to receive any 

number of types of supports, and those go from scholarships 

and fellowships and teaching assistantships — various forms of 

stipends, Mr. Speaker. Importantly, we have the third lowest 

graduate tuition in the country, Mr. Speaker. Very affordable, 

Mr. Speaker, which takes us to a broader theme, and that is our 

Finance minister today has released figures where over $700 

million in tax relief to the people of Saskatchewan for 2009, 

Mr. Speaker.  



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2883 

This is the type of fact and figure that people across the country 

are paying attention to as they‟re moving to Saskatchewan for 

the land of opportunity that it is. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister‟s program is 

not fair and it doesn‟t make sense. Another story, Mr. Speaker 

— this one from a 30-something graduate student who feels that 

the Sask Party policy discourages relatively young people from 

staying in the province. I quote: 

 

I was told that the program was aimed at “young people” 

for the retention of young people. As such, the province 

was not interested in retaining “older individuals.” At the 

time, I was 31. I guess that is considered “old.” 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party not treating graduates 

fairly? Why are they discouraging educated people over 30 

from settling, making their lives in our province? 

 

[14:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hyperbole is 

probably on the other side. With 15,000-plus people moving to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, what‟s important is to begin to 

look at the actual dollars that are being invested: $665 million, 

more than that, Mr. Speaker, invested in our institutions; 26.4 

million in the booster shot to help ensure that infrastructure is 

being . . . there‟s progress on infrastructure; 25.1 million on 

facility maintenance for the U of R [University of Regina] and 

U of S [University of Saskatchewan] alone, Mr. Speaker; $23.5 

million, Mr. Speaker, for tuition management to help ensure 

that tuition stays reasonable, Mr. Speaker; $2.2 million to help 

with students loans. Those haven‟t been moved since 1994, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hardly, hardly is there room for members opposite to be 

providing any lectures or advice on how to treat students, Mr. 

Speaker. Students, scholars, researchers, the institutions, and 

the fine communities within which they live — these are the 

priorities of the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Hyperbole, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what the 

minister says — hyperbole. These are real-life stories. Master‟s 

and Ph.D. students are frustrated, Mr. Speaker. Many have gone 

to school longer, paid more tuition, and gone without a salary 

longer than individuals currently covered under the minister‟s 

flawed programs. 

 

The Premier boasts about these programs on his road trips to 

Ontario and BC [British Columbia], yet many recent graduates 

are unable to access them. The Sask Party is alienating the very 

professionals that it claims it wants to attract to our province: 

professors, business grads, speech-language pathologists, nurse 

practitioners, physiotherapists, social workers, and clinical 

psychologists, just to name a few. 

 

To the minister: he suggested on Monday evening in committee 

that he was open to expanding the graduate retention program. 

Given the stories, the real stories you‟ve heard today here in the 

House, are you willing to make an announcement here today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

opportunity to expand on the comments that I made on Monday 

night, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟ve met with both deans of 

graduate studies at the respective institutions. I met with, as 

well, graduate students representatives at both institutions. 

 

I‟ll just say quite simply, Mr. Speaker, there is no consensus. 

There are a range of options and policy instruments about how 

to move forward. That‟s exactly right, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

consensus. What we‟re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is NDP politics. 

What we‟re doing, Mr. Speaker, is looking at sound public 

policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskPower Rates 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party wants 

annual SaskPower rate increases. The utility rate review panel 

notes that SaskPower projects a 21 per cent increase in 

operations, maintenance, and administration costs in 2009 

alone. On page 26 of the rate review panel‟s report, the 

consultants refer to “a disconcerting trend” to operating, 

maintenance, and administration costs. 

 

To the minister: why is this government continually looking to 

SaskPower customers to pay for its inability to manage things at 

SaskPower? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Once again I appreciate the opportunity to talk about 

the work that this government is doing to ensure that 

Saskatchewan residents pay the lowest possible cost on their 

utility rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the fastest growing economy in the 

country. We have a responsibility, a responsibility on this side 



2884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

of the House to ensure that we have safe, reliable, and 

sustainable power going forward to serve as the engine for that 

economy going forward, Mr. Speaker. That‟s indeed what this 

government will be doing. We‟ll be providing that at the lowest 

possible cost. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know the 

government‟s got a real poor record when it comes to openness 

and accountability. According to the panel on page 10, I quote, 

“. . . information gaps exacerbated the challenges involved in 

conducting the rate review.” And the panel continues on, 

saying, “An additional concern arising from the review process 

was the amount of material SaskPower was not prepared to 

make available to the public . . .” 

 

The Sask Party is hiding from the rate review panel, and it‟s 

hiding from the Saskatchewan public. To the minister: what is 

this government so not prepared to share with the rate review 

panel? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, you want to hear 

about poor records? I‟ll tell you about poor records under that 

administration, Mr. Speaker. I will tell you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Member for Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, about 

a government — the members opposite — who came to this 

legislature and talked about their support for the Crown 

corporations. At the same time, they did not put the capital 

necessary forward to ensure that there was not an infrastructure 

deficit in that corporation. They governed without 10-year 

plans, without a plan for a growing economy, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s the poor record of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Going forward we will indeed have a plan. Today there is an 

article in The Globe and Mail talking about carbon capture; 

talking about, you better have a plan, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

indeed what this government has. We‟re leading, leading the 

way on carbon capture and sequestration. We‟re leading the 

way as far as the technology goes. That‟s what people can 

expect from this government, not the poor record from 

members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — The Sask Party‟s got a plan. Their plan is a 13 

per cent rate hike to SaskPower right now, and rates coming 

fast and furious in the future. What a plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the rate review panel is crystal clear 

in their report. They say that a 13 per cent rate hike at 

SaskPower is “a legitimate cause [for grave concern] for public 

concern, given its potential to impact negatively on the 

province‟s economy.” 

 

To the minister: this government pursued a 13 per cent 

SaskPower rate increase. Did the Sask Party not know that this 

would negatively impact the economy? Or do they just don‟t 

care? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Here we go. We have the height of 

hypocrisy again. We have the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres talking about more intensive targets, higher targets. And 

we have the member from Regina Coronation Park saying, no, 

no, no, no, no, you can‟t do any of that. They can‟t have it both 

ways, Mr. Speaker. They can‟t have it both ways. 

 

As I indicated earlier, the rate review panel has done some good 

work. They‟ve made some recommendations. They‟ve made 

several good recommendations — some which say, some of the 

good ideas that are being put forward should be deferred 

because now is not the right time to do it. We will look at those 

recommendations. We will give them the careful consideration 

that they deserve, and we will report back to the people of 

Saskatchewan in a responsible way. The people of 

Saskatchewan deserve no less, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party said a 13 per cent 

rate increase is needed to pay for new power generation and the 

booming economy. The panel reports that even an eight and a 

half per cent rate increase is disconcerting to business and 

consumers, due to a slowing and uncertain economy. 

 

If you read a little deeper into the report, a consultant says 

SaskPower costs are out of control. Why does the Sask Party 

keep looking to SaskPower customers first to pay for its 

inability to manage effectively? 

 

To the minister: what is SaskPower doing to manage resources 

at SaskPower? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would tell the hon. member what we are doing. We 

are doing not what the previous administration did. We are 

suspending the dividend from SaskPower. We ensure that they 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2885 

have a strong balance sheet going forward. We ensure that they 

have the ability to have sustainable power going forward, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — And, Mr. Speaker, we are doing it 

in an open and transparent way, Mr. Speaker. And I call the 

attention of the members to the editorial that was in the 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix, the Saskatoon Star Phoenix this past 

Saturday and it says, and I quote, and I hope all members 

opposite are listening, “. . . an irony that can‟t be lost on anyone 

. . . it‟s a fool‟s game to believe this province can reduce 

emissions without cost.” The NDP can‟t have it both ways. 

They can‟t demand status quo on SaskPower rates and higher 

climate change targets. Truer words were never written, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Profits from Crime and Victims’ Rights 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 

Justice has raised an ever-changing series of excuses as to why 

he cannot prevent criminals from profiting from the most 

notorious crimes committed in our province, but he has failed to 

provide reasons why the Manitoba‟s profit of criminal notoriety 

Act cannot be used as a model. Mr. Speaker, Manitoba‟s Act 

seems easily adaptable to accomplish what the minister believes 

or says is either impossible or undesirable. 

 

The NDP opposition has agreed to fast-track a Bill through the 

House so it can be passed this session. Why is the minister 

dragging his feet? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

were in government for some 16 years. They had ample 

opportunity to do whatever they chose to do to deal with this 

particular issue during that period of time. Mr. Speaker, they 

chose to do nothing during that period of time. Mr. Speaker, my 

question to the member opposite is, if he feels strongly about it, 

does he wish to introduce a private member‟s Bill? We can 

have some discussion. We can have some debate on the issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has got a very strong and 

aggressive position with regard to victims‟ rights. We have 

increased victim surcharges, we have helped victims enforce 

restitution orders, and we will continue to stand behind victims 

in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for his 

history lesson. When the NDP was in government, we passed 

legislation protecting victims. When this government put 

forward legislation protecting victims, we supported it. If they 

thought they missed anything, Mr. Speaker, we will support 

them with further legislation. It is not either-or, Mr. Speaker. 

We can do both. We can pass legislation to stop criminals from 

profiting from their notorious crimes in this province, and we 

can protect victims in other cases, Mr. Speaker. Why won‟t the 

minister do both? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin was the minister of Justice for four years. 

Had he wanted to do something during that period of time to 

prevent people from profiting from crimes or anything else, he 

had ample opportunity to introduce Bills, pass legislation. We 

supported legislation during our time in opposition that 

enhanced victims‟ rights. 

 

We have actually, Mr. Speaker, we have taken it further. We are 

now at a point where we have increased victims‟ rights 

substantially in our province. We have enabled victims to get 

restitution orders enforced. We are taking steps so the province 

will actually enforce restitution orders on behalf of victims, Mr. 

Speaker. I can‟t imagine a province that‟s doing more. 

 

We‟ve also undertaken to have a careful look at legislation in a 

variety of different jurisdictions to try and find out what better 

we can do and what more we can do to help victims. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Minister of 

Justice has no problem intruding into the justice system in 

respect to sentencing in specific cases or commenting on 

freedom of the press in specific cases, Mr. Speaker. We also 

know that specific legislation exists, effective legislation exists 

in Manitoba and other jurisdictions that prevents criminals from 

profiting from their crimes. And the Justice minister knows that 

his officials are capable of solving whatever problems he will 

not detail to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition is willing to work with the 

government to pass legislation to stop criminals from profiting 

from the notorious crimes committed in our province. To the 

minister: will he commit today to working with the opposition 

to pass such legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I take strong exception to 

some of the language used by the member opposite. I have tried 

to maintain a strong, credible, ethical conduct throughout my 

career in this legislature, and I take strong exception to his 



2886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

statements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will not act in a knee-jerk or a spontaneous 

response to something merely for political grandstanding, 

unlike the members opposite. We will sit down; we will give 

careful due diligence; and we will come up with legislation that 

is appropriate, meaningful, and capable of offering some real 

support to victims in this province, Mr. Speaker. That is the 

direction that this government is going to go. 

 

We‟re not going to go off on some ill-conceived . . . [inaudible] 

. . . because that member opposite wants it. If he wants to 

introduce a Bill, we‟ll look at his Bill, and we‟ll give it some 

careful consideration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Gender Equity Issues 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last week the minister 

responsible for women‟s issues replied to a pay equity question 

by acknowledging that the wage gap was severe when it comes 

to Aboriginal women. And we agree, Mr. Speaker. Stats show 

that for every dollar earned by an Aboriginal woman, a 

non-Aboriginal man earns $2.34. But the question was never 

answered by the minister — and it still stands — where the 

Saskatchewan Party is on the question of pay equity legislation 

for Saskatchewan women. 

 

To the minister: will the Saskatchewan Party recognize the 

contribution that women make to Saskatchewan‟s economy and 

introduce pay equity legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 

opportunity to talk about wages in Saskatchewan because, Mr. 

Speaker, while we know we‟re not immune from what‟s going 

around us, just today, Mr. Speaker, the latest statistics, average 

weekly earnings are up by 3.5 per cent over February 2008, Mr. 

Speaker. Here in Saskatchewan the average weekly earnings: 

$804 per week, second largest growth in wages in Canada, third 

highest average weekly earnings across the country. Mr. 

Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are enjoying increased 

opportunities to earn more money and there are still thousands 

of jobs to fill right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister hasn‟t got 

quite got the hang of what gender-based analysis is or pay 

equity, and I know that employers often argue that they are 

better equipped to make decisions than what governments are. 

 

But let‟s put this theory to the test and look at how the 

Saskatchewan Party stacks up as an employer. The 

Saskatchewan Party has direct responsibility for the salaries of 

approximately 150 people working in this building, either in 

ministers‟ offices or Executive Council, and the government‟s 

own figures show that there are twice as many women working 

in Sask Party offices as men. So to the minister: what steps have 

they taken to ensure that women working for the Saskatchewan 

Party enjoy wage parity with their male colleagues? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — You know, Mr. Speaker, at the Fourth 

World Conference on Women in the mid-1990s, that was a UN 

[United Nations] conference, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, at the Fourth World 

Conference on Women, that was a UN conference in the 

mid-1990s, there was some debate and discussion about the 

need for mutual responsibility. And I‟ll read a quote: “It will 

not be possible” . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Actually in my 

office I would be happy to talk about any number of 

opportunities that we have regarding gender equality, but this is 

much broader than that, Mr. Speaker: 

 

It will not be possible to attain sustainable development 

without cementing the partnership of women and men in 

all aspects of life. Women have all along struggled with 

their men-folk for the abolition of slavery, the liberation 

of countries from colonialism, the dismantling of 

apartheid and the struggle for peace. It is now the turn of 

men to join women in their struggle for equality. 

 

It‟s a shared responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the average Saskatchewan 

woman is paid 84 cents for every dollar paid to the average 

Saskatchewan man. But figures provided by the government 

show that women working for the Sask Party are paid just 53 

per cent of the median salary earned by men working for the 

Sask Party. 

 

To the minister: how can the Sask Party justify a gender gap in 

their own offices that is far wider than the gender gap in the 

general population? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2887 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity. The gap that‟s most apparent is the gap between 

the previous government and the policies that were ill-advised 

and the policies that are in place now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a family of four with a $35,000 income, more 

than $2,500 worth of tax savings. Mr. Speaker, a family of four 

with $50,000, almost $2,000 in tax savings. A family of four 

with $60,000 or higher, almost $1,700 of tax savings. And the 

list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just today the Minister of Finance has announced for the people 

of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, today the Minister 

of Finance has come out and made an announcement of $700 

million in tax savings for the residents of this fine province, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s a track record that we‟re happy to stand on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, when this minister can 

stand up and talk about gender-based analysis and pay equity by 

coming back with tax reductions and increased general wages 

across the province, he has no idea . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has no idea when it 

comes to women‟s issues, and the old boys‟ club is alive and 

well, I must say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, and no wonder that this 

government won‟t introduce pay equity legislation or restore 

the influence of the Status of Women office. To the minister: 

why would Saskatchewan women trust this Saskatchewan Party 

government to defend their interests when they can‟t even treat 

the women in their own party equally? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, on a personal basis, I take 

exception to the statement that‟s been made. Mr. Speaker, 

during my professional career at the University of 

Saskatchewan, I actually helped with a project, a CIDA 

[Canadian International Development Agency]-run project on 

gender issues in the former Soviet Union. 

 

But, I think, to the question, Mr. Speaker, it was under the NDP 

in 2002 that the former government changed the Women‟s 

Secretariat from a stand-alone agency to a subset in what was 

the former Ministry of Labour. At the time, it was significantly 

reduced in size and was renamed the Status of Women office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to say that we‟re making progress. Is 

there more to do? Yes, Mr. Speaker, but it‟s your track record, 

the track record of the members opposite — that‟s the legacy, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟re moving out beyond that legacy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the standing 

committee on Crown corporations. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

54, The Vital Statistics Act, 2008 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in the Committee of the Whole on 

this Bill and that this Bill and its amendments be now read the 

third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations has requested leave to waive consideration . . . 

Just remind members if they want the House to extend for an 

extended period, the Speaker is willing to wait. 

 

The Minister of Crown Corporations has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 54, 

The Vital Statistics Act, 2008 and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/ 

Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 



2888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

readings of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/ 

Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Corporations that Bill No. 54, The Vital 

Statistics Act, 2008 be now read the third time and passed under 

its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

55, The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill, and that this Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 55, The 

Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 55 — The Vital Statistics Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Corporations that Bill No. 55, The Vital 

Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 47, The 

Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, later this day if leave is 

granted. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 47, The 

Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I move third reading of Bill 

No. 47. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Energy and Resources that Bill No. 47, The 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2889 

Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion?  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Private Bills to report 

private Bill No. 902, The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz 

Foundation Amendment Act without amendments and to present 

its fourth report. I move: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 

 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in.  

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of the Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

ask that the Bill now be read for the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 902, The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation 

Amendment Act and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed to third reading. I 

recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 902 — The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz 

Foundation Amendment Act 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill now be read 

for the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 

Opposition that Bill No. 902, The Stephen and Michelene 

Worobetz Foundation Amendment Act be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker; 354 through 356 are 

ordered. 

 

Although we have information available for public service 

employee severances, more time is required in order to compile 

the information on severances in the Crowns as requested. The 

rules of the Assembly include a provision that when more time 

is needed to compile the complete information requested, that 

the question be ordered and we wish to exercise this option. We 

commit to providing this information as soon as it is available.  

 

The Speaker: — Questions 354 through 356 are ordered. 

 

[14:30] 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Inquiry into Meeting Growing Demand for Electricity 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I am pleased to rise in the House today to speak on a 

motion before this Assembly. In terms of energy, these are 

exciting times in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and indeed around 

the world. More specifically, this is an exciting time in the 

history of our provincial electrical utility, SaskPower.  

 



2890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

At home, at work or play, our lives are touched daily by 

electricity. Most of the time we take the services provided by 

SaskPower for granted. We expect the power to be there until it 

isn‟t, Mr. Speaker, and that is why the Government of 

Saskatchewan is leading a province-wide discussion on how we 

can best ensure an environmentally and economically 

sustainable supply of power is there for the future generations. 

 

The work that begins today with this motion that stands before 

this House is a job that requires thoughtful consideration, a job 

that is well-suited to the Crown and Central Agencies 

Committee, that hon. members from both sides of the House are 

its members.  

 

The work of this committee could not be more timely or 

necessary, Mr. Speaker. That‟s because a large portion of 

SaskPower‟s generation supply will reach a crucial decision 

point in the next 20 years due to several factors including new 

federal regulations on greenhouse gas emissions; planned 

facility retirements; the need for capital investment and facility 

life extensions; and the expiration of supply contracts with 

private sector suppliers — some of them entered into under the 

previous government and some under this government, Mr. 

Speaker. Decisions on whether to retrofit the existing 

generating units or to shut them down or renew private sector 

contracts will all be required.  

 

Our government sees an opportunity here, Mr. Speaker, an 

opportunity to develop and deliver the power we need. We‟ll do 

this by using new and innovative technologies, while at the 

same time not ignoring our expertise in coal-fired generation or 

fuel sources like hydro power from our rivers that we have in 

abundance in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because despite economic uncertainty elsewhere in Canada, in 

Saskatchewan we continue to see a strong demand for 

SaskPower services. Looking back in recent years, SaskPower 

has experienced low growth, averaging between 1.6 and 2.1 per 

cent annually from 2002-2007. That low growth, Mr. Speaker, 

is poised to more than double as we look ahead with the growth 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. Although SaskPower is seeing some 

project timelines slide on large industrial projects in the oilfield 

and mining sectors, what is important to note — and we see that 

and certainly on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker — that 

these projects are not being cancelled. 

 

Having the electrical infrastructure in place for those large 

industrial projects is not a job that can be completed overnight, 

Mr. Speaker. Generation and transmission facilities can take 

anywhere from 2 to 10 years to complete, so our government 

needs to invest now to stay ahead of the curve. No longer can 

we go about running a $1 billion corporation without having 

10-year plans in place, Mr. Speaker, as was the case right up 

until this very year. 

 

The work of this committee will inform those investment 

decisions in whatever final form they may take. SaskPower has 

already taken some steps to address this challenge. At the end 

of March, I announced that SaskPower will be investing nearly 

$1 billion in 2009 in generation and transmission projects — a 

large number indeed, Mr. Speaker. Three times the five-year 

average that this corporation has expended, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

the company‟s largest ever annual investment in the provincial 

electrical system. And over the next 10 years, Mr. Speaker, 

SaskPower is projecting it will need to spend up to $8 billion on 

capital renewal and replacement to address an infrastructure 

deficit. So you can see why this is the perfect time for the work 

of the legislative committee exploring electricity options. 

 

What I would like to do over the next few minutes is highlight 

some of the existing work that‟s already under way at 

SaskPower, work the committee and the entire province will 

soon learn much more about. I will start with one of the most 

promising projects, clean coal initiative. Our government 

through our work with SaskPower is currently leading the 

development of one of the largest integrated carbon capture 

projects in the world. The Boundary dam integrated carbon 

capture and sequestration demonstration project would fully 

integrate and retrofit an aging unit 3 carbon capture and 

enhanced oil recovery operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you don‟t have to look any farther than the front 

page of The Globe and Mail today when the federal government 

is saying provinces across the country, responsible utilities 

across the country do indeed need a plan, and that‟s why we 

have a plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

By 2015 this clean coal unit would produce more than 100 

megawatts of clean baseload power while reducing 

SaskPower‟s annual greenhouse gas emissions by about 1 

million tonnes. With an estimated 300-year supply of lignite 

coal in our province, this is an attractive energy option both 

now and into the future. Options like clean coal are gaining 

more traction because of the urgent need to manage greenhouse 

gas emissions. That‟s why other clean technologies like wind 

power are also under active investigation by SaskPower. 

 

SaskPower established the wind power integration and 

development unit in 2007 to help resolve technical and 

operational issues that will emerge when we need to add more 

wind power generation to our mix. The corporation will release 

the strategy later this year, outlining exactly how it will tackle 

these problems in collaboration with the private sector, Mr. 

Speaker. The groundwork for more wind power has already 

been set with the imminent addition of new natural gas 

generation over the next two years. 

 

In the short term, those natural gas turbines will supply new 

economic development, but over the longer term, those same 

turbines will provide backup for new wind power 

developments. Technology today regarding wind power needs 

gas backup, and that‟s indeed what we‟ll be doing to ensure that 

that peaking power takes place. 

 

Another area of future supply where SaskPower is reaching out 

to the private sector, and particular Saskatchewan‟s First 

Nations, is hydroelectric generation. Preliminary talks are under 

way, with two possible hydro projects in the North. While 

hydro is appealing because of its zero emission generation 

source, in considering the potential of this option for our future, 

the committee and all Saskatchewan residents who participate 

in the hearings will also have to consider the impacts on land 

and traditional fishing areas that accompany hydro generation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said before, it‟s something that our province 

to the east, our neighbours to the east have done very well. 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2891 

When we were more concerned about potash mines and who 

should own those mines in Saskatchewan, the Manitoba 

government was indeed looking at additional hydro generation. 

What I‟m hoping is becoming abundantly clear to members of 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is that SaskPower‟s old model of 

building, owning, and operating generating facilities is not 

necessarily how the corporation will proceed into the future. 

 

Let me share with you a couple of examples to prove my point. 

Demand-side management is another area that I will get into in 

a moment, Mr. Speaker. Last year SaskPower and NRGreen 

Power completed construction of four waste heat recovery units 

on Alliance Pipeline‟s natural gas pipeline in the province 

adding, Mr. Speaker, 20 megawatts of clean energy to 

Saskatchewan grid. 

 

And I know I hear members opposite saying, great projects 

because I know members, I believe members on both sides of 

the House had an opportunity to examine these structures and to 

see them operate and to see them operate in a clean and 

responsible fashion in our province. And in September 2008, 

SaskPower finalized an agreement with the Red Lily Wind 

Power to purchase power from a 25 megawatt wind power 

facility that will be constructed northwest of Moosomin by 

2011. And I know the Speaker is well aware of some of the 

work that‟s gone on there as well. 

 

Demand-side management, Mr. Speaker, is another avenue 

where the private sector will help SaskPower meet our 

province‟s growing demand for power. By encouraging our 

customers, both residential and industrial, to use power more 

efficiently, we can actually help delay or even avoid the need to 

construct new generating facilities. SaskPower hopes to reduce 

the demand for electricity by 100 megawatts over the next 10 

years through efficiency and conservation initiatives. 

 

Of course no discussion of future generation options would be 

complete without the mention of nuclear power generation, 

something that will get a thorough hearing across this province, 

as we‟ve heard of the explanation of the Uranium Development 

Partnership‟s province-wide, public meetings. I expect that the 

final report produced by Mr. Dan Perrins — and we‟ve spoken 

about this individual before in this House, a person that‟s well 

respected by members on both sides of the House — will come 

forward with a final report that gives consideration to the 

Crown and Central Agencies Committee on a complete 

evaluation of the uranium cycle in our province and the 

prospects going forward. 

 

As it completes the work of the proposal in the motion before 

us today, our committee will certainly examine each and every 

option. As I‟ve said many times in this House, it‟s not an 

either/or situation, Mr. Speaker. What it is is an examination of 

every type of generation going forward. 

 

The UDP [Uranium Development Partnership] was a case that 

needed special examination because it hadn‟t been done for 30 

years in Saskatchewan. Indeed a complete analysis of nuclear 

power generation was never done in our province. It was long 

overdue and that‟s why the Uranium Development Partnership 

is doing its work. 

 

In addition to that, SaskPower is looking at every other type of 

generation going forward. And further to that, I‟ve taken the 

opportunity to meet with governments — certainly in Western 

Canada, the Manitoba government — to talk about the 

possibility of importing electricity, and I think that‟s an 

important part that this committee has to look at as well. 

 

Other options under consideration which the committee and the 

public will hear about in full detail include polygeneration, 

natural gas, biomass, and also imports from other jurisdictions, 

as I‟ve just indicated. 

 

SaskPower is also currently evaluating all feasibility supply 

alternatives and creating a new, long-term supply development 

plan, a document that the committee will no doubt closely 

review. Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to talk about the lack 

of a long-term plan within SaskPower under previous 

administrations. That will no longer be the case going forward, 

because no matter what type of generation it is going forward, 

it‟s important to Saskatchewan for electrical generation. And in 

the case of the Uranium Development Partnership, as I said 

earlier, it expands well beyond power generation. It looks at 

things like medical isotopes and how we can have that 

excellence here in Saskatchewan. 

 

As I said at the opening of my remarks, the work of the Crown 

and Central Agencies Committee on this topic could not be 

more timely or more urgently needed. The task ahead of 

SaskPower and the committee itself is monumental, Mr. 

Speaker. It represents nothing less than a once-in-a-generation 

opportunity to shape our province‟s future path, and I have 

every faith in this committee. 

 

By investigating the many options to meet the growing need for 

electricity in the province, we will see that the best decisions 

get made, Mr. Speaker — members from both sides of the 

House will have that opportunity — decisions that not only help 

support new business growth, but also ensure the preservation 

of the environment and, most importantly, to secure the 

long-term prosperity of the men, women, and children who call 

Saskatchewan home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to participate in the 

trade-related hearings that took place previously as a member, 

an opposition member at the time. I felt that I had ample 

opportunity to put my ideas forward and to be a contributing 

member of that committee. Certainly I didn‟t spend as much 

time as many other members did at that committee, but indeed I 

felt that I‟d made a contribution. And I know members opposite 

through this committee, at the end of it, will feel that they‟ve 

made a contribution to Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Crown Corporations, I certainly 

look forward to participating in the hearings and to ensure that 

all voices in this legislature are heard through the committee 

process but, more importantly, that all voices throughout 

Saskatchewan are heard on this very, very important topic, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So at this time I would like to move the motion, and I move: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies, in accordance with rule 147(3) of The Rules 

and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 



2892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

Saskatchewan, shall conduct an inquiry to determine how 

the province can best meet the growing demand for 

electricity in a manner that is safe, reliable, 

environmentally sustainable, and affordable for 

Saskatchewan residents; and 

 

that the said committee shall conduct public hearings to 

receive representations from interested individuals and 

groups; and further, 

 

that the said committee may, notwithstanding rule 147(4), 

report its recommendations to the Assembly at a date 

determined by the committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations has moved: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies, in accordance with rule 147(3) of The Rules 

and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, shall conduct an inquiry to determine how 

the province can best meet the growing demand for 

electricity in a manner that is safe, reliable, 

environmentally sustainable, and affordable for 

Saskatchewan residents; and 

 

that the said committee shall conduct public hearings to 

receive representations from interested individuals and 

groups; and further, 

 

that the said committee may, notwithstanding rule 147(4), 

report its recommendations to the Assembly at a date 

determined by the committee. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Carlton.  

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to rise 

today and speak to the motion and propose an amendment to the 

motion. What the minister doesn‟t understand and what has 

been the problem from the outset was that he‟s part of the 

problem. He‟s part of the impetus for the motion. He‟s part of 

the impetus for the EDP [energy development partnership], and 

it stems from the duplicity that they‟ve exhibited on this file 

from start to finish. 

 

Now the EDP was created by the opposition and presented to 

the government because of consultation with Saskatchewan 

people. Now this is again where the government drops the ball. 

They drop it on the Uranium Development Partnership. They 

drop it on the uranium file at every stage. They drop it in labour 

legislation. Legislation that has to do with the education sector. 

Bills 84, 2, 5, 6 — the list goes on and on. 

And so it‟s because they refuse to consult with Saskatchewan 

people that we created the EDP. And the EDP and the motion 

amendment was based on questions that were being asked of 

our members based on input that we got from community 

members, from people throughout the province, who said that 

they wanted more information, and it was information that the 

UDP and that the government wouldn‟t provide to them. 

 

Now I‟ve had many, many calls to my office and contact 

through email, phone calls, conversations. And 90 per cent of 

those calls and 90 per cent of that contact is from people who 

say, you know I‟m neither for uranium development and I‟m 

not against it, but what I am for and what I need is to have the 

full picture. And so I‟m not against power created by uranium. 

I‟m not against nuclear power. I‟m not a big proponent of it, but 

what I want is more information. 

 

And so when you have that many people contact your office 

and all they want is information that the government won‟t 

provide, it provides for you the impetus to put forward a 

different idea that the government might follow. 

 

Now the government has said that the EDP had merit. Why 

don‟t they just adopt it? What part of the EDP didn‟t have 

merit? Stark silence, Mr. Speaker. So we had to propose it 

because people asked for it. 

 

Now what is some more impetus for our proposal of the EDP 

and an amendment? I want to read a letter to the editor by Mr. 

Bert Pitzel, community coordinator of the Saskatchewan 

KAIROS Prairies North. And I‟ll quote: 

 

An open letter to Brad Wall. 

 

Editor: You stated that the people of Saskatchewan will be 

able to participate in the nuclear power question, but 

you‟ve also said that the question of whether or not there 

will be nuclear power in the province is not on the table. It 

looks like the level of participation is only token, with 

citizen decision-making being reduced to when, how, and 

where, not if „adding value to uranium‟ will come. 

 

On Ash Wednesday, Feb. 25, three Bishops, representing 

the Anglican, Catholic and Lutheran Evangelical 

Traditions, who also spoke on behalf of four other 

Saskatchewan Bishops, released a joint statement calling 

on your government to listen to the voices of the citizens 

of Saskatchewan so they might participate meaningfully in 

the nuclear question before you act on recommendations 

that your nuclear panel will give you at the end of March. 

They also asked you to provide adequate forums so 

nuclear power generation and other renewable energy 

approaches could be studied in an unbiased and 

transparent way. 

 

Additionally, the Bishops called upon their own Diocesan 

Church members to begin a process of critical examination 

of the issues surrounding „added value‟ to our uranium 

resource so that when called upon, their participation 

would be intelligent, responsible and moral. I remind you 

that together the religious leaders who signed the 

statement represent about 250,000 people, fully a quarter 

of Saskatchewan‟s population. 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2893 

The Bishops said it would be sinful to make a choice 

without careful consideration of the consequences that the 

decision would have on community and environment. 

 

Quite significantly, the Bishops‟ statement calling for 

genuine participation has been endorsed by groups which 

are not Episcopal polities — the River Bend Presbytery of 

The United Church of Canada, the Saskatchewan 

Conference of the United Church of Canada and the 

Mennonite Central Committee. 

 

CBC-TV news carried a portion of the Bishops‟ news 

conference, but the news piece ended with an interview of 

yourself so that you would have the opportunity to have 

the final say on the matter. 

 

Mr. Premier, I was surprised at your response. As if by 

divine right, you dismissed them, failing to acknowledge 

that they offered a means for enriching the democratic 

process and an opportunity for you to show that wisdom 

and humility required you take their words to heart — you 

too might have something to learn. You deflected their 

comments by using your reading of the polls to try to 

trump their words. You said that the polls indicate a 

majority of citizens of Saskatchewan favour nuclear 

power. 

 

Is that the truth? What preparatory work has been done to 

help citizens through this complex matter? Who framed 

the polling questions? Front page newspaper articles have 

only echoed pronuclear points of view. Crafting the 

decision making process in this way denies the people of 

Saskatchewan the opportunity to make an important moral 

choice for themselves. Is it ethical and wise to by-pass 

their discussions and discernment when it will be citizens 

and their grandchildren who will have to live with the 

consequences of expensive power generation, radioactivity 

and waste disposal for many, many lifetimes to come? 

 

Mr. Premier, the Bishops call you to use the power vested 

in you to act responsibly. Show you respect the dignity of 

the people of the province by engaging them with the 

lesser questions of when, where and how without omitting 

the more telling question of if we should have nuclear 

power in our province at all. In the spirit of the Cluff Lake 

Inquiry and as you did with the Uranium Development 

Panel who now use our money to promote nuclear power, 

fund environmental and clean green groups so that they 

can begin a process of informing the public about the up 

and downside of every kind of power generation. 

 

Extremely powerful words, Mr. Speaker, representing 250,000 

people in this province, and all they‟re asking for is a direct 

comparison. All they‟re asking for is honesty and transparency 

from this government. And the reason that we brought forward 

the EDP was because they weren‟t getting it, clearly. 

 

And so it‟s wholly unfortunate that the bishops of this province 

would have to write a letter like that, and we have to go to these 

extremes in this legislature to get change from this government. 

 

Now, the member from Saskatoon Northwest calls it rhetoric. 

This is a letter from the bishops of Saskatchewan, and he calls it 

rhetoric. What a shameful, shameful approach by that member. 

 

Now some more of the impetus for us bringing forward the 

EDP and for the amendment that we made to the motion is as 

follows: more contact to my constituency via an email. And the 

email reads, and I quote:  

 

Why is it all moving so fast? I feel like a customer on a 

used car lot — it‟s the best thing here; might be gone 

tomorrow; better buy now; this‟ll solve all your problems. 

 

If the Sask Party thinks this is the answer, why don‟t they 

let everyone have some time to examine it further? If the 

economics are sound, the science is sound, then why all 

these high-pressure sales tactics? Something this good 

shouldn‟t need a big sales pitch. It should sell itself, really. 

Right? 

 

It looks dishonest, dangerous, and irresponsible to push 

this hard so quickly. Why can‟t everyone have some time 

to get educated instead of simply indoctrinated? It takes 

much less time and effort to brainwash than it does to 

teach. 

 

And so further evidence that the government has certainly 

dropped the ball and they need some help. And so we provided 

a change for them in their approach, and that was the EDP. And 

although they said that it had some merit, they wouldn‟t point 

out where it didn‟t have merit. But they also wouldn‟t adopt it. 

So again it‟s unfortunate that we‟ve had to come to this stage. 

 

Now in the way that they presented the motion, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s unfortunate because it‟s obvious that they‟ve learned 

nothing from the UDP process. So what did they do when they 

presented the motion? They sprung it on the Assembly at the 

last minute last week. They consulted with nobody. And it 

contained none of the relevant information that would enable a 

reasonable person to make a decision on whether to support it 

or not. Sound familiar? It‟s the exact same process that the UDP 

has used. 

 

And so if I could quote from Abraham Maslow, he said, “If you 

only have a hammer, you tend to see everything else as if it 

were a nail.” And so they only know one approach, Mr. 

Speaker, and it certainly has nothing to do with consultation. It 

has nothing to do with meeting the needs of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

Now they have huge inconsistencies in the entire process. They 

stacked the UDP. They‟ve had continuous flip-flops on 

government funding, huge contradictions by front bench cabinet 

ministers and the Premier in terms of a timeline for a decision. 

They flip-flop in this legislature on a daily basis when it comes 

to nuclear waste storage. They haven‟t consulted anybody but 

their own private polls — which I‟ve asked them to release — 

and they refused, flat out refused to release the polls that are 

driving this whole process. So much for transparency and 

accountability. And they‟ve been as secretive as they could 

possibly be under current legislation when it comes to this 

process. 

 

And so I‟m going to outline, if I could, some of the 

inconsistencies that are also the impetus for the amendment to 



2894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

the motion, and they were the impetus for the EDP that we 

proposed. I‟d like to, if I could, read from a scrum — several 

different scrums actually over a short period of time — that the 

minister responsible for this whole process has had with 

reporters where he‟s not only contradicted other members of his 

own caucus, but he‟s contradicted himself. 

 

So he can‟t get it straight with his colleagues, and he can‟t get it 

straight with himself in terms of what he believes would be the 

funding model for a nuclear reactor. And so the reporter says, 

“How about the nuclear industry, which is an established 

industry? How about putting money into a nuclear power 

plant?” December 12, 2008. I quote Minister Stewart: “All 

scenarios, or all possibilities are on the table as far as financing 

. . .” 

 

We go back a short 11 days before that, and a reporter asks, “So 

you think once the public is informed about the risks the 

support won‟t be there?” 

 

“I wouldn‟t say the support won‟t be there for the project. But 

the support won‟t be there for doing it with taxpayers money.” 

So, a complete contradiction 11 days before that. 

 

We go back to November 27. He‟s asked by a reporter this 

question: 

 

In Ontario there has been an agreement that is allowing 

the cost overruns on the Bruce Power project there to be 

partly paid by the taxpayer. Would we be considering, you 

know, looking into some kind of partnership with Bruce 

Power if they did have cost overruns, or any other 

circumstances? The taxpayers there are maybe a little 

concerned about it. 

 

And the answer is, from the minister responsible, and it is as 

follows. I quote Stewart: 

 

We‟re certainly not considering anything like that . . . And 

I guess the options are all on the table. If indeed a power 

station is built it could be solely built, owned and operated 

by Bruce Power. It could be a partnership between 

SaskPower and Bruce Power. It could be a partnership 

between SaskPower and the Province of Saskatchewan 

and Bruce Power, any number of possibilities. Other 

private sector partners even. So we‟re not quite there yet 

. . . 

 

So at one stage it‟s on the table. At the next stage it‟s off the 

table. This is from the same minister June 17, a few months 

before that. He says: 

 

. . . the people of the province, zero . . . this is not going to 

be built with taxpayers dollars or SaskPower fees. This is 

going to be built with private funds. 

 

And so again part of the impetus for our EDP proposal and part 

of the impetus for the amendment to the motion is the fact that 

they can‟t get it straight in terms of who‟s going to fund this 

project. They don‟t know who‟s going to fund grids. They don‟t 

know who‟s going to fund cost overruns. They don‟t know 

who‟s going to fund the actual project itself. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Additionally, they‟ve had huge contradictions in terms of the 

timeline for a decision on this project. On one hand we have to 

get the UDP process out and done by June because the Premier 

says we have to have a decision made by the fall. Now that‟s 

the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan saying that we 

have to have a decision made by the fall. Now he says that, and 

some short days later the minister responsible says, oh no, no, 

no. It‟ll be a long, long time before we have to make a decision. 

So you can‟t trust them on the timeline. 

 

So now you can‟t trust them on how it‟s going to be funded or 

who‟s going to fund it. You can‟t trust them on when they‟re 

going to make a decision. And on the very fundamental and 

important question to the people of Saskatchewan, and one that 

I would argue causes about the most controversy when it comes 

to this, is nuclear waste. And so you‟d think as a government 

that you would have an idea of what you‟re going to do with 

nuclear waste in this province. If you‟re proposing a Uranium 

Development Partnership, you‟ve worked with Bruce Power, 

and you want to build a nuclear reactor in this province, you‟d 

think you‟d have had that discussion as a government. But such 

is not the case. 

 

We have the Premier himself saying to a business group in 

Saskatchewan that unequivocally we have a moral and ethical 

obligation to store spent fuel rods in this province, and that he‟s 

going to charge the universities in this province with the . . . 

He‟s going to charge them with the responsibility of finding a 

way for Saskatchewan to do it. And so very definitively the 

Premier says, not that we should store waste because it‟s got 

some economic value, not that we should store waste because 

it‟s going to increase the economy in one particular part of the 

province, not that we can use those funds for some things to 

fund government business, but that we have a moral and ethical 

obligation. Strong words. 

 

And so you would assume that if the Premier of this province 

says it, that it‟s going to happen. It‟s his process. But what 

happens? 

 

I asked the minister, the member from Thunder Creek, in 

committee, what‟s going to happen with nuclear waste? And he 

says unequivocally there will be no nuclear waste stored in 

Saskatchewan under this government. And so I find it hard to 

believe that the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan to say 

we have a moral and ethical obligation to store waste and he‟s 

going to charge the universities with finding a way to do it. And 

then you‟ve got the minister saying that not only do we not 

have that moral and ethical responsibility, we‟ve already 

decided we‟re not going to do it. 

 

And so I found that curious. So I thought, you know, as an 

opposition we have a responsibility, and that responsibility is to 

make sure that the government‟s on the same page. And so I ask 

in this Assembly in question period: is nuclear waste going to 

be stored in Saskatchewan? And the minister, who I argued was 

part of the reason that we brought the EDP forward, has this to 

say: we‟re certainly going to study it. 

 

And so now you‟ve got the Premier who says that we have a 

moral and ethical obligation to store waste. You‟ve got the 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2895 

Minister of Enterprise and Innovation saying that there‟s no 

possible way it‟s going to be stored. And then you‟ve got the 

CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 

minister saying that of course it‟s on the table. 

 

And you know where he got the information that it‟s on table? 

It‟s from the member from Thunder Creek‟s own process. It‟s 

his panel that‟s travelling the province that has it as a part of 

their consultation. 

 

And so he doesn‟t think that it‟s duplicitous in any way that 

they would study waste as part of his process, and in the same 

breath say that there‟s no possible way we‟re going to do 

anything about it. How does that make any sense? It‟s his own 

process. 

 

And so you‟ve got the Premier saying we have an obligation to 

do it. You‟ve got that member saying there‟s no possible way 

we‟re going to do it. And then you‟ve got the Minister 

Responsible for CIC saying, well maybe we‟re going to do it. 

His own process says that we‟re going to do it, but he says 

we‟re not. 

 

You know, Abbott and Costello did a skit that was called 

“Who‟s on First?” and it‟s apropos of what we‟re doing here 

today. Who‟s on first; what‟s on second; I don‟t know — third 

base. 

 

And so another problem and another reason, the impetus for the 

EDP, was their lack of consultation. It‟s clear through some of 

the quotes I‟ve read here today that they haven‟t consulted with 

anybody. Well they consulted with somebody, but they‟re not 

going to release the information. They‟ve got their own poll that 

is deciding this whole process, but they won‟t release it to the 

public. So they‟re secretive, and it‟s unfortunate. 

 

But they didn‟t consult, and they‟re not willing to consult, not 

in an appropriate fashion. I‟ll read again, the president of the 

Métis Nation of Saskatchewan Robert Doucette said this, and 

I‟ll quote, “You can talk all you want but you have to 

accommodate the interests of Métis people and that‟s the thing 

that I don‟t see or hear from the province right now.” 

 

And so the Métis Nation president says that they haven‟t been 

consulted and that they‟re not going to be allowed enough time 

to do a proper consultation. And the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation answered by saying, that‟s one more 

day than everybody else gets. 

 

And I think it speaks volumes to the position that they‟ve taken 

as it relates to First Nations and Métis people in this province. 

And I think it speaks volumes to the way that they‟ve handled 

this entire process. And it‟s not enough for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And so we proposed the EDP, and we‟re 

proposing amendments here today. 

 

Now in terms of the secrecy that they‟ve used in this process, 

we‟ve had a secret poll that was conducted that they won‟t 

release, that they say is driving this whole process. Why won‟t 

they store nuclear waste? Why won‟t they examine it? It‟s 

because the minister responsible says that they‟ve got secret 

polling that they‟re not going to release that tells them that 

people don‟t want it. And so that‟s one of the reasons. 

Additionally they conducted a study with Bruce Power, and 

they released the information late last year. But just after the 

information was released, we found out through an FOI 

[freedom of information] that some weeks earlier they already 

knew the outcome of the study. And it says, I quote: 

 

The study will conclude that it is feasible to build a two 

unit, 2,000 megawatt nuclear power plant in Saskatchewan 

under certain conditions. The study will also identify as 

many as four potential locations . . . 

 

The rest of the page was redacted. 

 

And so they knew about the outcome of the study some three 

weeks before they released it. And when asked why, he said, 

well we didn‟t think it was a big deal. Not a big deal to release 

information in a timely fashion to the people in Saskatchewan 

while they drive headlong down this road. 

 

Now in another FOI that was requested by a citizen of the 

province, they got this answer. The access to information 

request submitted to CIC in January asked for copies of any 

briefing notes and memorandums from August 1 to January 15 

regarding or related to Bruce Power. 

 

On March 9, the CIC released 11 pages of information, half of 

which are blacked out. The CIC listed the following reasons 

under The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 

Act as justification for withholding information from the public, 

and it goes on to list several. It gave six reasons for the denial of 

information. And I‟ll quote again. The reasons given for 

denying access to certain information are itself revealing. 

 

Two of them say it‟s because of contractual or other 

negotiations. What possible contracts and negotiations could be 

taking place that relate to Bruce Power? The public are 

repeatedly told that no decisions have been made, but obviously 

some kind of deal appears to be going on. The other thing to 

keep in mind is that the briefing notes are five or six months 

old. So who knows what has transpired since then? As usual the 

public will be the last to know. 

 

Another reason cited for denying access is, quote, pending 

policy or budgetary items. Again what could possibly be in the 

works if no decision has been made? Or has the public been 

misled all these months? 

 

Now they‟ve got pages in this document that are half blacked 

out or all blacked out, several pages in a row in some cases . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And so the member from Moose 

Jaw North asks me what I‟m talking about, and I‟m sad that he 

can‟t understand it. But I‟m talking about secrecy, and it‟s plain 

that they‟ve been secretive throughout this process. It‟s plain to 

everybody but them. So again I find that unfortunate. 

 

Now additionally we‟ve got a contradiction in terms of how 

much power‟s going to be produced and where we‟re going to 

send that power. On three different documents, it said that we 

have a need for 1000 megawatts of power. I read from a 

document that said we have a need for 2000 megawatts of 

power. And I‟ve read very recently that if it‟s going to be done 

and going to be done economically, that we need 3000 

megawatts, and it has to be exported. 



2896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

Now what they‟re doing is taking this question to the people of 

Saskatchewan before they know themselves where the export 

market is, what it‟s going to look like, who‟s going to pay for 

the grids, or anything relevant to the question. So how do they 

expect the people of Saskatchewan to answer a question or to 

make a decision when they don‟t know the answer to their 

question? So again a massive failure in this process by this 

government. Now it‟s unbelievable. I could go on for hours and 

literally days about their flawed process. 

 

But I want to talk about a good process, a proper process, and 

something that they‟ve said is sound and has some merit. Now 

they said it‟s sound and has merit, but they certainly won‟t talk 

about where it doesn‟t have merit. And they won‟t adopt it 

because they‟re afraid to; they‟re afraid to take the question to 

the people. 

 

Now we proposed an energy development partnership that will 

do a few things. One, it will initially ask the question of 

SaskPower, what is future demand growth going to look like? 

What are the infrastructure needs to meet that demand growth? 

What‟s the infrastructure necessary to accommodate export or 

import grids? And what are the rate increases required to meet 

future costs? No small questions, but vital if you‟re going to 

make a decision on power in this province. And so that‟s the 

first question you ask. 

 

If you‟re going to decide how much power you‟re going to 

produce or how you‟re going to produce it, first you should find 

out whether or not you need it. And then you should make some 

decisions on whether you should export it and whether you can 

make some money on it. 

 

Now we proposed this process, and in it are three different 

options to study energy. The first one is the nuclear option. 

Now we would charge that the UDP do some more work, and 

that they come back with answers to the relevant questions that 

people are asking, and the people who I quoted here today are 

asking on behalf of up to a quarter of a million people in this 

province. They want detailed information regarding those 

potential export markets. They want projected costs per kilowatt 

hour. 

 

We proposed a mechanism and cost for transportation and 

storage of nuclear waste, and that the UDP should find out what 

the projected costs of the ultimate decommissioning of a 

nuclear reactor or two or three might be. That‟s the first option. 

 

The second option is the carbon option. So we proposed a 

carbon development partnership. And we would charge them 

with developing realistic options and alternatives presented by 

carbon-based fuels in this province which are plentiful. We 

want a realistic description of the technology‟s potentials for 

clean coal, including in situ technology and coal bed generation. 

 

We want a description of the role of natural gas in generation 

options. And we want a report on the potential role of 

polygeneration that‟s currently, as an example, is the one that‟s 

currently proposed by the Belle Plaine project. 

 

We also proposed a renewable energy development partnership. 

Now this partnership would develop realistic options and 

options on capacity through wind, solar, hydro, cogen, 

geothermal, and biomass sources. And I think it‟s a reasonable 

thing to ask. 

 

[15:15] 

 

People want an apples-to-apples comparison. They want to be 

able to compare nuclear power versus carbon-based source 

power versus a renewable energy option — in terms of the cost 

of kilowatt hour, in terms of the jobs generated, in terms of the 

impact on the environment, the impact on the economy, the 

impact socially for their community. And it‟s not too much to 

ask. 

 

Now it‟s unfortunate that their demands had to be so strong. We 

had to ask the government to create an EDP, which they‟ve 

refused. And we have to propose amendments to a flawed 

motion. 

 

And so in closing, I‟d like to say that it‟s obviously unfortunate 

that they‟ve gone down this road. The impetus for the EDP and 

the amendment to the motion is clear. It comes from the people 

of Saskatchewan. It comes from questions that they‟ve asked. It 

comes from contact and consultation with our members, and so 

we proposed it. And so this is a very short two-page 

amendment. And so I‟m going to read it. I‟ll move: 

 

That the motion be amended by adding the following 

word after the word “groups”: 

 

and for the purposes of this inquiry the said committee 

shall create four subcommittees with the following 

mandates: 

 

(a) The first subcommittee shall identify the future 

electrical requirements of the province and that 

consultations on this matter shall include testimony 

from the appropriate experts at SaskPower and CIC, as 

well as with external expert witnesses. 

 

(b) The second subcommittee shall examine the work 

done by the uranium development partnership, the 

UDP, and that the said examination shall include the 

testimony from the principles of the UDP, including the 

consultants who wrote any relevant reports: Bruce 

Power, Enterprise Saskatchewan, SaskPower, CIC, the 

Chair of the public consultation process, as well as any 

expert witnesses deemed appropriate for the review. 

 

(c) The third subcommittee shall review any and all 

carbon-based options for energy production, and that 

consultations on this review shall include SaskPower, 

CIC, any government officials involved with 

carbon-based projects, such as the clean coal project, as 

well as external expert witnesses. 

 

(d) The fourth subcommittee shall review any and all 

renewable energy options for power production, and 

that consultations on this review shall include 

SaskPower, CIC, and any other government agencies 

involved with renewable energy projects, such as the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, as well as external 

expert witnesses; 

 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2897 

And that, pursuant to rule 148(1), the said committee shall 

temporarily expand its membership to accommodate the 

aforementioned subcommittees with the members to be 

named by the committee itself, and that any such 

expansion of membership shall be in accordance with the 

ratio of government to opposition that currently exists on 

the committee; 

 

And that, pursuant to rule 147(6), as expeditiously as 

possible the Chair and Deputy Chair of the said committee 

shall present to the Board of Internal Economy a funding 

proposal for undertaking the inquiry, and the Chair and 

Deputy Chair of the said committee and the Board of 

Internal Economy shall reference the cost of the UDP as a 

starting point for the budget of the committee; 

 

And that the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies shall, in accordance with rule 131(4), reimburse 

witnesses for all reasonable travel expenses; 

 

And that the said committee shall hire consultants to help 

with the drafting of the committee‟s reports; 

 

And that the work of the aforementioned subcommittees 

shall be compiled into an interim report which is to be 

submitted to the Legislative Assembly; 

 

And that the interim report shall form the basis of 

extensive public consultation to be undertaken by the full 

committee before a final report is presented to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The amendment has 

been moved by the member of Prince Albert Northcote. Is the 

amendment taken as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Carried. I recognize 

the member for Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I‟m very pleased to stand today and talk about the 

motion and also talk about the amendment. The member 

opposite had talked about, some ramble about ill-conceived 

motion or something. Well I think he should look closely at his 

amendment because I think there‟s not much justification at all 

to the amendment that he put forward. 

 

But I would like to talk just a little bit about some of the 

comments the member had made during his speech. He talked 

about trust, and he was trying to blame the Saskatchewan Party 

for a whole bunch of issues. But when he wants to talk about 

such things as trust, I have to remind members on the other side 

of the House that things come up, like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 

Potato Utility Development Company]. And how much trust, 

how much trust was there? He talks about consultation. How 

much consultation was there with stuff like SPUDCO? 

 

He talks about consultation. And from up in his own area that 

he talks about on occasion, about the forest industry and the 

$100 million, how much consultation was there with people of 

Saskatchewan on the $100 million in the dying days of an 

election campaign or dying days of a government? How much 

trust did people have in that former government when they‟re 

looking at $100 million? And he has the audacity to stand and 

talk about our party now with trust. But oh by the way, 

members, there was a vote on the $100 million, and it was 

November 7, 2007. 

 

The member also talks about secrecy; the Sask Party is cloaked 

in secrecy. I would remind the member there was 17 reports on 

the nuclear file held by that former government — 17, and I 

hope the member is listening — 17 that were held in secret until 

the Saskatchewan Party got elected. And those reports are 

available to the public. Seventeen reports over a period of 16 

years that were held in secret files, and the member has the 

audacity to stand up and talk about the secrecy. 

 

Sixteen years of dropping the ball, and he says the 

Saskatchewan Party has dropped the ball on this file. They 

dropped the ball for 16 years. But maybe they didn‟t because I 

don‟t think they were ever on the ball. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

way the NDP operate, I‟m a firm believer if they were in power 

when fire was invented, they would still be in the dark with no 

heat. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the member talked about cogen. 

Would we look at cogen? Golly, we looked at cogen. We were 

promoting cogen years ago. And what would they do? They 

were against it. They were against cogeneration. And now he 

has the audacity to stand up and say, well you should look at 

cogen. 

 

But I do want to go through the motion as it is and talk a little 

bit about it point by point. The first one is the future electrical 

requirements. Expert witnesses, we already have recognized 

experts, and it‟s in SaskPower. Why would we want to be 

forming subcommittees? This information should be gathered 

by the all-party committee. 

 

The UDP, the work of the UDP will continue to go on. These 

public consultations are about the future of the uranium industry 

and not just power generation. And as far as the nuclear 

industry, the members must realize on the other side that they 

all voted for it. They all voted for what we were doing in the 

nuclear industry. The UDP report will be available to the 

all-party committee to review, and the ongoing consultation 

process will be used to inform the all-party committee. 

 

Carbon-based options, renewable energy options — why 

separate subcommittees on energy options? It creates an 

unnecessary bureaucracy. SaskPower is already working on 

both carbon-based and renewable energy resources, and there‟s 

no need to split them apart as Saskatchewan‟s future power 

needs will be met with a mix of options. 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also go to the point that 

one day in the House the other side is complaining about 

spending some money. And here today, here today they‟re 

putting an amendment in that wants to put a minimum, a 

minimum I mind you, of $3 million investigating what our 

Crown corporations already know. They already have the 

information. Now they want to put $3 million in to find out 



2898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

what we already know. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to talk a little bit about 

SaskPower. For decades they have been producing 

carbon-based energy. They are internationally recognized 

experts in the field. We need look no further than to SaskPower 

officials as we chart the future. 

 

For decades SaskPower‟s producing hydroelectricity and more 

recently has been investigating other forms of renewable energy 

— wind power. Why would we go and investigate wind power 

when we already know about wind power? The research and 

analysis already conducted by SaskPower can clearly outline 

Saskatchewan‟s future electrical requirements. 

 

What group or organization would be better able to provide this 

information than SaskPower? Do members on the other side 

have an answer for that question? Who better to provide that 

information than SaskPower? 

 

The only energy source that SaskPower has little experience is 

in nuclear energy, although there was reports done that the NDP 

kept secret. They kept them under wraps for 16 years, some of 

them. That‟s why we turned to the Uranium Development 

Partnership to add to our energy knowledge in Saskatchewan, 

the nuclear energy cycle. And we hear members opposite talk 

about all different sides of it. What is wrong with garnering 

information on the file? 

 

Now to thoroughly consider how the province can best meet the 

growing demand for electricity in a manner that is safe, reliable, 

and environmentally sustainable and affordable, all options are 

under consideration. And they need to be reviewed at the same 

time by the same people — not by a number of subcommittees. 

To get a thorough understanding of all the potential electrical 

generation options under consideration, the same committee 

members need to hear the same information. This cannot be 

achieved in a piecemeal manner, as the opposition would like us 

to consider. That is why the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies is the best option to undertake this extremely 

important work. 

 

I get the impression that the NDP feel that our committee 

system doesn‟t work. Why would they want to form 

subcommittees? And are they going to want to form 

subcommittees of the subcommittee and continue on and on? 

Again I go back to that‟s their history of inaction. You form a 

bureaucracy and then do nothing, and we know that they‟ve 

done that for 16 years. And I think this is just a little play to 

make sure that nothing can go forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, armed with all this knowledge that we would 

garner, it would be time to act. It‟s time to share what we know 

with the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s time to hear their 

opinions on the path forward, and the way to do that is through 

the Crown and Central Agencies Committee. For those reasons, 

Mr. Speaker, we cannot support the amendment to the motion. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very few 

comments to make before we can proceed to vote on this 

important amendment and on the motion of course that the 

government has brought forward. 

 

Let me just say, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this debate, it has been 

the position of this opposition, and remains the position of this 

opposition, that as we consider the options available to 

Saskatchewan people to meet their electrical needs in the future, 

that the people of Saskatchewan should have as broad an 

opportunity and as studied an opportunity as is possible as we 

make these important decisions. 

 

Now the government advanced us into a discussion about a 

nuclear reactor — not initially through the UDP‟s work but 

through their partnerships with Bruce Power and the invitation 

to Bruce Power to consider the feasibility of a reactor in 

Saskatchewan. That launched an important discussion. 

 

The UDP has reported from their point of view a nuclear reactor 

should be part of the power mix in Saskatchewan. It has been 

the position and remains the position of this opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, that as the people of Saskatchewan are being asked in 

this way to consider a nuclear reactor or reactors as part of the 

power mix, that they should have an equal opportunity to be 

informed and consider the entire menu of options that exist for 

our province. And we have a luxury that many other peoples 

and jurisdictions on the globe will not have, and that is a full 

menu of options that may not exist for other nations or other 

jurisdictions but clearly exist for Saskatchewan. 

 

Our argument has been from the start that the people of 

Saskatchewan should have this full menu and as much 

information as is possible before they are asked to make a 

decision, before they are asked to recommend to their 

government what government ought to do. That‟s point number 

one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Point number two. We believe this exercise should be an 

exercise, first of all, of informing and engaging the people of 

Saskatchewan. This is not an exercise particularly designed — 

or we think it shouldn‟t be particularly designed — to inform or 

allow members of the legislature to debate. It ought to be an 

exercise that engages and informs the public. Members of this 

House have much opportunity to debate and perhaps some 

greater measure to be informed. We would hope that this 

government would take seriously its commitment, or at least its 

stated commitment, to engage the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the member from Moose Jaw North shouts from his seat. 

I‟d wish he‟d stand on his feet and make a speech once in a 

while . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh it wasn‟t the member 

from Moose Jaw North this time. It was the member from 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now the government has recommitted here, by the comments 

from members from their seats, that they are truly interested in 

engaging the people of Saskatchewan in a debate or a 

discussion about electrical options. Now they weren‟t so 

interested in this several weeks ago. But as the debate ensued 

around the UDP and around the Bruce feasibility study, the 

government has come some ways in their position. 

 

They weren‟t proposing a Crown corporation investigation of 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2899 

these matters. They weren‟t proposing that the UDP be 

expanded. If fact they weren‟t doing any of that until this 

opposition and the people of Saskatchewan demanded it. Now 

they have moved some ways. They are now admitting from 

their seats today that it is their intention to engage the people of 

Saskatchewan in a full discussion. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Absolutely. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Now because the member from Saskatoon just 

says absolutely, then I‟m sure he will be very supportive of the 

amendment that my colleague from Prince Albert has just made 

to this motion. If he wants to be absolutely certain that the 

people of Saskatchewan can be fully informed and fully 

engaged in the process of the Crown Corporations Committee, 

then he will be 100 per cent supportive of this amendment. 

 

It only is common sense. It‟s only common sense, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s only common sense to have before the people of 

Saskatchewan opportunity to indulge in all of these discussions 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now the Premier is shouting 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

from his seat is saying, well this is the NDP. You have a bunch 

of subcommittees. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t this 

party, when in government, that came up with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan which has got subcommittee after subcommittee 

after subcommittee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, we are 

proposing in this amendment that the Crown Corporations 

Committee be equipped to, number one, have a solid discussion 

with the people of Saskatchewan regarding the actual electrical 

needs of our province going forward. That, Mr. Speaker, is a 

foundation piece that must be made available to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the Premier and others will argue, well SaskPower can 

provide that. Well we‟re not certain of that, Mr. Speaker, after 

today‟s question period and after the rate review report 

yesterday. We learned that the rate review panel can‟t get 

information from the power corporation. So it‟s entirely 

appropriate, we believe, that a subcommittee be established of 

the legislative committee, a subcommittee be established to 

bring forward that information from Power, from other third 

party expertise, so that we could have that foundation piece. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we believe the legislative committee 

should have, through a subcommittee, the opportunity to ask 

and seek answers around the nuclear reactor proposals. There 

are many, many unanswered questions . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I understand, Mr. Speaker, the government 

really doesn‟t want to hear some of these arguments, but we 

will make them in any event. Mr. Speaker, we believe that there 

are many unanswered questions that still surround the concept 

of a reactor as part of our power supply, questions that the 

people of Saskatchewan deserve to have answers for if they‟re 

asked to make an informed decision. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we believe that with the carbon resource 

that does exist in our province, primarily coal, and new 

opportunities in coal in some other areas of our province — as 

opposed to just in the South — that are there new technologies 

that we can seize? We have pioneered, we have pioneered in 

this province some of the technology around carbon dioxide 

sequestration, capture and sequestration. Are there yet other 

technologies that should be investigated and pursued for the 

carbon-based resource? We‟re saying that a subcommittee that 

has the power to draw in expertise be available for the 

committee and for the public to understand the reality of what 

might be possible in the carbon-based resource. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we believe that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve a full review and full information when 

it comes to those variety of other sources, many of them 

described as renewable — wind, solar, hydro, geothermal, 

hydrogen. We believe that the people of Saskatchewan should 

be able to see and discuss the potential that might come from 

demand-side management, from conservation. We believe that 

the people of Saskatchewan should be well informed about 

what potential might exist to import clean electricity from 

Manitoba through a grid to Manitoba, the hydro resource of 

Manitoba. This too demands the work of this committee so that 

the public can be well informed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when government members from their bench 

today and in public and other circumstances have said they are 

sincere about desiring that the people of Saskatchewan have a 

full opportunity for information and debate, we would have 

argued and have argued that this should have been done 

simultaneously and would be better done simultaneously 

through an energy development partnership so that, as the 

discussion around the reactor goes on, this would be going on 

simultaneously. The government has rejected that. 

 

Therefore if they are sincere today, if the Crown Corporations 

Committee and its work is a sincere, is a sincere effort to 

engage the people of Saskatchewan to fully inform the public of 

Saskatchewan, then the government members opposite will vote 

for this amendment. If they vote against this amendment, Mr. 

Speaker, it is clear that the motivations are somewhat different, 

that in fact they are not, they are not interested in a real and 

broad public discussion. They are interested, they are interested 

in getting out of a political trap that they got themselves into 

over the reactor. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll see. Well see how this government 

votes on what is truly a reasonable, common sense amendment 

— a reasonable, common sense approach that this opposition 

offers to government today. Mr. Speaker, I second the 

amendment made by the member from Prince Albert. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Will members take the amendment as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 



2900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

The Speaker: — Or the amendment, pardon me. The 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the amendment say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. The motion before 

the Assembly is the motion presented by the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Corporations. Will the members take 

the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. The motion carries. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 84 — The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well once again I‟m pleased to enter debate 

this afternoon in the Legislative Assembly. I want to chat if I 

can a little bit about Bill 84, the labour-sponsored venture 

capital amendment Act, and I want to talk about the members 

opposite, the government Saskatchewan Party, and their past 

speeches that suggest that the Invest in Saskatchewan program 

encourages Saskatchewan employees and individuals to invest 

in funds or in this case essentially a pool of capital. 

 

We‟ve heard that fund managers then make investments on 

behalf of contributors, investments in Saskatchewan-based, 

small- and medium-sized businesses. Effectively this provides 

much-needed capital, and at no time in Saskatchewan‟s history 

is there such a demand for capital in the business community. 

And it‟s capital that‟s required to grow a business, to grow it 

from a start-up to a larger business, to grow a medium-sized 

business to a large business. And it‟s capital that‟s lacking right 

now all over the world. Now we‟ve had the collapse of financial 

markets around the world. And so in the words of the Minister 

for Enterprise and Innovation, his deputy, and the head of the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, they all agree that 

capital markets currently are the number one inhibitor to growth 

in our province. 

 

And so what does this Act do at a time when capital markets are 

at their lowest levels globally and at their greatest need in the 

province‟s history? What do they do? They introduce Bill 84 

which effectively directs capital from Saskatchewan-based 

businesses to businesses outside our province. And so it seems, 

and I think most would agree, that it‟s wrong-headed at a time 

that Saskatchewan businesses need the capital the most, when 

it‟s the number one inhibitor to growth in our province as 

agreed by the minister himself, the head of the chamber of 

commerce in the province, that you would introduce a Bill that 

drives capital outside the province. 

 

And so you question what the impetus for the Bill is, and again 

it goes to consultation. I spoke about that in a speech earlier 

today. They refuse to consult with people on anything. If they‟d 

have talked to the folks at the chamber of commerce, they‟d 

have found out that — you know what? — capital markets are 

at an all-time low in terms of the volume of funds that they have 

to invest. At that same time, it‟s the most needed in 

Saskatchewan in our province‟s history. And so it makes no 

sense at all. And they‟ve agreed that at that time you would 

introduce a Bill that drives capital outside the province. But 

that‟s what they‟ve done. 

 

And so I‟ve talked to a good number of the people who make 

investments on behalf of people in this province, both 

labour-sponsored venture capital funds and other investments, 

and I can‟t find one that they‟ve spoken with on this Bill. And 

so who did they consult with? It‟s unclear. But what‟s clear is 

that they haven‟t consulted, or they wouldn‟t have put this Bill 

on the table that would drive capital, at the worst capital crunch 

in our province‟s history, outside of Saskatchewan. Now it‟s 

unanimous virtually with the folks that manage these funds, 

people in the business community, their own minister who 

introduced this very legislation, that capital markets are the 

biggest inhibitor to growth in the province right now. And they 

introduce a Bill that drives capital outside of the province. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now initially, labour-sponsored venture capital funds were 

created to encourage capital for Saskatchewan small- to 

medium-sized businesses. And the effect of an influx of capital 

enables a small or medium-sized business to make investments 

in infrastructure or in additional employees. The net effect is an 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2901 

increase in the employment of Saskatchewan people. It provides 

jobs for Saskatchewan families. 

 

Another effect of the labour-sponsored venture capital funds is 

to encourage growth in our province, and it does this by 

investing in Saskatchewan-based businesses. Now what the 

fund will effectively do is take capital from a number of small 

sources, up to $5,000 per investor, and pool that capital and 

enable a manager, a fund manager, to invest in small- to 

medium-sized businesses in this province. 

 

Now it‟s the opposition‟s job to hold a critical eye to the 

government when they introduce legislation. And I didn‟t have 

to make too many calls to find people that were willing to speak 

negatively about this legislation. Nobody called for it that I 

could find, and they all agreed that it seemed wrong-headed, 

and it was introduced at precisely the worst possible time. 

 

So what they‟ve done effectively is allowed capital to flow 

outside of the province when it‟s most required. And my 

consultation with the different fund managers and the different 

investors in this province lead me to one conclusion. And 

virtually all of them said, you know what you could do with Bill 

84? You could increase the limit for investment from 5,000 to 

$10,000 per person. That would encourage more capital to flow 

in Saskatchewan. It would encourage investors to invest more 

so that you could pool more money to invest in our province, to 

grow the economy, to create jobs, and that it hasn‟t been done 

in some time. And they almost all agreed on this. 

 

And so what did I do? Well I take my responsibility very 

seriously. And so I phoned the minister‟s office and asked to 

talk to the minister about Bill 84, that he might make a small 

amendment to increase the limit as has been done in other 

provinces. And you know what I got for an answer? No phone 

call. He refused to talk to me about it. And so it‟s unfortunate 

that when virtually everybody I talk to calls for an increase in 

the limit, hasn‟t been done for some time — it would increase 

capital to markets in Saskatchewan to create jobs in this 

province for Saskatchewan people and would help 

Saskatchewan businesses grow — and they won‟t return a 

phone call. 

 

Now fundamentally, I and a number of the people that I talk to 

have huge concerns about this legislation, the impetus for it, 

and how wrong-headed it is in terms of its treatment of 

Saskatchewan business and investment. And so at this time, I 

move to send it to committee so that we can further scrutinize it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the committee is the 

motion put forward by the Minister Responsible for Enterprise 

and Innovation that Bill No. 84, The Labour-sponsored Venture 

Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 71 — The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, I‟m 

pleased to be on my feet today to discuss this legislation. I‟m 

pleased to enter the debate on Bill 71, The Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act. 

 

Now I‟ve only got a few points to make on this piece of 

legislation, but I think they‟re important points. Previous 

speakers have raised and identified most of the points that I 

would want to raise. And I‟d argue that there are really some 

good things in this Bill, and one of them is that it supports 

innovation in our province, and I think that we could all agree 

that that‟s a good thing. And as a government, we certainly 

demonstrated our support for innovation. 

 

In fact, we presided over the greatest increase in innovation in 

Saskatchewan‟s history. We supported entities such as the 

Saskatchewan Research Council, SOCO [Saskatchewan 

Opportunities Corporation], the synchrotron, the Petroleum 

Technology Research Centre, the Centre for Carbon Dioxide 

Capture at the U of R, the Saskatchewan forestry centre, centres 

for innovation in Saskatoon and Regina that have an economic 

impact of approximately three-quarters of a billion dollars each 

year in this province. So we‟re certainly proud of our support 

for innovation, and we‟re pleased that the government is 

supportive as well. 

 

But this Bill, of course, is not all extremely positive. There‟s 

certainly some aspects to this Bill that cause questions and raise 

some concerns. And I take my role as an opposition member 

very seriously, and thus we have to ask some questions. And 

those questions regard the transparency and accountability. 

 

Now this Act removes much of the transparency and 

accountability that would have existed previously. They ran on 

accountability and transparency, but they haven‟t delivered. 

They‟ve had a series of blacked-out reports — one from the 

Minister of Corrections — several FOIs that I talked about 

today, and reports that are kept from the public, polling that‟s 

kept from the public that they admit is driving a nuclear 

process. 



2902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

And so how does this Act reduce transparency and 

accountability? Well it changes the reporting mechanisms in the 

legislature and to the Assembly. Instead of having a series of 

very detailed budget entries that are easily scrutinized by the 

members of the public, now there‟ll be a single-line item 

provided. And so it makes it more difficult to look into the 

doings and happenings as it relates to money expenditures on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now additionally there have been many quotes in committee 

that makes me think that there‟s some duplicity on this Bill that 

needs to be explained. Now they seem to have an investment 

strategy that contradicts itself at every turn. I‟ve asked 

questions regarding Innovation Saskatchewan and who‟s going 

to be making decisions, the final decision on expenditures. It 

turns out it‟s the minister. 

 

We had a situation last fall where they introduced legislation to 

nationalize a Saskatchewan-owned company that made 

investments at arm‟s-length in government. And so I‟ve asked 

questions in committee, trying to nail down exactly what is their 

philosophy as it comes to making investments as a government 

on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and the people of 

Saskatchewan in the economy. And so what were the answers? 

Well I asked this question, and it was, what is the philosophy of 

this government? And the minister answered, from Hansard: 

 

. . . I said that we didn‟t believe as a government in risking 

tens of millions . . . of taxpayers‟ hard-earned money, as 

risk capital and high-risk ventures. And we vowed that we 

wouldn‟t be doing that as government. 

 

And so I asked a simple question. Then does this philosophy 

then apply to the government‟s Apex Investment Fund? And 

you know what the minister‟s answer was? I‟m not familiar 

with the Apex Investment Fund. 

 

So they‟ve got a philosophy that‟s supposed to apply across 

government in terms of investment on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan as a government, and they don‟t even know 

whether or not it applies across their government. It applies in 

Enterprise and Innovation, but it doesn‟t apply for the Apex 

Fund. It applies for Victoria Park Capital, but it doesn‟t apply to 

SaskWorks Venture Fund. It applies again to Victoria Park 

Capital, but it doesn‟t apply to the Sask Entrepreneurial Fund. 

And so the duplicity is staggering yet again. 

 

And so you have to question what this Act does exactly and 

why it was brought forward. If they have a philosophy of not 

investing in the economy and “using hard-earned money as risk 

capital in high-risk ventures,” then what exactly is the 

innovation fund going to do and who‟s going to make the 

decisions? 

 

Well the minister has admitted that he is going to be making 

decisions and that there will be some political influence in those 

decisions. So again it goes to trust. They say that they‟re not 

going to be risking taxpayers‟ dollars in high-risk ventures, and 

yet they do it on a number of fronts. And they agree that they do 

it on a number of fronts. 

 

Now we have, as any good opposition would do, done a little 

bit of research on what other people think of the duplicity that 

they have shown in terms of The Innovation Saskatchewan Act. 

And so in a speech given December 8, ‟05, the Premier says 

this, and I quote, “The terms of reference of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan also include the end of government picking 

winners and losers in the economy.” That‟s what he said. So 

how does he square that with the minister deciding, and stating 

clearly, that politics will play a role in some of the decisions 

that are made? Obvious contradiction. 

 

Additionally there‟s a quote from Don Black after they 

introduced this legislation, and the quote is: “Don Black, 

executive chair of Greystone Capital Management, said 

independence was vital when it comes to government 

investment „to remove politics and any temptation of politics 

from the process.‟” 

 

This is just smoke and mirrors; shuffle men around the 

chessboard. I mean, why do you need to create a new agency? 

Why don‟t you just refocus Investment Saskatchewan? So 

another third party validator who believes that this is smoke and 

mirrors, it‟s wrong-headed, and it‟s not going to work. 

 

Additionally the headline the day after they introduced this 

legislation said, quote, “Investment agency flip-flop.” So 

apparently they had a position in opposition that they thought 

people wanted to hear. They were going to get out of picking 

winners and losers in the economy. But they create an agency. 

They create a Crown corporation that does exactly that. So 

certainly have some questions regarding that duplicity. 

 

Now it says in my notes that the Saskatchewan Party claims that 

Innovation Saskatchewan will only invest in non-mature 

industries. Now this is the same Sask Party government that 

dismantled a $320 million Green Future Fund, which would 

have encouraged green innovation. So innovation is fine as long 

as it doesn‟t affect the green economy or environmentalism. 

 

Now interestingly, they introduced this legislation which makes 

decisions on investment in innovation in Saskatchewan. And 

where does this leave the folks at Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

They thought that when their entity was created that they would 

be the ones that had the ability to make investments and to 

make decisions based for economic reasons. And in discussions 

with some of the folks that belong to Enterprise Saskatchewan, 

they said they thought they‟d be making decisions based on 

economics, that they‟d have some influence. 

 

But the only recommendations that they‟ve put forward have 

been rejected. They weren‟t consulted on an economic stimulus 

package for the province. We have a forestry industry, and the 

minister is struggling and the minister has managed to have one 

meeting. They weren‟t consulted by the minister about the 

global financial meltdown. And so they feel ignored and used. 

They feel like they‟re political pawns in a game that the 

minister‟s playing. So they say that they‟re going to get out of 

picking winners and losers, but they admit to having politicized 

investment in this Innovation Saskatchewan. And so, if I could 

now, I‟d like to move to send this to committee so that we 

might further scrutinize the Bill on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:00] 

 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2903 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion put forward by the Minister Responsible for Enterprise 

and Innovation that Bill No. 71, The Innovation Saskatchewan 

Act be now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009/ 

Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la 

Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 92, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You don‟t want to do your speech? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I will do it if it comes to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009. 

This amendment corresponds to a change in the federal Income 

Tax Act in 2008 that introduced tax-free savings account 

effective January 1, 2009. 

 

The proposed amendments to The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 

allows the holder of a tax-free saving account to designate a 

beneficiary. Upon the account holder‟s death, the amount in the 

account would be paid to the designated person rather than 

being considered an asset of the holder‟s estate. If this 

legislative change is not made, the amount in the account would 

be distributed according to the account holder‟s will. If there‟s 

no will, the rules of intestacy would apply.  

 

The tax-free savings account is a flexible savings mechanism 

that allows Canadians to make annual contribution and 

withdraw funds at any time to be used for any purpose. 

Contributions are not deductible, but income earned within a 

tax-free savings account and the distributions are tax free. 

 

This amendment allows beneficiaries to be appointed for 

tax-free savings account in the same way as is currently allowed 

for RSPs [retirement savings plan]. The account holder can 

ensure that the designated beneficiary can receive the tax-free 

savings account in the same way as the proceeds of an RRSP 

[registered retirement savings plan], that is, without having to 

be specified in a will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we received a number of requests for this 

legislation. The opposition members did as well, and they‟ve 

written to us and made a request for us to complete this 

legislation. The legislation was under way when we received it 

and we‟re pleased to have their support in the speedy passage of 

this. And I thank them for that accommodation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion put forward by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 92, 

The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Very 

briefly, this is a piece of legislation that I think escaped the 

government in the larger sense. Not just the members of the 

government across the way, but the officials, the public service 

as well, Mr. Speaker, until relatively recently, which is why it is 

Bill 92 and doesn‟t have a lower number, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The tax-free savings accounts are a new instrument created by 

the federal government but created with similar purposes in 

mind, Mr. Speaker, not necessarily to save for retirement but 

that‟s certainly one of the uses of the tax-free savings account. 

And the rules around those accounts are very similar to the rules 

around registered retirement savings plans. 

 

A citizen of Saskatoon wrote one of my colleagues in 

Saskatoon a letter saying the treatment of these upon death in 

respect to designating a beneficiary should be the same as for 

registered retirement savings accounts. Because I am the Justice 

critic, my colleague forwarded the letter to me. I wrote a letter 

to the minister saying that this is a worthwhile suggestion, 

something that should be proceeded with; received a response 

from the minister saying that, yes it is, that the government will 

proceed with legislation. 

 

What this legislation means of course, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

government will suffer some loss of prospective revenue 

because this money will not be included in estates, and 

therefore there won‟t be probate fees attached and there is some 

revenue loss to the government. But it treats fairly and equally 

money that‟s put into registered retirement savings plans and 

money that‟s put in tax-free savings account. We think that‟s 

appropriate. The government thinks that‟s appropriate. 

 

I think this Bill and what‟s going to happen to it this afternoon 

is evidence that democracy in the province of Saskatchewan 

works very well. Citizen-initiated initiatives can proceed fairly 

quickly with bipartisan support through this House, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think it‟s a good representative of that. It‟s 

maybe ironic that it happens on this day when we weren‟t able 



2904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

to achieve that kind of bipartisan support for something else 

that I think the people of Saskatchewan are calling for. But in 

this particular case, no pun intended, Mr. Speaker, where 

there‟s a will, there‟s a way. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 92, 

The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 92, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 be committed to the 

Committee of the Whole, and request leave for the said Bill to 

be considered in the Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands committed to the Committee 

of the Whole, and the minister has requested leave for Bill No. 

92, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 to be considered 

in Committee of the Whole later this day. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 

 

Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2009. This Act will facilitate the newest trend 

in condominium projects, multi-use developments. These are 

developments which contain both residential and commercial 

units. 

 

The current legislation does not prohibit multi-use 

developments. However it does not specifically allow certain 

features common in such developments, including titled parking 

and the ability to have semi-autonomous areas called sectors 

within the project. 

 

This Bill provides the legislative framework for titled parking 

while maintaining the consumer protection elements found in 

the Act today. We want to continue the requirement for one 

parking stall for each residential unit. This ensures that our 

streets are not clogged with parked cars, and people buying a 

condominium expect to have a parking stall available for their 

use. 

 

Across North America, newer condominium developments are 

integrating commercial and residential units within the same 

complex. This makes it possible for a condominium owner to, 

for example, buy their groceries or visit their dentist within the 

same complex. This is a convenience for the residential owner 

as well as a readily available market for the commercial units. 

 

As you can imagine, these mixed-use developments may need 

to be governed differently from a development with only 

residences or only commercial enterprises. Mr. Speaker, these 

amendments will allow the condominium corporation to pass 

bylaws to allow the development to be divided into sectors for 

administrative and management purposes. This ensures that the 

residential owners have a greater say in how the residential 

sector is administered and the commercial sector could have 

different bylaws that fit its unique needs. Because there will 

always be matters of general concern for all owners within a 

mixed-use development, the amendments also allow bylaws to 

be passed to deal with interrelationship between sectors and 

matters of general concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is one further important addition to the 

condominium legislation in this Bill, namely the ability to 

create services units. Services units are owned by the 

condominium corporation and are intended for the use and 

enjoyment of all owners. Services include such amenities as 

laundry rooms, recreational facilities, landscaping, and 

hallways. 

 

The ability to create services units will address a concern 

identified during consultation that there is no ability to create 

common property or common facilities when bare land units are 

redivided. Furthermore, because the facilities and services units 

are important to all owners, new regulation-making powers are 

being provided to allow any unique consumer protection 

requirements related to services units to be added in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the condominium community was consulted about 

proposed amendments for the purpose of titled parking and 

multi-use developments, and expressed strong support for 

legislation for this purpose. Mr. Speaker, I understand that 

consultation was also taken with the members of the opposition 

who consulted with officials from the city of Saskatoon among 

others. I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 93, The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Relatively briefly — I don‟t know how long the members want 

to listen to remarks from either side of the House about 

condominiums, Mr. Speaker — but again I think this is another 

example, like the previous legislation that we are going to deal 

with later in Committee of the Whole this afternoon, an 

example of how nimble and flexible the legislature can be when 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2905 

the legislature wants to be. 

 

And the history for this legislation, for me, starts some time 

before the sitting when there was concern expressed in the press 

in Saskatoon by developers of certain condominium projects in 

that city as to whether legislation in our province allowed for 

the type of financing needed for the different kind of 

development that was going to be taking place in these projects. 

And when the legislature sat, I looked for this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, and it wasn‟t there. 

 

And in the Crown and Central Agencies Committee, there was 

land titles legislation for which I am the critic because it comes 

through Information Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker. And I 

asked the minister — and this is just before the Easter break — 

I asked the minister, what about this concern about financing, 

strata financing for these multi-condominium corporation 

developments, Mr. Speaker. And the minister said, well we‟re 

working on legislation but we don‟t have it ready. We hope to 

have it ready after the Easter break, and we would like the 

opposition‟s co-operation, Mr. Speaker. A little late in the day 

to ask for the opposition‟s co-operation with less now, less than 

three weeks — less than three weeks. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I hadn‟t raised the issue, I don‟t know 

when we would have been forewarned, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

not a criticism of the government. It‟s more of a commentary on 

this place, Mr. Speaker, that sometimes we get so adversarial — 

I expect, Mr. Speaker, that you‟ve noticed this on occasion — 

so adversarial that it gets in the way of even doing what we 

might agree to do, Mr. Speaker, and this is an example. I think 

if the opposition had been taken by surprise by this legislation, 

we may not have had the happy result that we‟re going to have 

today which is to pass legislation that I think makes perfect 

sense. And we weren‟t taken by surprise only by the accident of 

me asking about the need for it in committee on unrelated 

legislation prior to the spring break. 

 

Now this is an example, Mr. Speaker, of legislation modelled 

on another province‟s legislation — British Columbia, I 

believe, in this case, Mr. Speaker. So the government, realizing 

that there was a gap, found a model in another province — in 

this case British Columbia; it might have been Manitoba in 

another case, in this case British Columbia — modelled 

legislation on that legislation and is passing it, as we will see in 

this legislature, with the co-operation of the opposition freely 

offered because there‟s common agreement on the value of the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, just to show that it can be done. 

 

Now I believe that the government in its consultations on this 

— as hurried as they might have been, Mr. Speaker — on the 

consultations on this Bill became aware of consumer protection 

issues around condominiums, Mr. Speaker. And residential 

condominiums are now a much bigger part of the housing 

market in Saskatchewan than they were two years ago. That‟s 

had, in my view, very unhealthy effect on the rental market and 

rental accommodation in Saskatchewan. But that‟s a matter for 

another debate. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But issues are arising about people‟s protection who buy 

condominiums, which has been not as common a part of the 

housing market as it has now become. I understand these 

concerns have been raised with the government when they‟re 

discussing this legislation. This is amendment to that 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we wouldn‟t have expected the government to deal with 

all those issues. These issues are urgent. And we want to help 

deal with these issues in an urgent way, and we are doing so. 

But we anticipate better consumer protection legislation around 

condominiums, arising from the consultations the government‟s 

had, concerns that we know that now have been raised with the 

government. We expect to see that legislation in the fall, now 

that the government‟s been put on notice and they have time to 

prepare for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But on this matter again, a good sign of what the legislature can 

do when nonsense like, you had 17 years to do it and didn‟t do 

it, isn‟t thrown up, and instead we work on what should be 

common intentions, in common, and quickly and flexibly and 

efficiently. This is what can be accomplished, Mr. Speaker. I 

wish we could do it more often. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 93, 

The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

committed? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I designate that Bill No. 93, The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act be committed to the 

Committee of the Whole, and request leave for the said Bill to 

be considered in the Committee of the Whole later this day. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands committed to the Committee 

of the Whole, and the minister has requested leave for Bill No. 

93, The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 be 

considered in Committee of the Whole later this day. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. 

 

I do now leave the Chair for the House to go into Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 



2906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2009 

Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009/ 

Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la 

Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

The Chair: — The item of business before the committee is 

Bill No. 92, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009. Clause 

1, short title, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows: Bill No. 92, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009. 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the committee report the 

Bill without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 

No. 92 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Chair: — Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[Clause 1 agreed to.] 

 

[Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 

of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as follows: 

Bill No. 93, The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009. Is 

that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the committee report the Bill 

without amendment. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 

No. 93 without amendment. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee rise, 

report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — The Government Whip has asked leave to report 

progress and asked for leave to sit again. Is that carried? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Agreed. The committee now stands adjourned. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 92, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read the third time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for Bill No. 

92, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 to be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The minister may 

move to third reading. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009/ 

Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la 

Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 92, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the committee 

to report Bill No. 93, The Condominium Property Amendment 

Act, 2009 without amendment and ask for leave to sit again. 



April 29, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2907 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read the third time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for Bill No. 

93, The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 to be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The minister may 

report the Bill, move the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 93, The 

Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Third reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today‟s 

agenda being completed, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2877 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2877 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2877 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2877 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2878 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2878 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2878 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2878 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2878 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2879 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2879 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2879 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2879 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2879 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Avenue Community Centre for Gender & Sexual Diversity Annual Awards 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2880 

 Spinal Cord Injury and Physical Disabilities Awareness Month 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2880 

 Remembering Peter James Bear 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2880 

 Foam Lake Company Active in Biodiesel Industry 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2881 

 Riffel High School H2O Our Life Fundraiser 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2881 

 Member Wins Woman of Excellence Award 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2881 

 Northern Hockey Star a Machine on Ice 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2882 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Graduate Students 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2882 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2882 

 SaskPower Rates 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2883 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2883 

 Profits from Crime and Victims’ Rights 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2885 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2885 

 Gender Equity Issues 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2886 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2886 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2887 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2888 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2889 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2887 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 54 — The Vital Statistics Act, 2008/Loi de 2008 sur les services de l'état civil 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2888 

 Bill No. 55 — The Vital Statistics Consequential Amendments Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2888 

 Bill No. 47 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2008 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2888 

 



 

 Bill No. 902 — The Stephen and Michelene Worobetz Foundation Amendment Act 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2889 

 Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2906 

 Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2907 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2889 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Inquiry into Meeting Growing Demand for Electricity 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2889 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2892 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2897 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2898 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2900 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2901 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2901 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2903 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2903 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2903 

 Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2904 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2904 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ASSEMBLY 

 Bill No. 92 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine .................................................................................... 2906 

 Bill No. 93 — The Condominium Property Amendment Act, 2009 ........................................................................................... 2906 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


