




















































Hansard: November 02, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3343 

 November 2, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if I may request leave to give 

a slightly extended introduction of some special guests joining 

us in your gallery today. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, members. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s an honour today to introduce some very special 

people seated in your gallery. Joining us today at the legislature 

is Mr. Mayo Schmidt, president and chief executive officer of 

Viterra. And also joining us today is his daughter Darian 

Schmidt, a grade 11 student here in Regina at Sheldon high 

school. With him as well is Joanne Johnson from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. We want to welcome them to the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after earning a degree, a bachelor‟s degree from 

Washburn University in Topeka, Mr. Schmidt‟s athletic skills 

earned him a stint with the NFL‟s [National Football League] 

Miami Dolphins where he was a wide receiver, and I think 

played some special teams and made a team that was coached 

by Don Shula. So that was obviously no small achievement. 

 

Then a career in the grain industry began in earnest, Mr. 

Speaker, including a stint as a senior executive for 

Nebraska-based ConAgra. And in January of 2000, Mr. 

Schmidt assumed the top job at the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

Later he told a reporter about just how tough it was, the first 

day on the job at the Wheat Pool. He said, and I quote, “For me, 

it was time for the company to stop talking about what it had 

done many years past, and start talking about what it was going 

to do to get in control of a situation that was beginning to be out 

of control.” 

 

Since that forward-looking statement and attitude, Mr. Schmidt 

and his team at Viterra have achieved great heights on behalf of 

the company and on behalf of the agriculture sector in our 

province. We‟ve seen the name change to Viterra. We‟ve seen a 

return to profitability. In 2007 Mr. Schmidt led the successful 

acquisition of Agricore United, creating Canada‟s largest 

agribusiness company headquartered in the city of Regina. 

More recently the $1.4 billion acquisition of ABB Grain Ltd. of 

Australia has certainly been in the news, and a very successful 

achievement it is. Mr. Schmidt‟s record has been nothing short 

of spectacular since 2000. It‟s been actually markedly better 

than the record of the Miami Dolphins, I would say. 

 

Today we honour Mayo Schmidt who has been named CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the Year by Canadian Business 

magazine. On behalf of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, on behalf of industry in our province, on behalf 

of agriculture here and right across our country and North 

America, we want to say how proud we are that all of that 

happened here in Regina because of, in many respects, because 

of the leadership of Mayo Schmidt. We welcome him and 

Darian to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join with the 

Premier in welcoming Mayo to the Assembly today, and also 

congratulating him on winning executive officer of the year. 

And I‟d like to quote from the chairman of Viterra, Thomas 

Birks. And he said, “His strategic and disciplined approach has 

positioned Viterra as a leader in shaping the future of 

agriculture and expanding Viterra‟s reach in North America and 

around the world.” 

 

And I think that fully describes the work that Mr. Schmidt has 

done since taking over at Viterra. And as a proud supporter of 

Viterra, and shipping a lot of our grain through the terminal at 

Gull Lake, I just want to say to you, Mayo, thank you for all the 

effort you‟ve put into it. And we look forward to working with 

you in the future. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce through 

you and to you some very important people in my life and in the 

constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale. I‟d like to introduce my 

oldest daughter Hennessey; her cousin Leadan; my mom and 

dad, Georgiana and Rusty Chartier; my sister Michelle; my 

niece-in-law Cynthia, her son Oscar. Some people from my 

own constituency, Grant McMurray, Jean Schimnosky, Yvonne 

McGowan — I can‟t believe I‟ve just missed my own CA‟s 

[constituency assistant] name; sorry, Yvonne — and her son 

Christopher. So I‟d like us to welcome them to their Assembly. 

Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know, Mr. 

Speaker, that many of the workers provide valuable services to 

some of the most vulnerable members of our society, such as 

persons living with mental and intellectual disabilities; women 

and children in crisis; low-income, at-risk individuals; young 

children; youth; aboriginal, immigrant, and visible minority 

persons. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 



3344 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the good cities of 

Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from a 

variety of communities throughout Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

yet another petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, and who yet have not had any commitment of 

assistance from the government. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfill its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are the good residents of Duck 

Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re all hopeful the Government of 

Saskatchewan realizes the value of the full range of professional 

skills offered by health care providers and is promoted to 

addressing the retention and recruitment issues ensuring safe 

staffing levels. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by the residents of Leader, Eatonia, 

Lloydminster, and Kindersley. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of affordable rents and housing in The 

Battlefords, where the residents note that rents have been rising 

at outrageous levels, and that the vacancy rate in The 

Battlefords is very low. 

 

The petitioners humbly pray that the Legislative Assembly 

may be pleased to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to a greater 

number of people throughout The Battlefords, and that 

will implement a process of rent review or rent control to 

better protect tenants in a non-competitive housing 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords. I thank you for the opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3345 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Shellbrook 

and Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

Assembly Elections 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

week I had the pleasure of attending the fall assembly of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations in Saskatoon. I was 

happy to be joined for parts of the proceedings by the members 

from Saskatoon Centre, Saskatoon Fairview, and the deputy 

leader of the official opposition, the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

It was an exciting assembly, Mr. Speaker, and there was a 

strong field of candidates running for election. Morley Watson 

and Dutch Lerat were successful in the contest for vice-chief 

elections, and congratulations to them. I also want to thank 

outgoing vice-chief Glen Pratt for his years of dedicated service 

 

In the contest for chief, Guy Lonechild was ultimately the 

winner after three thrilling ballots. Muskowekwan Chief Reg 

Bellerose and Red Pheasant Chief Sheldon Wuttunee are to be 

commended for their vigorous campaigns and for bringing 

much eloquence and intelligence to the race. 

 

I especially want to commend Lawrence Joseph for 21 years of 

service to First Nations and to all people of Saskatchewan. 

Chief Joseph put a lot of miles on his truck over those years 

working for the people, and he will continue to be a passionate 

and compelling voice for First Nations. Ēkosi. 

 

Finally, a big word of congratulations to new FSIN [Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] Chief Guy Lonechild, his 

partner Leah, and their daughter Darian. Chief Lonechild brings 

a unique mix of experience and desire for change to the job. I 

had the chance to tell him that, in his words and actions, he 

reminded me of what another Sioux chief had called for many 

years ago, Tatanka Iyotanka, Chief Sitting Bull. He said, “Let 

us come together and see what we can do for the children.” 

 

Chief Lonechild is looking to build a better future for First 

Nations children and families in our province, and if that can be 

accomplished, it will benefit all of Saskatchewan. On behalf of 

my leader and my colleagues in the official opposition, 

congratulations Chief Lonechild. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 

like to extend congratulations to new chief of Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Chief Guy Lonechild of the 

White Bear First Nations. And as well, congratulations to 

re-elected Vice-chief Morley Watson and newly elected 

Vice-chief Dutch Lerat. Chief Lonechild won a hard-fought 

victory over three candidates, including second-place finisher, 

Red Pheasant First Nations Chief, Sheldon Wuttunee; 

incumbent Chief, Lawrence Joseph; and Muskowekwan First 

Nation Chief, Ronald Bellerose. 

 

In Chief Lonechild‟s acceptance speech, he heralded a new era 

and a new time in his message largely directed at First Nations 

youth. Mr. Speaker, our government is encouraged to hear 

Chief Lonechild speak of a new era and the importance of 

working together to better the lives of First Nations people. 

 

As he said in his acceptance speech, “When you pitch in 

together, anything is possible . . .”As our government moves 

forward with economic development and the duty to consult, 

we are confident that there will be great success in working 

with Chief Lonechild and the FSIN. Through co-operation, we 

can ensure that all Saskatchewan residents benefit from living 

in the greatest province in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to acknowledge outgoing Chief 

Joseph for his contributions. As well, he worked tirelessly for a 

better future for First Nations in Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

International Day of Climate Action 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 24th, my 

colleague from Saskatoon Massey Place and I, along with about 

150 people, gathered in Saskatoon‟s Kinsmen Park to demand 

government action on climate change. It was part of the 

International Day of Climate Action that saw groups around the 

world hold more than 5,200 events registered in about 181 

countries. It was coordinated by the group 350.org which 

campaigns for the atmospheric concentration of CO2 to be 

reduced to 350 parts per million from the current level of 387. 

 

Locally the event was organized by the Sask Environmental 

Society, We Are Many, Sask environmental network, Engineers 

Without Borders, Oxfam Canada, U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] Students Union, and Road Map Saskatoon. 

Every event highlighted that day highlighted the number 350, 

and people gathered at some point for a big group photo 

depicting that all-important message. These photos will be put 

together as a gigantic, global, visual petition. 

 

[13:45] 

 

As we head towards the crucial UN [United Nations] climate 

change negotiations in Copenhagen in December, this may well 

be the pivotal moment that determines whether or not we get 

this planet out of the climate crisis. And these actions 

demonstrate that we need a real solution that pays attention to 

science. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to congratulate these groups 

here in Saskatchewan and around the world for their leadership 

in continuing to bring forward the climate change crisis and 

positive solutions. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 



3346 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

Paralympic School Week 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

week has been named Paralympic School Week in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Paralympic School Week focuses on the value of equality and 

the importance of access and inclusion in all areas of life. The 

goal of this week is to build awareness for Paralympic Games 

among students and educators and to recognize athletes with 

disabilities and their engagement in sports and physical 

activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recently read an article written by Lisa Franks. 

Lisa Franks is a Paralympic gold medal winner in wheelchair 

racing from Moose Jaw. In this article, she described what it 

was like when she first discovered her sport. She talked about 

rediscovering her passion, setting new goals, developing 

friendships, and having a reason to believe in herself. These 

were all the things that were taken from her when she received 

her injury, Mr. Speaker, and it was through sport and the 

Paralympic Games that she got these back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to invite all 

members of this Assembly to recognize Paralympic School 

Week from November the 2nd to the 6th. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on Sunday afternoon, I, along 

with the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, attended the 15th 

annual Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards in 

Saskatoon. The award ceremony is held under the auspices of 

the Ukrainian Canadian Congress-Saskatchewan Provincial 

Council to honour members within the Ukrainian community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the category of Nation Builder, the Congress 

has this to say of the award. The awards “. . . are presented to 

persons who have, without reward or gain, made meritorious 

contributions which have had a significant impact; left a legacy; 

and/or provided an exemplary role model to [either] the 

Ukrainian community and/or Saskatchewan-Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, recipients this year were Dr. Tony Edward Harras 

from Regina, Chief Judge Gerald Terry George Seniuk from 

Saskatoon, Orest Warnyca from Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Community Recognition Awards are presented 

to persons who have made meritorious contributions in one or 

more areas. For Creativity, Innovation, and Leadership, the 

award this year went to Michael Dutchak of Blaine 

Lake-Saskatoon. The Award for Cultural Preservation and 

Development went to Stan Hawryliw, Edam-Saskatoon; Albert 

Kachkowski, Dauphin-Saskatoon; Catherine Woloschuk, 

Wroxton-Yorkton. And the Award for Leadership and 

Volunteerism recipients were Paul Bunka from Saskatoon, Glen 

Tymiak, Tadmore-Yorkton; and for Youth Achievement, 

Carissa Klopoushak of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

recipients of this year‟s Nation Builders and Community 

Recognition Awards. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert High School Junior Girls Volleyball 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well last Wednesday 

evening, the Prince Albert High School Junior Girls Volleyball 

season came to an end with the annual extravaganza. Teams 

from the local high schools played throughout the afternoon and 

evening until the city champion was crowned. 

 

This year the Carlton Junior Girls “A” team were crowned the 

champions after beating St. Mary High School in three sets. The 

coordinator of the tournament, Mr. Ron Stewart, a recently 

retired phys. ed. [physical education] teacher, commented 

during the medal presentations that the final game was one of 

the best and most exciting he‟s ever been a part of, throughout 

his many years of teaching and now coordinating high school 

tournaments. 

 

I would like to congratulate the coaches, Mrs. Corin Cey and 

Mrs. Karey Lehner, and the team: Morgan Wauters, Rylie 

Bonkowski, Sydney Bueckert, Jacy Akre, Katelyn Lehner, 

Jasmine Pasap, Morgan Holmen, Morgan Zaparaniuk, Shelby 

Novak, and my two girls, Alyssa and Mackenzie Hickie. 

 

These girls worked incredibly hard all season long, and I‟d like 

to offer my thanks to the coaches and the Carlton High School 

athletics program. I would also like to thank all the teachers 

who coach in our schools across this province. I look forward to 

reading many more of these member statements as this group of 

athletes are some of the very best Carlton High School and 

Prince Albert has to offer. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Walk of Stars Recipient in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — It‟s an annual tradition with the Broadway 

business improvement district to honour a businessperson who 

has shown outstanding leadership to the Broadway community. 

The first bid star was awarded posthumously to Greg Botting, a 

talented and inventive business owner in the Broadway district. 

The award is now known as the Greg Botting Walk of Stars. 

 

Honourees‟ stars are embedded in the sidewalk outside the 

Broadway Theatre. This year‟s star is Allan Wickstrom, 

owner-operator of the Broadway Shoe Repair, an old-fashioned 

business in the best sense — one that provides solid, reliable, 

and friendly service to customers. Allan also markets several 

well-known brands of sandals and boots desired by many. On 

Saturday, September 19th Allan‟s star was unveiled followed 

by a celebration at Lydia‟s, another famous Broadway venue in 

a landmark building. 

 

Al Wickstrom grew up on a farm near Tompkins in the 

beautiful Cypress Hills. His early life created in him a hunger 

for a sense of belonging and contributing to community. After 

working at the Awl Shoppe for five years, Allan found a new 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3347 

sense of community when he bought an established shoe repair 

business and renamed it the Broadway Shoe Repair. He quickly 

found his soul — no pun intended — in the Broadway area 

where merchants and business owners work hard to build an 

attractive, cohesive community serving area residents. Allan 

quickly formed strong friendships and alliances, giving his time 

and energy to many projects with his neighbouring merchants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all of my colleagues to congratulate 

Al Wickstrom in getting this well-deserved star of Broadway. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Staffing in Health Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, last week the minister 

admitted that he had ignored 1,300 notices of offence, those 

cases where patients‟ care was at risk because of the lack of 

staff. Today, Mr. Speaker, I have 1,000 more notices of offence 

that he has received and will be receiving that have come in 

since June of this year. My question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: are you going to ignore these . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I have reminded members of 

the rules of the questions, not only to be directed through the 

Chair, but no reference to personal, but by ministry or 

government. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question to 

the minister: will he please now understand that these 1,000 

violations need to be dealt with? And will you now call an 

investigation into the care and concern that have been brought 

forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this issue was brought to 

light a week or so ago in the House. At that time I said to the 

members opposite that, if people that are working in the health 

care system feel that they‟re operating in conditions that are 

unsafe, there is a process to go through, through their 

bargaining unit and through management. And those issues will 

be addressed, Mr. Speaker. They‟re called critical incidents, Mr. 

Speaker, and they will be addressed through the proper 

processes. 

 

These letters that are coming to the floor today are no different 

than the letters that we saw the last time. And I said at that time, 

unfortunately we‟ve inherited a health care system that was 

understaffed because of years of mismanagement through the 

NDP [New Democratic Party]. Mr. Speaker, we‟re dealing with 

that. And we continue to deal with that into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can make light 

of these notices of offence that have been received: 2,300 — 

2,300 have been brought to the attention of this government. 

Mr. Speaker, these are not the rules that the NDP brought into 

place. These are rules that this government, this minister, 

brought in in the essential services legislation. Now 2,300 have 

been brought forward. 

 

My question is, when will he call an investigation into these 

cases, these 2,300 cases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much for the opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker, to provide a bit of an update on our very important 

essential service legislation. We know this is a new process. 

That being said, we‟re seeing early successes right across the 

province. In Moose Jaw, in Swift Current, in Melville, in 

Saskatoon, we see agreements being signed, Mr. Speaker, and 

we know there are others under way. 

 

We certainly are aware of the concerns that have been 

expressed. But importantly, the Labour Relations Board is the 

dispute settlement mechanism in these instances, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s important for the members opposite to understand the 

process that‟s under way. We‟re seeing real successes, which 

means the people of this province will be protected even more 

under essential service legislation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question is back to the Minister of 

Health. The minister knows that he has received 2,300 

expressions of concern. What we want to ask the minister is 

this. When the SEIU [Service Employees International Union] 

West presented these 1,000 new notice of offence last Friday, 

their president, Barb Cape, asked the following question, and I 

quote: 

 

How can safe staffing be important during the potential 

job action, but of no concern during the rest of the year? 

Isn‟t health care 365 days a year, 24 hours a day? 

 

Can you answer the president‟s question? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as we‟ve said several times, 

several times within this legislature, we know that this piece of 

legislation — the essential service legislation — offers a 

balance between the right to strike and protecting the health and 

safety of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is enabling legislation; that is, it‟s enabling 

the parties to actually negotiate and bargain through their own 

respective essential service piece of legislation. So in Moose 

Jaw, in Melville, in Swift Current, in Saskatoon we‟ve already 

seen the successful completion of these negotiations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we‟ve seen through last week is numbers 

that have been part of a proposal. This proposal is simply a part 

of negotiations, Mr. Speaker. The Labour Relations Board is the 

dispute settlement mechanism, Mr. Speaker. We‟re confident in 

essential service legislation because it‟s helping to protect the 



3348 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

health and safety of the people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — Just to remind members again, according to 

rule 50(c), members are to refer to other members not by name 

or personally, but by title, position, or constituency name. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Immunization for H1N1 Influenza 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week 

Saskatchewan started vaccinating front-line health workers. It 

was reported that Saskatchewan had 112,000 vaccinations 

available. There are approximately 40,000 health care workers 

in the province. To the minister: how many vaccinations were 

given last week? Were all health care workers vaccinated last 

week that wanted the vaccine? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the rollout of the 

vaccine started absolutely last Monday, a week ago today, and 

under the advisement of the chief medical officer and her staff, 

we followed along with the sequencing of our health care 

providers throughout the province. So anyone that wanted a 

vaccination throughout the province that was a health care 

provider certainly had that opportunity. We‟ve moved past that 

now, Mr. Speaker, to offering it to children from six months to 

under five years of age. Those clinics are going on, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — How many? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well the member opposite asks how 

many. Last week we were about 70,000 vaccinations 

distributed, Mr. Speaker, not only to health care workers, but to 

many, many communities across northern Saskatchewan. I‟d be 

glad to name them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, there are health workers who did 

not get their vaccine last week, and they‟re calling and saying, 

why? So I really think the minister better look at his 

information again because I asked how many of the health 

workers had been vaccinated. That shouldn‟t be hard. That 

shouldn‟t be hard to find that out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, there‟s 40,000 health care workers. Who 

received the rest of the vaccine last week? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, that all 

health care providers that wanted to receive a vaccine had the 

opportunity to. If she knows of some health care providers that 

weren‟t able to receive that vaccine last week, I‟m sure they‟ll 

be made available to receive the vaccine this week, Mr. 

Speaker, because we know that that is a priority. 

 

What I will do, I will put our disciplined strategy up against any 

other province, Mr. Speaker, because you‟re seeing provinces 

all across Canada moving to where we are right here today, Mr. 

Speaker, by priorizing on a limited amount of vaccines to make 

sure it goes to the people that need it most, i.e., health care 

providers. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, late Friday it was announced that 

the 60,000 vaccinations Saskatchewan was supposed to be 

getting this week will not be coming. Instead we‟ll be receiving 

13,000, which is less than a quarter of the vaccinations we were 

expecting. And this begs the question. To the minister: with the 

dramatic decrease in available vaccinations, who will be getting 

the vaccine this week? Are high-risk children and pregnant 

women going to be forced to wait even longer to get the 

vaccination? And is there a screening process on site to ensure 

that it will be children between the ages of six months and five 

years and pregnant women over 20 weeks that are getting the 

vaccine this week? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer that this week we will be rolling out the vaccine to 

children from six months to under five years, to women that are 

pregnant, Mr. Speaker. But what I‟m very, very confident in is 

the discipline that we had last week. We can assure that every 

one of those children, every one of those pregnant mothers that 

want a vaccine have the opportunity to receive a vaccine here in 

Saskatchewan. That isn‟t the case in every province, Mr. 

Speaker, as other provinces opened it up to the general public, 

which is what that member was asking me to do at the 

university of Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

HealthLine Resources 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister just doesn‟t have a 

clue. Already last week, the HealthLine was flooded with calls. 

People were waiting long periods of time to get through. The 

announcement that we will be receiving less than a quarter of 

the H1N1 vaccine that we were promised will lead to further 

increase in demand on the health hotline. With the increased 

demand for the HealthLine due to H1N1, people calling in with 

day-to-day concerns are not being adequately served. 

 

The minister has said that he‟s going to put additional resources 

into the HealthLine. To the minister, Mr. Speaker: how many 

new positions are being added to the HealthLine, and what is 

the minister‟s acceptable average wait time with these 

additional positions? 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Before I recognize the minister, 

just another reminder that all comments are to be directed 

through the Chair and by constituency or title. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — There‟s a couple of issues here, Mr. 

Speaker. First of all, the member opposite is correct in the fact 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3349 

that our vaccinations that we‟re receiving through the federal 

government is way down, as it is down in every other province 

in Canada, Mr. Speaker. It‟s on a per capita basis we are 

receiving. And I want to assure the general public and this 

House that we are receiving the appropriate amount of vaccine 

for the population that we have in Saskatchewan. There is no 

deals cut between provinces and the federal government. It is a 

per capita allotment, and that‟s what we‟re receiving. 

 

Regarding the HealthLine, Mr. Speaker, I said last week if we 

see the numbers increasing of calls coming in to the HealthLine 

— which is welcome, which is what we‟re asking people to do 

is to use that HealthLine — we may have to make adjustments, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

This week some of those adjustments will be made as we see 

the volumes increase, such as increasing the number of 

registered nurses that will be fielding calls regarding health 

issues. And people that are just phoning for clinic times may be 

diverted to not a registered nurse, but another employee of the 

HealthLine. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Options to Expedite Surgical Procedures 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the Minister of 

Health claimed that he knew absolutely nothing about a plan to 

send surgical patients to British Columbia. Then he even tried 

to pin the whole thing on the Premier and shove it off in his 

direction. Finally a senior official admitted that in fact the 

government has been in discussions with British Columbia 

about 400 hip replacement surgeries. And a news release by the 

government just last Thursday confirmed that by saying, and I 

quote, “McMorris said the Ministry of Health began exploring 

options over the summer . . .” 

 

So my question‟s to the minister: just how long has he been 

planning this? And at a time when money is getting even tighter 

here in the province, why is the government paying more and a 

premium to ship patients out of the province than they would to 

be able to provide the care here at home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to say 

how proud I am of our government and the initiatives that we 

have taken as a government to reach a target of three months in 

four years. Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee you that if that party 

was in government they would never set a target because, 

according to the former Health minister, there is no use setting 

targets because we‟d never meet them anyway, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has set a target. And I had asked 

the deputy minister to look at options that were available to us 

to start meeting that target, and he was doing that work. The 

Premier had talked to the Premier of British Columbia and 

looked at possibilities. Because what we want to do, before we 

eliminate some things, we want to put everything on the table to 

see what makes sense and what doesn‟t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I will admit that phone calls were made to British Columbia 

through an assistant deputy minister, talking about whether 

there was any capacity or not. There‟s no use putting it on the 

table if we don‟t know whether they had any capacity, Mr. 

Speaker. So those discussions were under way, Mr. Speaker, 

and when it came to any sort of decision-making part, we 

definitely would have been involved. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad to see that the 

minister at least read his briefing book over the weekend. But 

he claimed to be out of the loop on this whole process. But yet 

what we‟re hearing from British Columbia, from the Minister of 

Health, he‟s been clearly briefed, fully briefed, and is ready to 

sign on the dotted line. He told the CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] that Saskatchewan approached 

British Columbia and that “we are having a discussion with 

them.” Something that sounds like a little more than one 

random phone call. 

 

He says BC [British Columbia] will charge a premium that will, 

and I quote, “allow us to use those dollars to allow British 

Columbians who may be waiting to get their surgeries done.” 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: given that 

BC recently cancelled thousands of surgeries, this sounds like it 

could be one hefty premium charged to Saskatchewan. How 

much is Saskatchewan prepared to pay BC for these surgeries? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let me help the 

member along with . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, let me help the member along 

with her conspiracy theory, if I can. Mr. Speaker, this notion of 

the province of Saskatchewan exploring, as a last option, the 

chance to send those who‟ve been waiting in some cases a year 

for the surgery they need, it happened at this level, Mr. Speaker. 

It happened at the premiers‟ level at the Western premiers‟ 

meeting in Yukon. I raised it with the Premier of NDP 

Manitoba. I raised it with the Premier of Alberta. I talked . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I talked to 

the Premier of British Columbia. I said, you know, in 

Saskatchewan we‟re still not doing very well in terms of 

orthopedics; we need to do better for our citizens who have 

been waiting for months for surgery. And I told them we‟re 

exploring all of the options. I‟ve asked the Minister of Health to 

explore all of the options. 

 

The first choice is to build capacity in the province. The very 

first choice is to build capacity in the province. The second 



3350 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

choice is to be open, Mr. Speaker, to potential private clinics 

who come in on an itinerant basis and help people. And a third 

option may be to provide that guarantee by offering 

out-of-province solution. Because here‟s the bottom line, Mr. 

Speaker: this government will put those waiting for surgery 

ahead of politics and ideology every single time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier has talked for many, 

many years about the patient-first review. That‟s what he hung 

his hat on. Well he gets the Patient First Review which talks 

about ambulatory care, the surgical centres — wonderful report 

— and then what do they do? Three days later they yank the 

funding from it and say, oh gee. 

 

But in the meantime, they‟ve been talking to British Columbia 

about paying a premium to ship people across the country to get 

their services done instead of investing in services here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister: why did the 

government cut funding for a solution that would have allowed 

patients to receive care that they need closer to home? And why 

is he paying more to create a two tiered health system by 

sending people who can afford it off to British Columbia? 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d ask members to be mindful of the rule. I 

know it‟s something we‟ve kind of worked with, but to refer 

directly by he or she is unacceptable according to the rules that 

were . . . And we‟re going back a number of years to how other 

Speakers have approached the subject of determining the first 

person. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member 

for the question. We welcome the debate. The government has 

set a bold goal in terms of three months for people to wait for 

surgical time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The priority in terms of the government dealing with it include 

the following: number one, we want to seek to build capacity 

within the province of Saskatchewan to meet that three-month 

target for people waiting for surgery. 

 

Number two, we may have to bring in private operators to do 

this on an itinerant basis. We might bring them into the 

province. We may use operating theatres in places like Yorkton 

and Prince Albert and Swift Current, if we‟re short of operating 

theatres. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, if we have to, to meet our target, what 

we will say to those who‟ve been waiting months for surgery, 

we will say, lookit, there may be another option, possibly 

another option, if we can‟t meet the need in the province. You 

deserve the surgery, we will say to them. We may have to look 

at giving them the choice of going to another province, Mr. 

Speaker. And you‟re right. The reason that the members 

opposite would never ever, ever, ever contemplate this is 

because they were more concerned about process and the 

system than the patient. 

I welcome the debate, Mr. Speaker, because people across this 

province have said, 19 months is too long to wait. They deserve 

surgery, Mr. Speaker. And under this plan, that‟s exactly what 

they‟ll get. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — The Premier recently said that, do people care 

if surgery happens in Regina, Saskatoon, or Surrey? Well the 

people that we‟re talking to do care. Because just the other day 

. . . You know, the Premier offers the debate. Mr. Speaker, we 

aren‟t afraid of the debate, but we‟d like some clear facts, for 

one thing. The Premier talks about in his media comments 

having out-of-province review of travel expenses. And then the 

Minister of Health in a question the other day says, oh no, it 

was out of country, not out of province. You can‟t get a straight 

answer from anyone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to the minister: not everyone can afford to pay for the cost 

of travel or accommodation out of the province. So that means 

that this government is paying a premium to move people who 

can afford it to the front of the line. And how is this not creating 

a two-tier medical system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, here‟s a couple 

of points. This is a good debate to have. I‟m glad the member‟s 

asking the question. Here‟s a couple of points. 

 

Number one, number one, there have been reciprocal 

agreements with other provinces when that party was in power 

for years. And they sent people out of province when treatment 

wasn‟t available in Saskatchewan. That‟s point number one. 

 

Point number two, if geography is the definition of a couple of 

tiers, Mr. Speaker, under that party, as they closed rural 

hospitals and as they shut down the Plains, there was one tier of 

health care if you lived in Consul and another if you lived in a 

major centre, Mr. Speaker, when it came to travel. 

 

And finally here‟s the worst tier of all. This is the NDP tier of 

health care. The worst tier of all is waiting 19 months for 

surgery, regardless of where you live. That‟s unacceptable and 

it‟s going to change in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Release of Information 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, can the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing confirm that from the 

moment the issue of the dangerous sex offender was made 

known — who was released to the public last Thursday — he 

has been conducting an extensive witch hunt trying to find out 

who provided us this information, trying to track down the 

person or persons who felt the public needed to be informed 

about this threat to public safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3351 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can definitely 

advise that it‟s very concerning to me as the minister as to how 

the member from Dewdney came into contact with confidential, 

highly confidential and sensitive information. It‟s just as 

concerning to me that the member would like to use that for 

political sensationalism. 

 

I think the real question, the real question here is, how did the 

member from Regina Dewdney come into possession of these 

files? Will he give them back? And will he disclose who gave 

them to him? 

 

It‟s also very concerning, it‟s also very concerning to me, Mr. 

Speaker, that we wonder how many files, how many 

confidential files that that member from Dewdney has in his 

possession. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing should understand that the public had a 

right to know this information, and that anyone who helped 

ensure the public was informed was acting in the public interest 

under the full protection of our whistle-blower legislation. 

 

Can the minister confirm that the person or persons responsible 

for helping to make this information public will face no 

sanctions from the minister or the government? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I can confirm that a 

CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] employee has 

been put on administrative leave while an investigation is being 

conducted into how, how confidential documents got into the 

hands of the member opposite. And I can also advise you that 

we‟re taking this situation very seriously and there will be a full 

investigation conducted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s also very worthy to note that a 

member of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing takes an 

oath of office when they take a job there and I would like . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote 

from that oath, and I quote, “That I will not use or disclose any 

matter or information that comes to my knowledge by reason of 

my employment, including personal information about any 

individual . . .” 

 

And the member from Regina Dewdney should know that, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would ask again if he has documents, 

confidential documents in his possession, that they be returned. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing: will he confirm that the 

individuals or individual who may have provided information 

will not be sanctioned as a result of protecting the public of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, what I will comment 

on is that I‟m very, very concerned about how the files got into 

the hands of the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

And I would also like to bring to the attention of the House a 

letter that was sent from the deputy minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing to the member from Dewdney 

asking for a return of the files, the confidential files that the 

member was waving around in the foyer the other day. And the 

question to the member from Regina Dewdney is, will he return 

those files? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 101 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 101, 

The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 101, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think members can 

appreciate, even for Clerks at the Table when we‟re trying to go 

through the business, that if there‟s a lot of dialogue across the 

floor it‟s hard to hear, even though this Chamber does carry 

sound very well. So I would ask members to recognize that and 

show the respect for the individual who happens to be speaking. 

I invite the Clerk to proceed. 



3352 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 102, 

The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 102, The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional 

Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 103, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 103, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 104, 

The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 104, The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read the first time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Question of Privilege 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a response to 

a question that was brought to my office this morning. Earlier 

today the Opposition House Leader raised the question of 

privilege under the provisions of Rule 12 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. Upon 

receipt of the notice, in accordance with the rules, both House 

Leaders were informed of the details of the case and the 

proposed question of privilege. 

 

It is the responsibility of the Speaker to determine if a prima 

facie case of privilege has been established. Contempt of the 

Assembly is a serious charge which requires careful 

examination of the case and this Assembly‟s practices and 

precedents. 

 

I wish to inform the Assembly that I have not had sufficient 

time to reach a decision on this question, so for this reason I 

shall defer my judgment until the conclusion of routine 

proceedings and before orders of the day tomorrow. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1 through 116. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1 through 116 tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To answers 117 

through 120 ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 117 through 120 ordered. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3353 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answer to question 121. 

 

The Speaker: — Answer to question 121 tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Answers to questions 122 and 123 are ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 122, 123 are ordered. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 124 

through 126. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 124 through 126 tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Answers to questions 127 and 128 are ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — 127 and 128 ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 129 

through 134. 

 

The Speaker: — 129 through 134 tabled. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — The question to 135 is ordered. 

 

The Speaker: — 135 ordered. I recognize the Government 

Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — I wish to table the answers to questions 136 

through 142. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 136 through 142 tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 

by Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s good to be back up on my feet here today to speak 

to the Speech from the Throne. As you know, I had given some 

comments at the conclusion of business Thursday, and I‟m 

going to be continuing with my speech. 

 

It really is a true honour to rise to speak today to respond to our 

government‟s Speech from the Throne, an excellent Speech 

from the Throne. The speech made abundantly clear what many 

Saskatchewan people know: our province is moving forward. 

When I meet with people in our cities, towns, villages, and RMs 

[rural municipality] all across our province, there‟s tremendous 

optimism. I‟m not sure we felt this kind of optimism all that 

often, if ever, before in our great province. It‟s been generated 

by Saskatchewan people, helped by the work of our government 

over the past two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Speech from the Throne made clear, our 

government has responded to long-standing needs for 

infrastructure with record investments in municipalities 

throughout our province. To help municipalities meet the needs 

of their citizens, our government introduced a historic 

commitment to tie municipal operating grants to revenue 

received through the provincial sales tax, making the grants 

more predictable for municipalities preparing their budgets and 

more aligned with the province‟s economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government continues to work with 

municipalities throughout Saskatchewan, with all stakeholder 

organizations and agencies, to ensure we have a strong and 

open relationship and are accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It all helps our province build on its momentum 

to keep our province moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech describes how we will move 

forward by continuing our successful nursing recruitment 

initiatives, work hard to retain medical school graduates, and 

recruit physicians. Our government will, this session, respond to 

the recommendations of the Patient First Review and address 

the surgical backlog. Over the next four years, we will reduce 

surgical wait times to no longer than three months. It‟s a giant 

move forward for people in all of Saskatchewan‟s 

municipalities. We‟re also committing to taking positive steps 

to reduce drug use and break the cycle of addiction. It all helps 

the people in Saskatchewan‟s municipalities move forward. 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, will invest in education 

infrastructure in communities and continue its commitment to 

improving over 230 schools in every part of Saskatchewan. 

These investments in Saskatchewan people, investments that 

help everyone move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has committed to helping our 

province‟s most vulnerable children with $25 million in funding 

set aside to improve the child welfare system. Our government 

will put forward laws to protect citizens by banning texting and 

hand-held cellphone usage while driving. And we will continue 

to work towards our commitment to put an additional 120 

officers in place throughout the province. 

 

Our support for the agricultural sector‟s strong. The 

AgriStability program is moving to Melville, and our 

government is providing $70 million in direct support to 

livestock producers through the cattle and hog support program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to work with First 

Nations and Métis people on developing guidelines on 

Saskatchewan‟s duty to consult. We will continue to work on a 

new environmental regulatory framework and present a 

comprehensive water management plan. 

 

Our government will commit to increased wind power, to 

innovation, and to continuing hearings on Saskatchewan‟s 



3354 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

energy future. We‟ll continue to improve our parks for the 

benefit of all in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve set a goal to open our doors to more 

immigration, just as Saskatchewan opened its doors over a 

century ago. Our government will reduce processing times for 

immigration. We have a goal of attracting 3,400 nominations 

through the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program. 

 

The initiatives our government will undertake will help our 

province grow. Saskatchewan is moving forward. Our province 

is growing, and, Mr. Speaker, the signs of growth are 

everywhere. Just two months ago, the towns of Meadow Lake 

and Martensville — my hometown of Meadow Lake — became 

a city. Our province hasn‟t added two cities in one year since 

1913. And not a word of support from the opposition opposite. 

 

Adding cities is a clear example of a province experiencing 

growth. Another strong signal is population. Between July 1st, 

2008 and July 1st, 2009, Saskatchewan‟s population grew by 

16,509 people. Mr. Speaker, it‟s the largest population increase 

in any 12-month period in our province since 1953, more than 

50 years ago. 

 

Our province‟s economy is strong. As we emerge from a 

worldwide recession, economic strength that helped 

Saskatchewan through the downturn means our province is in a 

strong position, ready for growth. Last month, Mr. Speaker, the 

Dominion Bond Rating Service granted the Government of 

Saskatchewan a credit upgrade from AA low to AA. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s unemployment rate, 4.6 per cent, is the lowest 

in the country. Regina and Saskatoon have the lowest 

unemployment rates of all major cities in Canada. It means, as 

our country‟s economy recovers, our province has an 

advantage. Our economy will continue to build momentum. 

 

Over the past two years, our Saskatchewan Party government 

has worked on getting the fundamentals of a good economy 

right. We lowered property taxes. We lowered income taxes, 

taking 80,000 people off the tax rolls. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve 

invested in infrastructure. We see evidence of the success of 

those investments. In July, Saskatchewan recorded the second 

highest percentage increase in building permits in Canada — a 

57.5 per cent increase from June to 215.5 million. 

 

[14:30] 

 

In the Ministry of Municipal Affairs, under the Building 

Canada plan, the provincial and federal governments together 

have committed over $645 million, from 2008-09 through 

2013-14, to more than 300 projects in communities throughout 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You will also recall the Premier making the commitment in 

February 2009 to provide a $500 million economic booster shot 

for our province. It was designed to accelerate capital spending 

to hospitals, schools, on highways, and for municipalities. Mr. 

Speaker, our government and our ministry were able to provide 

$100 million quickly to all municipalities on a per capita basis 

through the municipal economic enhancement program. These 

dollars mean jobs in communities, dollars for suppliers in the 

service industry throughout Saskatchewan. 

Over the past two years, Mr. Speaker, our provincial 

government has committed an unprecedented $2.5 billion in 

capital investment for schools, hospitals, roads, and municipal 

infrastructure. The investment means cleaner drinking water for 

Saskatchewan families, safer roads for all travellers, and 

increased recreational opportunities. 

 

Beyond infrastructure, our government saw the advantage of 

tying municipal operating grants to the provincial sales tax, 

making the grant more predictable and linked to the overall 

growth of the economy of the province. It means substantial 

increases and a break from past practices. It means we work 

with our municipal sector partners to arrive at a solution that 

would work. It means, Mr. Speaker, that we were able to help 

municipalities budget for the service the citizens needed. 

 

In the 2009-10 provincial budget, municipal operating grants 

rose 24 per cent to over $167 million. These investments in 

municipalities are important. Dollars are the catalyst, but how 

do we ensure investments meet the needs of Saskatchewan 

people? How do we ensure that what we are investing in 

provides for future growth? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is in 

listening to what our constituents want. The answer is in 

thoughtful, careful planning for growth in all of our 

municipalities. 

 

Whether it‟s WaterWolf and the 40-plus municipalities setting 

out a plan and jointly hiring resources to grow their future; or 

the village of Meota and the resort villages of Metinota, 

Lakeview, and Suttons Beach working together on sewage 

lagoon expansion; or the Dundurn water facility that brings 

water to the towns of Dundurn and Hanley as well as Blackstrap 

Provincial Park, Canadian Forces Base Dundurn, Beaver Creek, 

Riverside and rural subscribers, it shows planning when done 

right can be successful. 

 

Our Saskatchewan Party government supports, with our 

municipal partners, an outcome-driven approach to regulation 

and to planning. Mr. Speaker, we all have a responsibility to 

ensure safe and secure communities and regions that offer a full 

suite of services and opportunities to be a place where people 

want to live. 

 

I spoke recently at the Provincial Association of Resort 

Communities‟ annual convention and told them how two RMs 

got funding on behalf of resort hamlets — the RM of Coteau to 

clay cap a road to Hitchcock Bay, and the RM of Mervin for a 

water treatment plant at Sunset View beach. These are good 

examples of municipalities working together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will keep working to sustain 

growth to keep Saskatchewan moving forward. It‟s why our 

government-to-government relationship with municipalities is 

so important. We need to be open to new ways of doing things, 

including new approaches. 

 

Working together, we can create more jobs and build more 

liveable communities. Working together, we will ensure 

Saskatchewan keeps moving forward. Working together, Mr. 

Speaker, our government will achieve shorter wait times for 

surgery. Our government will recruit more physicians and retain 

more health care workers. Working with all Saskatchewan 

people, our government will continue to invest in education, 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3355 

invest and plan in our municipalities to keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward. 

 

I will be voting against the amendment and in favour of the 

Speech from the Throne. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s a 

great privilege for me to participate in the Throne Speech 

debate today. I was thinking back over the last number of years, 

and I‟ve had less and less opportunity to speak. But there‟s so 

much to address as part of the response to the Throne Speech 

that I‟m glad for this opportunity today. 

 

Unfortunately I‟ve already been informed that my time‟s going 

to be restricted to about 20 minutes. And most of my colleagues 

know that I hardly am able to say my name and where I‟m from 

in 20 minutes. But nevertheless we‟ll do the best we can with 

the time we‟re given. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say off the top . . . and it‟s not 

simply formality. It‟s genuine. I‟ve heard many of the 

colleagues in the House make reference to the people who 

support them from the constituency, particularly the 

constituency assistants that work on their behalf. I am fortunate 

to have three individuals who work on a job-sharing basis in the 

constituency office in Cypress Hills. We‟ve had this team 

together for a couple of years now. 

 

My lead constituency assistant is Beth Humphrey. She joined 

my staff almost nine years ago, and she‟s been a real steadfast 

support and a wealth of assistance in so many different ways to 

me personally but more importantly to the constituents who call 

the office regarding a variety of concerns that are raised from 

day to day. But we also have two others ladies who work on a 

less rigorous schedule. One lady‟s in one day a week. The other 

is in two days a week. And I‟m referring to Glenna Gordon and 

Carol Miller, the most recent addition to my office. And these 

individuals have supported our office complement in a very 

significant way. They each bring their own strengths to the 

office. And across the piece, I depend on them entirely for the 

success of our constituent activity. And I‟m very grateful to 

them. 

 

I also want to acknowledge again the love and support of my 

wife. You know, Mr. Speaker, when I ran — and I think I 

probably repeated this story previously — but when I first 

decided to run, my wife was the individual who gave me the 

motivation and the confidence. She said that if I chose to do 

this, she would support me. There was a little trepidation in her 

voice when she said that, but she gave me the assurance that she 

would support me. 

 

The other thing, the motivating part of the decision was when 

she said, if you don‟t get off the couch and quit complaining 

about what‟s happening politically, I don‟t want to hear about it 

anymore. So that was enough motivation for me to say this is an 

opportunity; this is an event that I need to pursue. And with her 

support and the support of many other individuals throughout 

the constituency, I got off the couch and put my name on a 

ballot. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve never regretted it whatsoever. This 

position has offered me greater opportunity and greater 

privilege than I could have imagined 11 years ago when I made 

that decision. And this year I‟m celebrating my 10th 

anniversary as a member in this legislature, and I‟m very 

grateful for the opportunity that has been given to me by the 

citizens of the great region of southwest Saskatchewan known 

as Cypress Hills. 

 

I want to welcome — while I‟m on my introduction — I want 

to welcome the additions, the two members that have come into 

the House just most recently. 

 

The member from Riversdale is brand new to the Assembly. 

We welcome her. I know that she‟s going to find her time here 

very rewarding. It‟s going to be challenging. There are going to 

be immense pressures on her time. And with a young family, I 

know that she‟s going to try and do the best she can to balance 

her work life circumstances. But I wish her well. And although 

we will disagree philosophically many times I‟m sure, that‟s not 

really the issue. The issue is the enthusiasm and the integrity 

you bring to the House and the determination with which you 

pursue your efforts on behalf of your constituents. So I‟d like to 

welcome her. 

 

And for the member . . . I almost said the new member from 

Regina Douglas Park. I guess the constituency‟s right, but 

referring to him as new is not the most appropriate designation. 

The most recent member from Douglas Park, we‟ve known 

each other over the last number of years. He, in some instances, 

is a constituent of mine and I try to represent his concerns and 

needs whenever it‟s appropriate. And in other instances, we 

have been colleagues. But contemporaries might be the best 

way to describe our relationship here. 

 

When I was first elected, the now Leader of the Opposition was 

a member in this House. He was serving as deputy premier at 

the time, and actually I think he used a line in the House one 

time that stuck with me. It was really quite original. There was 

an individual standing in the House here giving a very 

long-winded, laborious speech. It went on and on and on. And 

when that individual stopped for a glass of water, just a quick 

drink, the then deputy premier said, first time I ever saw a 

windmill run on water. 

 

And you know, I liked that line so much I waited almost 10 

years to use it. And I took the advantage to use it against one of 

the current members in the opposition last year during debate, 

and everything stopped in the House. So it was a very good line 

and I thank him for the use of it, although I didn‟t ask 

permission. I think repetition and copying that is the highest 

sense of flattery really. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to be able to stand and talk 

about Speech from the Throne 2009 titled, “Moving Forward.” 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to be fairly broad ranging in my 

comments today because I think that the opportunities given to 

members to reply to this particular speech are quite diverse. 

They can be wide-ranging. We‟re not focusing on one specific 

piece of information or one Bill, and we‟re not required to be 

completely focused on any given item. So I want to talk quite a 

bit about where this speech came from, the importance of it to 

the people of Saskatchewan, and where it points, what 



3356 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

trajectory it suggests for this government as we move forward 

in the years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are, as a government and as a province and as 

a people, moving forward. This Speech from the Throne, the 

title of which is emblazoned on the front page, is a clear road 

map of the government‟s intention. And I heard a member from 

the opposition say the problem with this speech is that it‟s just a 

rehash of a whole litany of previous promises and doesn‟t say 

much about where it‟s going. In fact it talks more about the past 

than it talks about the future. Well the past for this government 

is very brief. It‟s a mere two years. And while this speech does 

contain quite a bit of information on promises made and what 

our goals and objectives had been as part of our election 

platform leading up to the 2007 election, the more important 

part of that record is the fact that we have achieved a vast 

number of things in our first two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, never in the history of this province for sure, 

maybe not in elected history ever, has a government completed 

and fulfilled and implemented well over 100 of its election 

promises within the first 24 months. That is historic, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s worth repeating in this particular document 

because of the historicity and because of the significance of this 

particular government‟s achievement over the first two years of 

its mandate. Mr. Speaker, if we had achieved less, we‟d have 

said less. And the fact of the matter is that we can point very 

clearly to over 100 election promises kept to date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the good news for the people of 

Saskatchewan is that, given our record, given our history, given 

the fact that this government has kept its word, that‟s a fairly 

significant and promising indication of where this government 

will go in the future. A government whose record is based on 

accomplishment is likely to continue accomplishing good things 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and I think that‟s 

what‟s important about this particular speech. While there are 

not a lot of specific items identified for future engagement and 

future introduction, the people of Saskatchewan can be 

reasonably certain, in fact given the history, they can be deadly 

certain that this government will do what it says it will do. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what makes this document so valuable in 

terms of where we‟re at politically in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know I could spend quite a bit of time 

comparing the short, two-year record of this government to the 

16 years of the previous government. We could do that. And if I 

have enough time left, I might get to that. But, Mr. Speaker, it 

would be a very paltry comparison when you look at our record 

in a short term versus the record of the previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things, as part of my wide-ranging 

response, that I‟d like to deal with right now is . . . you know 

I‟ve sat in this House, and I‟ve listened to most of the speeches 

by members both in the opposition and on the government side. 

But I was particularly interested in speeches made by the 

member from Regina Coronation Park and the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana and the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote and some comments outside the House by the Leader 

of the Opposition in which they stood here, in full bluster and 

loud and excessive language, claiming that for the first time in 

history, the people of the province — and they were referencing 

the protesters that were in the front area of the legislative 

grounds last week — the first time in history people who are 

protesting were locked out of their legislature. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the claim that, for the first time ever, 

people of Saskatchewan were locked out of the legislature. But 

the accusation didn‟t end there. The accusation was that they 

were locked out by the Saskatchewan Party government. And in 

one instance, they were locked out by the Premier, and by 

name. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a House where ideas are freely 

debated back and forth. And many, many facts are debatable. 

But I think it‟s important, when you‟re going to make that kind 

of an accusation, that there be some substance, some foundation 

before the accusation, that there be some clearly identifiable, 

factual relevance and substantiation to that kind of accusation. 

And I was, I was intrigued by it because, you know, we‟re a 

government that‟s done a lot of things. We‟ve produced a lot of 

historical firsts in this province. And we‟re pretty proud of that. 

But this isn‟t a first that we would be proud of under any 

circumstances. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that we‟re not the 

first. Fact would have it that there has been previous occasions 

when the doors were locked by the government of the day to 

keep protesters out of the building. And I thought I‟d just check 

into the background of that particular reality, Mr. Speaker, and 

as it turns out there is a long-standing agreement that deals with 

those kinds of situations and how it might be handled in this 

legislature. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, there is a policy in place 

that has existed for years and years; we know that it‟s been in 

place for more than 15 years, that clearly identifies the role of 

the independent agencies of this legislature — in this case the 

Sergeant-at-Arms and his office responsible for security — and 

the mechanisms that they are allowed to use to make sure that 

security is accomplished for the legislature, for the building, for 

the people that work in the building and so forth. 

 

But more interesting than that, Mr. Speaker, is, the policy is a 

document that has been approved by one of the legislature‟s 

own committees. And, Mr. Speaker, the committee that handles 

this particular activity and makes decisions in this matter is 

served by members from both sides of the House. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the Board of Internal Economy — which is the 

legislative committee that deals with these types of issues, 

which is a House committee that has representation from both 

the government and the official opposition — have approved 

this very document that talks about how demonstrations are to 

be dealt with. 

 

And I‟d like to read some of it into the record, Mr. Speaker. It 

says here on page 1 that: 

 

The Sergeant-at-Arms shall be responsible for 

coordinating action taken during demonstrations at the 

Legislative Building. 

 

The Sergeant-at-Arms . . . shall work with the 

demonstrators, [with] elected officials, and other building 

occupants to ensure an orderly assembly. 

 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3357 

It goes into several sub-points, but here‟s something that‟s 

really important, Mr. Speaker: “Demonstrating groups shall not 

be permitted access to the building.” Written right into the 

policy, a policy agreed to by the Board of Internal Economy 

and subscribed to by the members opposite and members from 

the government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say the following guidelines 

must be adhered to by groups demonstrating at the Legislative 

Building. And it goes on to identify certain criteria that, if met 

by the protestors, would allow them entrance into the building 

under very rigorous conditions. And, Mr. Speaker, if the 

members opposite weren‟t aware of this policy, I‟d be surprised 

because the ones that identified the fact that the building was 

locked to protestors are among those who‟ve been in this House 

the longest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Coronation Park, the member 

from Nutana, the Leader of the Official Opposition — those 

three individuals have been around here, some as early as the 

mid-‟70s, some more recently as the early ‟80s, Mr. Speaker. 

So if the people in the opposition didn‟t understand that they 

were party to this agreement and that these rules were in place, 

then I don‟t know how much we can trust their memory on 

anything. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something else that‟s quite interesting. The rules 

here about entry to the building are pretty clear, and we do 

know that an independent agency has the authority to lock the 

building up until certain agreements have been reached. But 

when members of the opposition tried to abrogate the 

responsibilities of this independent officer and threatened to 

open the doors against the clear guidelines, Mr. Speaker, that 

really goes counter to the kind of integrity that this particular 

Chamber expects and requires of its members. 

 

These rules are put in place, not for our individual benefits, but 

for the benefit of democracy as a whole. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think it‟s important that members be very prudent about abiding 

by the very rules that they have agreed to, and in this instance 

there was an attempt to abrogate those rules. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

unacceptable and unreasonable. 

 

But when the Leader of the Official Opposition was heard on 

Swift Current radio, Saturday, saying that the government had 

locked the doors to the people of the province, that is clearly not 

the case, and he knows it. He‟s sitting in his seat saying, that‟s 

what happened. The government did not do that, and we cannot 

allow that kind of information to be spread. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also know, I also know for a fact that the doors 

to this building were locked on a previous occasion, and that‟s 

when farmers from rural Saskatchewan came to this building to 

protest so much of the agriculture policy of the previous 

government. And when they protested outside, the doors were 

locked. By policy, the doors were locked. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the doors can be opened, the doors can be 

opened when agreement is reached by the protestors and the 

authorities responsible for the security of this building. And in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, agreement was reached. Mr. Speaker, the 

galleries were filled with people among the protesting group 

outside. Mr. Speaker, the door was closed until an arrangement 

and agreement could be reached, then the door was opened. 

That gallery was filled. That gallery was filled. This gallery was 

filled by members of the protesting group. The only exception 

were a few other private parties that had come here to observe 

the proceedings. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to say the doors were locked and people were 

prevented from entering is clearly a distortion of the facts. And 

I just want to make sure that the record is clearly made in this 

particular discussion, that if the people of Saskatchewan want to 

know what happened, that‟s the reason why it happened as it 

did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that has come to my 

attention is related, I guess, in some respect. And that is 

selective memory, I guess you‟d call it, because I‟ve also heard 

many members of the opposition over the last number of days 

say, where‟s the money gone? Where‟s the money gone, as 

though it might have disappeared. 

 

You know, what I find really interesting, Mr. Speaker, is when 

that question is asked and an answer is provided, they only 

remember the part of the question that was asked, not the 

answer. And it seems to me that selective memory and/or 

selective hearing is at play here. Now I know about selective 

hearing; I‟ve been accused of it myself by my wife once in a 

while. But for political purposes, you know, it‟s a game that‟s 

played. 

 

Well if the question is where has the money gone, maybe I 

could take a few minutes to say, I‟ll give the answer. We‟ll put 

the answer on the record. 

 

One of the places the money went was $2.7 billion to debt 

reduction. Mr. Speaker, that‟s a pretty significant sum to 

misplace. It‟s a pretty significant sum to ignore. And it‟s clearly 

a sum that is very important to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, I know over the years how significant the accumulated 

debt in this province impacted both the activity of the 

government and impacted the psychology of the people of the 

province. Everybody in this province was aware of the 

significant debt this province carried. 

 

But now that this government has been able to take its good 

fortune — and that‟s what is was, was good fortune — and 

apply large sums of it to the accumulated debt, you‟d think that 

the opposition would be quite happy about that. They were the 

ones that used the so-called Devine debt as a cudgel over the 

people of Saskatchewan to win elections and make their 

political points. 

 

Now that the debt is being paid off, now that the debt is being 

reduced dramatically — and who‟s ever heard of a $2.7 billion 

debt paydown in a short time like we‟ve just experienced? — 

now that it‟s happened, they ask the question, where‟d the 

money go? Well the money went to the provincial debt, a good 

part of it. 

 

Where did some of the other money go, Mr. Speaker? Well it 

went to a variety of things. It went to infrastructure. We‟ve 

never seen infrastructure investment in this province like we 

have in the last two years — $2.5 billion of infrastructure 

spending in highways, in schools. It went to hospitals, health 



3358 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

care facilities. It went to student housing at the University of 

Saskatchewan. A hundred and fifty million dollars into general 

post-secondary educational capital expenditures, whether at 

universities or SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] or junior colleges around the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province has never seen as much capital 

expenditure in one short period of time as this government has 

provided for the province in the last 24 months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where did the money go? Well the money went to 

people who were, because of circumstances beyond their own 

control, they were living in difficult financial circumstances. 

We‟ve certainly seen a lot of money go into seniors‟ support 

programs. We‟ve put it into housing programs. We‟ve put it 

into loans for students. We increased student loan programs. 

Mr. Speaker, we have taken the money that was left to us and 

the money that was generated as a matter of course when we 

took office, and we have spent that on programs that will 

benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there isn‟t a single investment that we have made 

that is to the benefit of anybody but the people of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it has gone right across the 

spectrum of constituencies. It‟s gone right across the spectrum 

of socio-economic groups. It‟s gone across the spectrum of 

urban and rural areas. It‟s gone to the people of this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that if the previous 

government had done just a fraction of what this government 

has done in terms of infrastructure spending, we wouldn‟t have 

had this huge deficit to overcome that we‟ve been dealing with 

the last number of months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk a little bit about roadways in 

particular because being a representative of a rural constituency, 

roads are among the most important investments government 

can make. And, Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to address 

a very specific infrastructure issue: Highway 32, the infamous 

Highway 32, that was so bad it provoked local citizens into the 

creation of a nude calendar. And, Mr. Speaker, when that nude 

calendar was brought to the attention of the House, it became a 

cause célèbre and went around the world actually. Stories about 

that calendar were published in languages that I‟ve never even 

seen before. 

 

But what arose out of that, Mr. Speaker, was a very clear 

awareness that this province had a huge shortfall in 

infrastructure investment. And Highway 32, that runs from the 

community of Leader to the city of Swift Current, was in such a 

sad state of repair that . . . Well, one guy in the calendar actually 

was canoeing in one of the potholes. And we had a duck blind 

in another pothole. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was a truly outlandish, 

quite humorous project, but it really drew attention to that 

highway. And as a result of this government‟s commitment to 

infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan, Highway 32 will be 

completely rebuilt within three years, and the people of that 

north part of the constituency of Cypress Hills are thrilled to 

death. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s important to them for economic reasons. 

It‟s important to them for social reasons. But it‟s even more 

important for health reasons because so many of the people that 

are served by the hospital and the ambulance service in Leader 

need to be transferred in to the hospital at Swift Current, and 

because of the condition of the road weren‟t able to go directly. 

They had to go south on Highway 21 to Maple Creek and then 

back east on Highway No. 1 into the city of Swift Current, and 

that added a lot of precious time to an ambulance run. 

 

And I think that that reality is one of the most telling problems 

with decaying highways in rural Saskatchewan: it really 

seriously impacts on the delivery of health in a timely manner 

to people who are transferred from community to a hospital at 

some distance away. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is another piece of highway 

infrastructure in my constituency that got attention this year. 

Highway 37 from the Frenchman River Valley south to the 

community of Climax is a stretch of about 7 or 8 miles that was 

a goat trail, really. It wasn‟t very good. The road from 

Shaunavon down to the Frenchman River Valley had been done 

previously, and it was pretty good. But from there south, from 

the valley south to Climax, it was a terrible piece of road. And 

worse than anything, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that the people 

who lived along that road, the communities that were served by 

that highway had been set up for disappointment so many times 

in years previous. 

 

[15:00] 

 

As it turns out, my uncle lives along that road. And when he 

saw the surveyors out there staking that highway for a rebuild 

project this year, he said to me, is this for real? And I said, you 

bet your boots. You can count on us. We‟ve committed to doing 

that road. And he said, I‟m going to have to wait until I see the 

earthmoving equipment here to believe that, because for almost 

40 years we have seen surveyors come out here half a dozen 

times, survey this road, leave the stakes in the ground, 

disappear. And our hopes have been raised and dropped so 

dramatically so many times we do not believe this project will 

be reality. Now, Mr. Speaker, that was my uncle. If he‟s that 

skeptical about what I tell him, you can imagine what the rest of 

the people felt. 

 

So when we actually got earthmoving equipment out there, 

when we actually saw activity in the area, when we saw a huge 

pile of gravel being crushed in preparation for this project, it 

was as though their excitement could not be contained, because 

at last somebody had made them a promise and somebody was 

keeping a promise. And, Mr. Speaker, that again is an 

indication of our trustworthiness as a government and our 

commitment to the people of the province. And that‟s why this 

“Moving Forward” document, this Throne Speech is so 

believable for the people of Saskatchewan because they know 

we have made promises and kept them, and they‟re aware of the 

fact that we will keep our promises going into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we spent a lot of money — in answer to the 

question, where‟s the money gone — we spent a lot of money 

on infrastructure for communities. I‟m talking about new 

schools. The community of Maple Creek is getting a new 

school as part of their complex there. We‟re putting money into 

repair projects on schools that were so long overdue that roofs 

which had leaked into buckets for years and years, where black 

mould had started to take hold, are now being repaired. 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3359 

Mr. Speaker, a new hospital, a new health care facility, in 

Maple Creek is going to become a reality in the next year or 

two. The last facility, which was built in the early ‟60s, the 

nurses had to walk around buckets in the halls to collect the 

water off a leaking flat roof. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Maple Creek are going to benefit 

from this government‟s initiatives on their behalf in a 

significant way because that facility will be built. It will replace 

two aging facilities — a health care facility and a seniors‟ 

nursing home. We‟ll put that under one roof. We‟ll provide 

better and more directed care. It‟s going to be easier to manage, 

easier to operate having the facilities united like that. But more 

importantly, it will give a level of optimism and an opportunity 

for the people of Maple Creek to be better served by the 

medical practitioners that are going to be practicing out of that 

new facility. So, Mr. Speaker, those are just two examples in 

one community. 

 

The community of Frontier, we shared in the cost of a new 

cement floor for their rec centre. The local community had great 

pride in their rec centre and had found themselves in need of an 

upgrade. And they raised some money there, and they got some 

local contributions, and the provincial government and the 

federal government came to the table. And they‟re getting a 

new cement surface for their arena to make it more usable for a 

variety of causes and events year round. That had been pretty 

limited previously by the dirt floor. 

 

In the community of Fox Valley, we‟ve got money going in 

there so they can be wheelchair accessible to their arena, and so 

that the visiting team and the home team‟s dressing rooms are 

in better shape, and that access by spectators would be 

improved. 

 

The community of Richmound accepted some money that our 

government provided as part of this question, where did the 

money go? And they decided at their RM facility to install a 

very sophisticated geothermal system. So they‟re removing 

their antiquated air conditioner and their furnace and they are 

going to be depending on this newly installed geothermal 

heating and cooling system. 

 

The community of Leader saw some money from us as well. 

The community of Hazlet is going to be benefiting from some 

of the programs that we have created for infrastructure. The list 

is just endless, Mr. Speaker. And if that‟s the kind of impact 

that these expenditures are having in the constituency of 

Cypress Hills, you can imagine, spreading that kind of largesse 

and that kind of programming to communities all across the 

province, what the impact would be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the infrastructure spending I guess I‟m most proud 

of however is, province wide, the highways and bridges. Now 

the Minister of Highways alluded to a number of them but I just 

want to recite some statistics, if I may. In the first two years of 

our government, we have done more work on highways than 

any previous administration ever. Now, Mr. Speaker, $1.1 

billion — was a little more than that — invested in highways 

and bridges. And in each year, more than 1380 kilometres of 

work was done on a highway somewhere in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, if you add that up, that‟s 27 . . . Is it 2700? Well 2800 

kilometres of work. There‟s 26 000 kilometres of highway in 

the entire province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though we have put more money in a more 

focused and deliberate way into the highways of this province, 

even though we have focused very clearly on new construction 

and an increased repair agenda and a maintenance agenda, at 

27, 2800 kilometres of work, you know, we‟re only 10 per cent 

of the way to the full job, 26 000 kilometres of road in this 

province. And even with maximum investment, we‟re still only 

a little better than 10, 11 per cent, 12 per cent into the cycle. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of work to do, but the people of 

Saskatchewan are seeing one thing. They see a change. They 

see a commitment to rural highways. They see new roads, new 

pavement, upgraded repairs, new bridges, new activity on 

highways in areas of this province where they‟d never seen it 

before. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re pretty proud of the results to 

date. 

 

Is there more work to do? You bet. There‟s a lot of work we 

need to do in the North yet. And we‟re working on a northern 

transportation strategy that will clearly articulate which roads 

need to be fixed on what timetable and to what extent, similar to 

the rolling, five-year plan that we implemented in southern 

Saskatchewan. Can we do it all next year? Can we do it all in 

the first term of our government? Probably not, Mr. Speaker, 

but the people of the province can see that there is good work 

being done, and they appreciate the fact that we took their 

concerns seriously and we‟re moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to say quite a bit about the agricultural 

agenda of this government. I understand the Minister of 

Agriculture, who spoke previously, detailed in quite a 

significant way some of the programs that we‟ve already 

undertaken, and so did my colleague, the member from Thunder 

Creek. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think there‟s one area that I‟d like to focus 

on, and that is the movement of some of the programming from 

the federal government to the provincial government‟s purview. 

We noticed how effective that kind of a change had been in 

Alberta and in other jurisdictions around the country, and we 

thought it‟s time that Saskatchewan — which is home to the 

largest land base for agriculture and the single largest number 

of farmers in the nation — it‟s time that we in Saskatchewan 

did something like that. 

 

And the benefit, Mr. Speaker, will be that Saskatchewan people 

with a farm background will be able to answer the questions of 

the very farmer customers that they are to serve. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that makes such a difference. You and I are probably 

as familiar as anybody of some of the absurdities that were 

given out as answers to farmers when they called urban centres 

down east someplace looking for information on their farm 

programs. 

 

Having that capability in the province of Saskatchewan will not 

only be less expensive ultimately, but it will be much more 

factual and we‟ll be able to direct information in a more timely 

manner and it will provide programming response when it‟s 

needed to the participants in our agriculture programs much 

more effectively. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s an important 

change. 



3360 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

The other thing that‟s really important for our producers around 

the province is the fact that we finally addressed the education 

portion of property tax. This is an issue that‟s been talked about 

by the previous administration, by NDP administrations right 

back to the day of Tommy Douglas. And it took a 

Saskatchewan Party government to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to take a Saskatchewan Party 

government to do a lot of things that the NDP thought about 

and talked about. But on this front, we‟re going to be doing the 

important changes to the education portion of property tax that 

has been talked about and promised and agonized over by 

previous administrations for years and years. Not just years and 

years, Mr. Speaker, decades and decades. And so it took a 

Saskatchewan Party government to take that problem seriously 

and move on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a record on which we are very proud to 

stand. And one of the things that I think will indicate the 

changing dynamic, the changing reality in this province — a 

reality, a changing reality which members of the opposition 

haven‟t even caught on to yet . . . One of the most significant 

things in my mind, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m going to use this to 

conclude my comments, but this in my mind indicates the 

changing reality in this province. 

 

When we sat in the opposition benches, the Minister of 

Education in those years used to talk about the planned loss of 

30,000 public school students in a decade. They used to talk 

about the declining population in schools all across the 

province, nowhere more real than in rural Saskatchewan. But, 

Mr. Speaker, imagine the despondency that that would create in 

a population to say, we are planning for the loss of 36,000 

students in the public school system this decade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased to hear from our Minister of 

Education that this year for the first time in I don‟t know how 

long we have seen a growth in student numbers in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a small number — it‟s 361 students — but it‟s 

heading in the right direction. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to 

be able to say that that‟s the new reality in Cypress Hills as 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I stand here with much more material to present to 

the people of this province. I have more things to say on behalf 

of my constituents, but we‟ve run out of time, Mr. Speaker. And 

so I want to say that I will not be supporting the amendment 

when it comes that time to vote, but I certainly will be 

supporting the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it is both a privilege and an 

honour to participate in my first response to the Throne Speech. 

I‟m going to start today by thanking some very important 

people. I‟m going to tell you a little bit about my constituency 

of Saskatoon Riversdale. I‟m going to tell you a little bit about 

myself, why I‟m here, and what I hope to accomplish in this 

job. And in conclusion, I‟ll tell you what I think about this 

Throne Speech. 

 

First I want to extend my congratulations to the new member 

from Regina Douglas Park, the Leader of the Opposition. I 

didn‟t know him or his family until just a few months ago, but 

through the by-election and now in caucus, I‟ve gotten to know 

him and I‟ve grown to like him and respect him very much. We 

come from different generations and I think we have different 

political styles, but we share many common beliefs among New 

Democrats. We both believe that this province is a wonderful 

place to call home, and every citizen deserves to have the 

opportunity to achieve their full potential and to share in all that 

Saskatchewan has to offer. 

 

Before I say much else, there is a long list of people I want to 

thank, starting with the voters of Saskatoon Riversdale. Over 

the course of several months, I knocked on almost every door in 

the constituency and got to talk to many people. There was not 

a day that went by that I did not meet someone for whom my 

reasons for running weren‟t reaffirmed. 

 

For the tenants in the apartments on Pendygrasse Road whose 

rents have almost doubled in two years and who many can no 

longer make ends meet. For the young woman from Vancouver 

Island who moved here with her boyfriend because she had 

heard of the Saskaboom and hoped they would find jobs, only 

to discover that things weren‟t quite as rosy as they‟d been led 

to believe. For the young couple who, despite being eligible for 

parental leave benefits through employment insurance, could 

not take full advantage of it because they couldn‟t afford to live 

on half of one of their salaries for the full year, so they were 

both back at work full-time before their baby was nine months 

old. 

 

For the senior who asked me to fight to raise the threshold for 

prescription drug coverage because, even though his income 

looked reasonable on paper, his drug costs were breaking the 

bank. For the mother on social assistance who said she wanted 

to work but she couldn‟t leave social assistance because her 

husband‟s costly prescriptions were covered on SAP 

[Saskatchewan assistance plan] but not if she joined the ranks 

of the working poor. For the mother who had to turn down a job 

that paid better than her current position because it involved 

weekend work, and her subsidized child care was only offered 

during the standard workweek. 

 

These are just a few of those voices that need to be heard in this 

legislature. I will make sure that I‟m reflecting their concerns, 

and I will hope that you will make sure that you‟re listening. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Aside from the voters in my constituency, there are many, many 

others, as I said, that I want to thank. I want to start with my 

campaign manager, Tim Williams. This was my first campaign 

and I was a total rookie, but I did realize my job was to be on 

the doorstep. And Tim did everything humanly possible to 

support me to get out on the doorstep, whether it was making 

sure that I had my chai latte on my canvassing breaks or from 

stocking the fridge for my vegetarian emergencies, and 

reassuring me that I wasn‟t a diva just because I needed to have 

my clothes taken to the laundromat or to the dry cleaner so I 

could be on the doorstep. Thank you so much, Tim. 

 

I want to thank Linsay who helped me with my nomination 

by-election campaign literature, despite his own really, really 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3361 

busy schedule. There were others who helped out right from the 

beginning with the nomination: Eric, Rob, Dave, Gord, and 

Michael. Thank you. 

 

During the campaign I had amazing volunteers from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, all over the city, and all over the province for that 

matter. Our phone and foot canvassers did a wonderful job: 

Sandy, Frank, Don, Greg, Dolores, and Jean, and there‟s so 

many others. But they were just a few people who put in almost 

as much work as I did into this campaign. 

 

Grant, Jacquie, and George — no one could ask for a better sign 

crew. 

 

To all the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] who 

were out with me on a very regular basis, thank you so much. I 

want to and need to extend a special thank-you to the member 

from Massey Place who spent an inordinate amount of time on 

the doorstep with me. One would have thought it was his own 

riding on the line if you would have seen the pace that he kept. 

Thank you so much. 

 

My constituency assistants are wonderful — Yvonne and 

Tammy. Thank you so much for helping getting me organized 

and to assist me in learning about my new roles and 

responsibilities. 

 

Now the most important people I need to thank is my very large 

and very supportive family. As a mom of two young kids, I 

could not do this job without the kind of support with which my 

family is providing me. 

 

My husband Blair, who is a total political animal himself, 

agreed to put his own desire to be actively involved in the nuts 

and bolts of the campaign aside so I could focus on the 

campaign and he could focus on Hennessey and Ophelia. And 

now that I‟m elected, he is doing what women have been doing 

to support their politician husbands forever. His own career is 

now on the back burner so one of us can parent full-time and 

one of us can politick full-time. Thanks, Blair. I love you and I 

really do appreciate you. 

 

My children, Hennessey and Ophelia, deserve an extra big 

thank you. My girls put up with almost eight months of 

campaigning from the time the nomination kicked off until the 

by-election on September 21. Hennessey is in grade 6 at the 

Saskatoon French School and, at 11, is a very good public 

speaker. She is filled with passion and compassion, and I know 

she will go on to do wonderful things in her life. Maybe she‟ll 

even sit in this Chamber some day. And I can honestly only 

hope to aspire to sound half as confident as she already does 

when she speaks in public. 

 

And Ophelia will be two in December and is such a joy. She‟s 

gotten very proficient at chanting Danielle, Danielle or NDP, 

NDP whenever we‟re in a crowd, sometimes not so 

appropriately, but that‟s okay. There have been many times 

when it has been so hard for me to be away from her, but her 

zest for life, her easygoing personality, and her love and 

enjoyment of her dad have eased my maternal conscience. 

 

My big sister Michelle, when I told her back in February that I 

wanted to do this, the first thing she said to me is, why in heck‟s 

name would you ever want to do that? Do you not have enough 

going on in your life? But within about 24 hours after she had 

processed all the information, she was my biggest supporter and 

my biggest help. She knocked on doorsteps with me in minus 

30 to help me win the nomination, and she knocked on doors in 

plus 30 to help me win this by-election. Aside from being a 

great campaigner and a confidante, Michelle is also the best 

auntie ever. She loves my kids as much as I do and has often 

been there for them when I can‟t be. 

 

My sister-in-law Yvette and my brother Marc, who have four 

children of their own, have also been a huge support for me. 

With my busy summer of canvassing, Yvette and Marc were 

always happy to have Hennessey, their fifth child, join along in 

their family excursions so I could door knock and know my 

oldest daughter was having fun. 

 

And last but certainly not least, I want to thank my parents 

Georgiana and Rusty Chartier who are my biggest supporters 

but will no doubt be my biggest critics and will help ensure . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . But it‟s true. It‟s true. You laugh but 

it‟s true. They will be my biggest critics and will help ensure I 

stay on the straight and narrow, and will always remind me why 

I wanted this job in the first place. 

 

I just want to take a quick aside to tell you a bit about my 

parents. They are good people. They raised seven of us, of 

whom I‟m the youngest, and demonstrated to us through their 

own actions the importance of being involved in politics and in 

the broader community. 

 

They‟ve both been very active in the NDP, but they‟ve also 

been incredibly involved in their community. From their 

hands-on involvement over the years with organizations like the 

Saskatoon Farmers‟ Market, the Core Neighbourhood Youth 

Co-op, Community First Development Fund, Quint, CHEP 

[child hunger and education program], the Good Food Junction, 

Station 20 West, and the Heritage Society, just to name a few, 

they‟ve always been guided by the principle that it is all our 

jobs to leave this place a bit better than we found it. And even 

as they approach their 80s in the next few years, neither has 

really slowed down a bit. 

 

There‟s some new people in my life I want to thank. The staff at 

this building, the Legislative Assembly staff — whether it‟s 

legal services, security, the staff in the cafeteria, the financial 

services people to the library services — you‟ve been so helpful 

in every regard in helping me adjust to this new life. 

 

I also want to thank the members opposite who‟ve had a smile 

and kind words for me when we‟ve met in the hallway, the 

cafeteria, the parking lot, or various other places. Thank you. I 

really do appreciate it. 

 

I want to tell you a bit about my constituency of Saskatoon 

Riversdale and my relationship to this area. I am a west side girl 

through and through and very proud to call Saskatoon 

Riversdale home. My family roots in this community go back to 

1942. In fact my husband and I are raising Hennessey and 

Ophelia on the same street where my grandparents raised my 

dad and his brothers and sisters, and we live just a few blocks 

away from where my parents have lived for 53 years. Saskatoon 

Riversdale is my home. There is no other place I‟d want to 



3362 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

represent as an MLA. 

 

Our constituency is made up of the communities of Holiday 

Park, King George, Pleasant Hill, Riversdale, Meadow Green, 

Fairhaven, and Montgomery. It‟s a very diverse constituency. 

We have some of the poorest people in this province who live 

there and some of the wealthiest people in the province who 

live there. We have some of the most beautiful green space in 

the city. Actually, in fact, just a block from my house we have 

Holiday Park which is an amazing spot. 

 

We have businesses that have been in the community for 

decades and, even in ownership and sometimes name changes, 

continue to thrive and serve our community. We are home to 

many small businesses like Mel‟s Café and the first and still 

thriving Vern‟s Pizza, and larger businesses and organizations 

including Cindercrete Products — which the member from 

Wascana Plains mentioned was her family‟s business — and 

Cameco‟s head office actually is in Saskatoon Riversdale as 

well. 

 

We are home of the Saskatoon French School, St. John‟s, King 

George, St. Mary, St. Dominic, W. P. Bate, St. Mark‟s, and 

Montgomery schools. Montgomery School, the latter, was just 

named to Today’s Parent magazine‟s top-20-schools-in-Canada 

list. 

 

Our constituency is ethnically diverse. In fact, one of our 

schools is like a mini-United Nations, with students from 29 

different countries represented at last count. Saskatoon 

Riversdale is a constituency not without its challenges, but it is 

a wonderful place to call home. 

 

So I want to tell you a little bit about myself. I think I‟m safe in 

saying that politics is in my blood. My family‟s involvement in 

it stretches actually back to the very beginning of our province. 

My great-grand-uncle, Albert Champagne, was one of the first 

MLAs to serve our province back in 1905 as the MLA for 

Battleford. My uncle Paul worked for John Diefenbaker and 

enjoyed sharing stories from this time. And in 1988, my own 

dad ran for mayor in Saskatoon simply for the reason to get the 

issue of community policing on the public agenda. 

 

My parents have taught me the importance of politics in our 

lives and the need to give back. Over the last decade or so, 

when the birth of my first daughter lit my own activist spark, 

I‟ve known I wanted some role in government or at the very 

least in impacting government. I wasn‟t sure if I was going to 

be behind the scenes as a bureaucrat or as a community activist 

or out front as a politician. Well, I guess, here I am. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Good choice. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Yes. During the by-election campaign, the 

question came up: what do you do? It was hard for me to briefly 

define myself at this point in my life. My answer was never 

short or simple. I‟m not a teacher or a doctor or a lawyer or 

something straightforward and simple like that. I was a reporter 

for 12 years. I was also an at-home mom until my oldest 

daughter started school and, honestly, I think being a mom is 

the thing that defines me the most. It is definitely one of the 

biggest reasons why I decided to put my name forward in this 

by-election. 

Aside from my journalism diploma I do also have a social work 

degree. But because of the kind of work I‟ve done as a social 

worker, I never needed to register, so I can‟t call myself a social 

worker. I‟ve just about completed a master‟s in public policy, 

but not quite. While doing this latest degree I‟ve been doing 

contract work in the area of work/family balance in 

lower-waged employees, but haven‟t focused on this because 

my youngest daughter isn‟t even two. 

 

I‟ve also spent the last couple of years of my life working in a 

volunteer capacity to get the doors open on the Children‟s 

Discovery Museum in Saskatoon, which consumed an 

incredible number of hours for me and for the rest of that board. 

So no, I don‟t fit in a nice little, neat little box and can‟t 

describe myself in one, two, or even three words, but I like to 

think my experiences will serve me well in serving my 

constituents. 

 

Over the last several years I‟ve also spent much of my time in 

the NDP working on the issue of women and politics. This is 

because it is my belief that women‟s issues are not women‟s 

issues alone; women‟s issues are issues of family and of 

community. I also believe — and there is evidence from other 

jurisdictions that supports this — that until we begin to elect 

more women, the priorities of women, of families, and of 

community will not be the priorities of government. For this 

reason, our legislature needs to better reflect the diversity of this 

province. 

 

I had the wonderful library staff in this building put together an 

extensive bibliography for me, for this speech, on why electing 

more women matters, and I had tons of reference material to 

share with you. But as I delved into all this material, you‟ll be 

very relieved to know that I realized that this wasn‟t a paper for 

one of my classes and my time before you today is limited. But 

I‟m happy to share any of those resources with you if you want 

to ask. 

 

There are many, many people in my own political party who 

also believe the diversity of this legislature needs to be 

enhanced — be it more women, more First Nations and Métis 

people, or people of visible minorities. I was so pleased to be 

part of putting forward a resolution at our convention two years 

ago that saw our party commit unanimously to nominating 50 

per cent women candidates in 2011. This next election and 

fulfilling this commitment is not an end point for our party, but 

a beginning. It should be the norm, not the exception, that 

women are well represented in electoral politics on both sides 

of this Chamber. 

 

I‟m totally inspired by the idea of paving the way for more 

women to get involved in electoral politics, including those like 

me with young families. I‟m fortunate myself to have an 

incredible family who make this job possible for me, but we do 

all recognize we will be making big sacrifices. But I want to be 

a part of ensuring we start to do politics differently and make it 

easier for individuals with family responsibilities, particularly 

women, to get involved. It is my belief that although it is a 

demanding job, it should not be so demanding that our 

husbands or wives have to give up their lives totally in order for 

us to be able to serve our community. 

 

A few years ago at an event featuring MP [Member of 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3363 

Parliament] Libby Davies, a concerned and well-meaning 

young man vocalized an observation he had made: “Why are 

female MPs so old? We need to get more young women 

involved.” This person making this comment did not yet have 

children himself and clearly did not understand the multiple 

roles that many women of child-bearing age hold, which I 

believe keeps women like me out of politics. It‟s just too 

demanding when you have to juggle the roles of politician and 

primary caregiver, as most women still are of their children. 

 

And I just want to point out what happened last year, when 

former Green Party leader Amber Jones took her infant to her 

inaugural news conference and, heaven forbid, happened to 

nurse her before the official event began. She was absolutely 

skewered in a blog by John Gormley‟s executive producer for 

supposedly using her daughter as a prop when she was simply 

being a good mother. I trust that this same producer — or 

anyone else for that matter — will not be making these kind of 

disparaging remarks about me when Ophelia comes to visit me 

for a nursing break and a quick cuddle. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Politics at the best of times is difficult, but it can be even more 

daunting if you‟re a woman. It is my goal to ensure it becomes 

more desirable for women to enter politics and easier for 

women to get elected. I envision a world where MLAs spend 

more time in their home constituencies with their constituents 

and, as a result, will have the opportunity to go home to their 

families at the end of a long day. Obviously there are times 

when MLAs need to be in the legislature, like during session, or 

need to meet face to face, but technology is such these days that 

much can be accomplished by meeting at a distance. I am new 

to this job and I fully acknowledge I don‟t have first-hand 

experience in this regard yet, but I‟m not sure there are good 

reasons why an MLA cannot take part in some meetings while 

sitting in her local office rather than in Regina. 

 

Just last week I had the pleasure of touring the Saskatchewan 

Arts Board‟s brand new offices on Broad Street and was thrilled 

to see they‟ve equipped their boardroom for meetings at a 

distance. According to their staff, video conferencing has 

proved to be very effective and an efficient tool in assisting 

them to get their work done. If those in the corporate world and 

those in the not-for-profit world can embrace this new 

technology, why can‟t government? 

 

This is just one possible way of doing politics differently that 

would be better for MLAs and their families, better for 

constituents, better for taxpayers, and last but definitely not 

least, better for the environment. Do this one little thing and I 

think you might see more women running. At least it would be 

a start. 

 

So far you‟ve heard my many thank yous and I‟ve told you a bit 

about my constituency and a bit about myself. Now I need to 

talk about what I think of this Throne Speech. I may be new to 

this legislature but I‟ve always understood a Throne Speech is 

about a vision of the future, not a reflection of the past. I believe 

my colleagues have already done a fine job of pointing out there 

is much more in this Throne Speech about the past two years 

than in the upcoming year. There‟s much more a hodgepodge of 

ideas than a real vision for where this province should go. 

So what is in this Throne Speech? We have heard this 

government is going to limit the number of needles handed out 

by needle exchange programs, despite the fact its own report 

says these programs have done a good job at reducing the 

spread of deadly disease among injection drug users here. 

Limiting the spread of disease is good on many accounts and 

the humanity of it should be enough. But one reason that it 

should appeal to those who don‟t have much sympathy for the 

users who contract diseases and die, it costs taxpayers a great 

deal of money to treat those with blood-borne disease, even if 

they die prematurely. 

 

As a mom of two kids who spend time playing in parks where 

needles have been discovered, I do know where this fear of 

needle sticks comes from. This is my reality. While on the 

doorstep during this by-election, several people talked to me 

also about poorly discarded needles, so I do realize it is a real 

concern. But as someone who studies public policy, I believe in 

putting evidence before ideology. I would like to see the 

evidence on how limiting the number of needles given away 

will increase an addict‟s contact with the health care system and 

potentially life-changing counselling. 

 

I have heard on many occasions this government talk about the 

need to address addictions. I would agree wholeheartedly, but I 

would also argue one needs to take just a step back and deal 

with the reasons why people become addicted in the first place. 

The 16-year-old girl who injects cocaine all day long does not 

do so because her life is good. Chances are good the addiction 

comes out of the desperation of her life. Poverty, abuse, lack of 

opportunity, and often racism are just a few of the factors that 

have likely led to her addiction. 

 

In the Throne Speech we have heard about what this 

government has done to attract nurses to this province and its 

success thus far. We also heard about the government‟s new 

strategy to increase the number of physicians working in the 

province, which is a laudable goal. However this Throne 

Speech did not even mention, let alone address, the concerns of 

the thousands of individuals who are the front lines of our 

health care system in the battle against drug-resistant bugs and 

illnesses like H1N1, or caring on a daily basis for our loved 

ones in hospitals, care homes, and through home care services. 

 

The fact that many facilities are often working short of these 

essential employees, and that we need to attract and retain 

health care professionals beyond doctors and nurses, did not 

even warrant a mention in the Throne Speech. I heard from 

many of these employees while on the doorstep during the 

by-election, and they do not feel like their contribution to the 

health care system is valued by this government. The lack of a 

contract or a decent wage offer, among other issues, reaffirms 

for them that this government believes our health care system 

only includes doctors and nurses. 

 

What is glaringly absent in this Speech is this government‟s 

commitment to addressing the issue of affordability for its 

citizens, which was a very real issue expressed to me when I 

was on the doorstep during the by-election. When the 

opposition talks about this issue, the government responds by 

telling us they removed the lowest income earners from the tax 

rolls and have increased the social assistance, shelter 

allowances, and rental supplements. I applaud the government 



3364 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

for doing this. This was a good start and is somewhat expected, 

especially when you have a giant wallet full of money. But I 

can tell you people are still suffering, and it‟s not enough. 

 

The member from Humboldt talks about a balanced approach 

which is great, but if things aren‟t balanced, a balanced 

approach isn‟t going to work. The people in my constituency, 

and I know elsewhere in this province, are having a harder and 

harder time making ends meet. Whether it‟s the rising utility 

costs, skyrocketing rents, or the rising cost of food, life is tough. 

This isn‟t just an issue for those on social assistance but for 

those who are working very hard for every dwindling dollar 

they earn. It‟s harder for students and it‟s harder for seniors too. 

This Throne Speech did nothing to address any of these real and 

pressing concerns. 

 

I would be remiss as the representative for Saskatoon 

Riversdale if I did not comment on this government‟s decision 

to pull the already-committed funding for the Station 20 West 

project, a project that grew out of community, not out of 

government, and would do a great deal for addressing the 

cost-of-living issues and food securities concerns for many 

people in Saskatoon. Handing out hamburgers and pop to 

hungry individuals during the advance polls of a by-election 

does not constitute a strategy to address hunger in this province. 

Contrary to the opinion on the benches opposite, Station 20 

West was not a political project and still is very worthy of 

support. 

 

Just to play the devil‟s advocate here and use the same approach 

the members opposite often take when they say the NDP has no 

authority in speaking to issues of rural Saskatchewan, perhaps if 

you don‟t live in the core of our urban centres, you have no idea 

what support individuals need to become full and active citizens 

in our province. 

 

Because of this government‟s lack of vision, I will be 

supporting the amendment and cannot in good conscience 

support this Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for 

me to enter into this exciting debate that looks back at the many 

significant accomplishments we have made together as a 

government and as a team. Even more importantly, this 

conversation provides us with a real opportunity to focus on 

what we can do to ensure a prosperous future of our home, our 

Saskatchewan. On that note, I am honoured to reply to the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the two 

members who recently won in the by-election in Saskatoon 

Riversdale and Regina Douglas Park. 

 

Before I give my response, I would like to first thank my 

family. Even though I appreciate them every day, it is important 

to thank them out loud. I have served diligently as an MLA for 

10 years now. In order to do the best job I can for my 

constituency, it requires a lot of extra hours, dedication, and 

patience. My wife, Cindy, and our three children — Lacey, 

Marshall, and Alex — have shown me unwavering 

understanding and patience. They are my rocks keeping me 

grounded even in the most intense prairie winds. 

 

I would also like to thank my constituency assistant, Ed Young. 

It has been 10 years now that Ed and his wife Terry and their 

two girls, who have treated me like a part of the family, they‟ve 

always lent out a helping hand as I often need extra support to 

completely fulfill and carry out my duties as MLA. 

 

My thanks would not be complete without acknowledging the 

constituents of Biggar constituency. My heart will always be 

deeply rooted in the prairie community. I‟ve had the pleasure of 

not only serving its members but also growing with them and 

among them. I have every faith in my constituents that I am 

happy to know they will still have faith in me, faith that I will 

bring their most important issues to this House. I‟ve put my 

focus on learning what is important to the citizens of Biggar 

constituency. I promise that, as long as I continue to represent 

these passionate citizens, I will do whatever I can to make sure 

your voices are heard, your stories are felt, and your needs are 

met. 

 

After hearing this year‟s Throne Speech, I can confidently say 

that our government is carefully looking after every last piece of 

the constituency puzzle that joins together and forms a complete 

Saskatchewan. This province now has over 16,000 new people 

in Saskatchewan contributing to our growing success. Just as so 

many of our newcomers can‟t seem to get here fast enough, our 

population grew faster than any time since the early 1950s. 

 

We are indeed moving forward and expanding forward. 

Saskatchewan today is indeed very different from the 

Saskatchewan the members opposite left us after the 2007 

election. It was a time when many people were continually 

leaving Saskatchewan in the dust as they rode on to oil rich 

Alberta and other lands of opportunity. 

 

Well today Saskatchewan is rich in population growth, rich in 

consolidations on Saskatchewan‟s energy future, rich in 

education infrastructure . There really are riches to be found in 

each constituency. People across the country are watching our 

province shine in the nation‟s spotlight. They want to get in on 

the action. In fact many Saskatchewan residents who left the 

province are eagerly returning in full stride, for Saskatchewan is 

the new Alberta. RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] Economics 

highlighted this turning point in March 2008. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, our party has never left. We have continued 

to stand beside the people of Saskatchewan as we tried to make 

life better for each and every one of them, and it should be 

evident from our Throne Speech that we have succeeded. 

 

Referring back to the RBC‟s claim, “Saskatchewan is the new 

Alberta — holding the top spot nationwide on growth across all 

key housing indicators . . .” said Derek Holt, assistant chief 

economist at RBC. Housing would not be the only issue that 

would take Saskatchewan to the front line in national standings. 

In March 2008, Enterprise Saskatchewan announced that the 

province is number one in the country in three important 

economic categories — wholesale trade, retail sales, and new 

vehicle sales. 

 

Just last week The Globe and Mail‟s Life section featured an 

article by André Picard titled, “Here‟s a radical health care idea: 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3365 

Put the patient first.” He refers to the report‟s idea of making 

the patients the centre of attention just one of the refreshing . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — He refers to report‟s idea of making the patient 

the centre of attention as: 

 

. . . just one of the refreshingly frank comments found in 

For Patients‟ Sake, a new report out of Saskatchewan, one 

that should be mandatory reading for every politician, 

health administrator and health professional . . . 

 

A new state-of-the-system report out of Saskatchewan 

should be mandatory reading for politicians and health 

officials alike. 

 

Well we incorporated that report into our Throne Speech so that 

the entire province could see what we have been up to regarding 

health care. Our government has responded to the unacceptable 

backlogs and surgical wait times that were left untreated by the 

former NDP government. 

 

After reviewing the thorough work done by Mr. Tony Dagnone, 

we decided to set a bold new goal. Over the next four years, we 

will reduce surgical waiting lists in the province to no longer 

than three months. Our government has taken many steps 

towards improving health care system. We have strengthened 

cancer care. We added more training seats for doctors and 

nurses, and we‟ve also added 13 new long-term care homes for 

seniors. Our latest in this long line of health care improvements 

is, as I have already brought to your attention, the patient-first 

review. The patient-first review included young and old . . . 

[inaudible] . . . rich and poor, with special emphasis on 

including First Nations and Métis voices. Over 4,000 

Saskatchewan residents share their experiences, ideas, and 

opinions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to make a few comments on agriculture. 

Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers produce nearly half of 

Canada‟s . . . is one of the world‟s largest exporters of canola, 

three quarters of its flax, mustard, and peas, more than 80 per 

cent of its durum and lentils, and has the second largest beef 

herd, bison and elk herds in the country. Saskatchewan has 

made a name for itself as a reliable supplier of quality 

agriculture products, and we can thank our producers for that. 

We have been moving forward on such initiatives as from that 

review our government made the largest ever contribution to 

crop insurance program by any Saskatchewan government. Our 

government‟s $20 million increased the crop insurance 

program, brought the program‟s budget to $155 million. The 

result of this investment is better coverage for producers, and it 

lowers their premiums. 

 

Our government, along with the co-operation of the federal 

government, has been able to provide $1 million in new 

provincial funding for the new Growing Forward agreement 

with the federal government, investing $152 million over five 

years to include the province‟s water infrastructure. This 

program, Mr. Speaker, achieved three strategic outcomes for 

agriculture in Saskatchewan — a competitive and innovative 

sector, a sector that contributes to society‟s priorities, and a 

sector that is proactive in managing risk. 

 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, invested $71 million to the 

Saskatchewan cattle and hog support program. Under this 

program, ranchers receive $40 per head of beef cows, $20 per 

market hog, and $10 per weanling or feeder hog. This program 

will help ensure that our agriculture economy will continue to 

create opportunities in rural Saskatchewan. And I‟d like to 

thank our government and especially our Agriculture minister 

for fighting hard for Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers at the 

federal-provincial meetings where he tries to improve 

AgriStability and agriculture programs for the best interests of 

Saskatchewan producers. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few comments on municipal affairs. 

Since forming government, our government has committed $2.5 

billion into the province‟s infrastructure for such things as 

highways, schools, health care facilities, and municipal projects. 

We have moved forward with creating the Saskatchewan 

infrastructure growth initiative which provides municipalities 

with an interest subsidy for five years to fund infrastructure 

development. This program will save municipalities $5.6 

million this year, and over the course of the program 

municipalities can save up to $67.5 million. 

 

Communities across Saskatchewan are taking advantage of the 

programs as we have approved over 70 projects with a total 

borrowing of $155.8 million. This is in stark contrast from the 

past 16 years where previous governments shortchanged 

municipalities by millions of dollars in operational funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is moving forward to help 

communities to grow during this current global recession, Mr. 

Speaker, and it starts with our new $100 million municipal 

economic enhancement program, MEEP, which is 

unconditional infrastructure funding — no political strings 

attached. To make the most impact on the communities, we 

need to accelerate the process, and we did just that. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d just like to point out some of the investments 

in infrastructure in the Biggar constituency besides the MEEP 

program, which every municipality in the constituency received 

a per capita funding . But under the Building Canada fund, 

Langham has received $1.15 million for a sewer lift upgrade 

and expansion. Vanscoy received $1.472 million for a sewage 

lagoon relocation. Perdue received $380,000 for a lift station. 

Radisson received $558,000 for a reservoir expansion. Borden 

received $1.64 million for a water supply treatment. And, Mr. 

Speaker, and Wilkie received $4.4 million for a main 

replacement. The town of Biggar received $159,000 for a 

sewage treatment plant, and Asquith received $1.965 million 

for a water treatment plant improvement. Asquith also received 

another $660,000 for a water main sewer trunk line. Delisle 

received $762,000 for a replacement of a lift station, and the 

town of Biggar also received another $100,000 for a sanitary 

sewer main. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we promised to pay down the province‟s debt by 

250 million within our first year in office and dedicated half of 

all budget surpluses to debt reduction. Now we‟re moving 



3366 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

forward. We‟ve created The Growth and Financial Security 

Act. This will make sure that half of all budget surpluses go 

towards debt reduction in the future. We greatly exceeded our 

plan to pay down the province‟s debt by 250 million within our 

first year in office. 

 

In our first full year in office, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we reduced 

the debt by $5,000 a minute or $300,000 an hour or $7 million a 

day. In other words, we reduced the province‟s debt by 40 per 

cent. That‟s the largest single amount of debt reduction in 

Saskatchewan history. This means that we can now devote a 

greater portion of people‟s tax dollars towards the programs and 

services that they want and deserve, and less towards paying 

interest charges left to us by previous governments. 

 

The NDP government has always had a spend-now, 

worry-about-it-later approach to government, so we‟ve had to 

tighten our belts. We implemented vacancy management, 

delayed some investments, and exercised fiscal prudency. In 

August our government announced that we were looking for a 

further 50 million in cost saving measures. The ministries 

pulled together and identified even further savings and 

efficiencies across the government. We doubled our original 

target, and we did so without having a significant impact on 

programs for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the NDP and their new leader are 

looking backward, Saskatchewan is growing and we‟re looking 

forward. Rather than paint a picture of gloom and doom, our 

government is making sure that the province‟s growth benefits 

everyone. This means keeping Saskatchewan affordable. That‟s 

why we created the task force on housing affordability to make 

sure that housing affordability keeps pace with our growing 

economy. 

 

Since the task force tabled its report, we‟ve acted on 22 of its 36 

recommendations. For example, the task force showed that 

recipients of income assistance were one of the groups hit 

hardest by the crisis in housing affordability. Our government 

responded by providing over $12 million to adjust shelter rates 

in the income assistance program and to index shelter 

allowances to 40 per cent of average market rents. This 

enhancement immediately benefited over 6,000 households 

across the province. 

 

We‟ve brought in the largest income tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan history. As part of this, we increased the basic 

personal exemption by $4,000. What this means is 80,000 

low-income people who paid provincial income tax last year 

will not have to pay any this year. We‟ve also introduced a 

number of new tax credits. Combined, these measures will save 

a family of four over $1,300 each year. That‟s $1,300 into the 

pockets of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Teresa from Perdue said to me one day after 

our budget came down, she thanked me and our government 

and our Premier for reducing taxes. She says it was very 

important to her and her family that she did not have to pay any 

more taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s interesting to hear about the history of 

the opposition leader. He said in his Throne Speech that his 

family had Liberal roots. Now as we know, he was elected as an 

NDP MLA in 1978. And he was a part of the socialist Blakeney 

government who nationalized the potash industry, driving out 

business large and small and killing the entrepreneurial spirit of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the going got tough, of course 

the Leader of the Opposition abandoned the NDP in 2001. Then 

what happens? He shows up as an oil company executive in 

Alberta. It‟s interesting to note that the Leader of the 

Opposition offered our Premier advice on how to defeat the 

then NDP Calvert government in the 2003 election. Then we 

hear the Leader of the Opposition actively campaign for Jim 

Dinning in the Alberta PC [Progressive Conservative] 

leadership contest. 

 

Then the Leader of the Opposition comes to Saskatchewan, 

takes a pro-nuclear position, and speaks in Saskatchewan about 

the need of a nuclear reactor to be built here. Now he comes 

back to Saskatchewan to lead the NDP and changes his 

pro-nuclear stance and now is anti-nuclear. Now we hear, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, he advocates for a government-owned oil 

company. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly think that the people of 

Saskatchewan will see through the Leader of the Opposition. 

And I put my trust into people like Teresa at Perdue and the 

thousands of families who have benefited from the 

Saskatchewan Party programs and reduction in taxes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So I will certainly be voting in favour of the 

Throne Speech and against the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s 

certainly my honour to rise in debate of the Throne Speech here 

today. And certainly I‟m in favour of the motion. And what you 

won‟t get from me, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of back-patting and 

cheering and then spinning that you‟re getting from this side. 

My member just down the side here says pompoms. 

 

What we‟re going to do and what the opposition‟s committed to 

doing is to raising the realities that are facing Saskatchewan 

people, Saskatchewan business, and we‟re going to be bringing 

forward constructive solutions and critique on that government 

because they‟re failing on so many fronts. 

 

But I‟d like to take a quick moment, a brief moment, to 

welcome a couple new members to the legislature. It‟s my 

pleasure to welcome the member from Regina Douglas Park, 

our leader, the Leader of the Opposition, to this Assembly. 

 

What I know, Mr. Speaker, is this: this leader brings with him 

experience and leadership in agriculture, in business, and 

certainly in government as deputy premier and in other 

ministerial capacities to this Assembly. And the Saskatchewan 

people are incredibly well served to have an individual bringing 

that kind of experience, bringing his energy, and bringing that 

focus to this Assembly here. So we‟re in good stead there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to comment that the member from 

Riversdale, that I welcome her to this Assembly. And I know, 

in listening to her maiden speech and certainly before that in 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3367 

knowing that member for some time, that those constituents, her 

constituents, will be served incredibly well. And the sincerity 

and commitment that the member from Riversdale brings to the 

issues of her constituents, which is a very diverse constituency, 

is going to be very strong moving forward. They have strong 

representation. 

 

It was a pleasure to see her family in the Assembly here today, 

who have done so much good within that community for so 

many years. I know she has a heck of a team around here and 

that she‟ll serve that constituency very well. 

 

I‟d like to mention and recognize Harry Van Mulligen who has 

provided exceptional constituency service for many years as 

city councillor and as MLA. And Harry, I know, is proud of 

many things and should be proud of many things. He developed 

many different programs and brought forward new regulatory 

processes and also new regime structures around tax 

competitiveness. 

 

But I know Harry, the one thing he‟s maybe most proud of 

when he talks about his time in government, is KidsFirst 

program, Mr. Speaker, that brings needed supports to at-risk 

parents. And I think that for somebody who presided over an 

economic boom, for somebody who worked on tax 

competitiveness and brought forward all those changes, I think 

it‟s telling, Mr. Speaker, that his heart was there with the 

KidsFirst changes. Personally I truly value Harry‟s friendship 

and also his wise counsel and judgment from a professional 

perspective. 

 

I want to thank the good folks within Regina Rosemont who 

have provided me the opportunity to represent them and speak 

on their behalf in this Assembly. And within our constituency, 

there‟s so many events and activities that make the area rich 

with opportunity and for families and for young people. It‟s a 

pleasure to serve and to be a part of that kind of activities from 

a sporting perspective, from a cultural perspective, from arts 

perspectives. We see it through our schools. We see it through 

our community associations, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s my pleasure 

to serve them. 

 

I‟d like to mention specifically the McNab Community 

Association, Mr. Speaker, who has refurbished and revitalized 

their park space with a significant tree planting program. The 

park looks fantastic. I‟d like to thank the city of Regina on this 

front and as well Dundee Developments for their partnership. 

 

Other community associations throughout the constituency do 

similarly important work. And I know the Rosemont Mount 

Royal Community Association are so regularly putting forward 

a rich array of exceptional youth and family programs that make 

our community better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟d like to thank the numerous outdoor hockey league coaches 

that have come forward in the last year, and we look forward to 

offering that program to our constituents again here this year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would be remiss not to recognize our constituency assistant, 

Donna From, who works tirelessly on a myriad of issues and 

problems brought forward by constituents. And it‟s with great 

devotion and dedication and organization that Donna From 

works to find solutions for my constituents, for our constituents. 

 

And what we realize is we have a busy office, and we have 

many issues coming into our office. But what we realize and 

recognize, Mr. Speaker, is that when a constituent arrives at our 

door, it‟s not typically the first place that they‟ve come to. 

Usually it‟s of last resort. And in most cases, Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s urgency and a constituent‟s at their wits‟ end. And in 

some cases, it‟s urgent crisis, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s my belief that 

constituents‟ needs are the first priority of an MLA and of the 

constituency assistant. And I know Donna From prioritizes 

these on a daily basis. I appreciate her response to our 

constituents‟ needs. 

 

And it‟s particularly satisfying to find practical and quick 

solutions to needs of constituents, but it‟s frustrating and 

disappointing when solutions are not at hand, particularly when 

the many of the issues that my constituents face are of huge 

strain upon them as individuals and as families. It‟s common to 

receive calls with respect to health care, individuals languishing 

on wait-lists. And they thought at one point that this Premier 

and this government, the Sask Party, was going to improve 

some of these fronts. What we‟ve seen is the opposite. We‟ve 

seen those wait-lists get longer. Other challenges such as cost of 

living or adequate housing, cost of utilities, prescription drugs 

are a real strain for many of my constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on the other side of that, we have something that‟s really 

gone on significantly in 2009, and that‟s job loss, Mr. Speaker, 

layoff. And this brings about a certain kind of desperation and 

strain on families that is undue and that a government must 

respond to. 

 

And it‟s difficult to see so many jobs being shed in this 

province under the Sask Party. It‟s difficult to witness strong, 

caring parents all of a sudden facing the harsh reality that they 

simply might not be able to make ends meet, put food on the 

table, or pay the bills. So many of these families have never 

experienced this sort of state of helplessness before. They‟re 

middle class. They‟re hard-working. They‟re educated. They‟re 

able. They‟re trained. And they‟ve been very proud of being 

able to take care of themselves. 

 

But for far too many, Mr. Speaker, 2009 hasn‟t provided this 

kind of opportunity. For far too many, in 2009, the Sask Party 

has failed on an economic front, and it‟s directly affecting the 

lives, happiness, and fulfilment of many of my constituents. 

 

As our Premier stood in Taylor Field in an empty stadium to 

cheerlead and back pat himself on population numbers, I had 

two different families — two different constituents, two 

different cases — within my office that were looking for 

something that I couldn‟t provide, and were desperate, Mr. 

Speaker. They were looking for a return to work, a return to the 

quality of life that they so expect the same very day that we 

have a Premier cheerleading in an empty stadium. 

 

It‟s these sincere and hard realities, Mr. Speaker, that many 

families are facing in 2009, a year that has seen a huge drop in 

full-time jobs year over year. And people are concerned that the 

Sask Party doesn‟t know what it‟s doing from an economic 

perspective. 

 



3368 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

[16:00] 

 

Unfortunately not only has the Sask Party developed a 

miserable record with respect to our economy — a decline in so 

many sectors and a major job loss problem — but the Sask 

Party are too busy and too focused on spin and denying the 

truths. 

 

And the minister . . . minister, that‟s a joke. The member from 

Moose Jaw North shouts out, what am I saying? And so that the 

member from Moose Jaw North knows, because many of his 

constituents are facing the same things, he needs to realize that 

right now — in this year, year over year — we‟ve lost jobs in a 

huge way. And while our population has grown, we actually 

have less people working in this province. That‟s an 

unemployment problem, Mr. Speaker, and it affects constituents 

in Moose Jaw North. And that member should be ashamed of 

himself in the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member, Regina 

Rosemont, has the floor. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — If the member from Moose Jaw North 

doesn‟t recognize that many of his constituents have lost jobs 

and found 2009 as a difficult year, I would urge them to write 

that member. But I would also maybe ask that member simply 

to be in a little bit more touch with what‟s going on in reality 

instead of putting the pompoms up from the Sask Party benches 

over there and pretending that everything is good. 

 

It‟s unhelpful that the Sask Party prefers to focus all its energy 

to try to sell positive stories instead of coming to terms with the 

realities of the people they have sworn to serve because for far 

too many, Mr. Speaker, 2009 has been a difficult year. It hasn‟t 

been an easy year. It‟s been difficult for those thousands that 

have been laid off or lost their jobs across this province. Just 

two Fridays ago, as the Sask Party continued to employ its 

economic plan of crossing its fingers and its toes and thinking 

good thoughts while spinning statistics and cheerleading, 1,100 

families, Mr. Speaker, were facing the harsh reality of recession 

— job loss — as they received layoff notices just prior to the 

Thanksgiving weekend, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Sask Party spin is cold comfort to these workers and the 

thousands of others that have lost their jobs or have been laid 

off. Sask Party denial of an economic recession and lack of an 

economic plan is worrisome and problematic, Mr. Speaker, to 

the people of this province. 

 

Our Labour minister, Mr. Speaker, in hearing about the 1,100 

layoffs, Mr. Speaker, says and I quote, “For now, great empathy 

goes out to those affected.” Well with all due respect, Mr. 

Speaker, the workers aren‟t looking for the minister‟s great 

empathy. They‟re looking for their jobs back. And I‟ll remind 

the out-of-touch minister, part-time Minister of Labour that they 

deserve more than Sask Party‟s spin and bluster. They deserve 

economic solutions being put forward. 

 

We have great concern and have raised this throughout the year 

— it‟s sort of a thread that‟s worked its way through — is great 

concern from a perspective of financial management. Financial 

mismanagement in the case of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And 

I have a few general comments with this perspective. 

 

Right now at this point in time we had a $1.3 billion miss on 

revenues, and this is growing larger by the day. The Sask Party 

has been anything but transparent in sharing this information 

and addressing and planning for this information. 

 

What we realize in this Assembly is that we have something 

that‟s historic because we know this government here, the Sask 

Party, likes to talk about making history. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

they made history all right. Never in the province of 

Saskatchewan has one government missed one resource in a 

calendar year by more than $1.3 billion. They made history, 

made history, Mr. Speaker, in a very negative way — ill 

planned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we have as a result of this is we have a 

government that‟s had strong revenues, had a windfall of 

dollars available in a rainy day fund and surpluses, but they 

overspent it, Mr. Speaker. And what we see is, we see a 

creation of a structural deficit, Mr. Speaker. That‟s right, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s not just a summary deficit, Mr. Speaker, but a 

structural deficit as we move forward. 

 

And when we talk about a structural deficit, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

talking about a government that‟s overspending its resources at 

a time where, in many ways, they shouldn‟t — where the 

revenues are strong and they have no excuse but for their own 

mismanagement. We have a burn rate on resources of 

government such as a rainy day fund that has been drained from 

well over $2 billion to well under, to 800 million here today. 

And we have stripping of Crown equity like never before at a 

time of relative revenue strength, Mr. Speaker — no excuses for 

this. 

 

And we have massive job loss, Mr. Speaker. And we talked 

about what this means for the constituents in Riversdale or in 

Rosemont or for your constituents, Mr. Speaker, or for certainly 

the Premier‟s. And we know this one thing about the economic 

challenges that have been created by the Sask Party, is that 

they‟re indiscriminate of what constituency we represent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And people around the province are applying certain 

terminology or words to the financial mismanagement, the 

fiscal mismanagement of this government. We hear that it‟s in 

disarray. We hear that they‟re reckless. We hear that the Sask 

Party‟s irresponsible, and we hear that the Sask Party‟s 

incompetent from a fiscal and financial perspective, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I think the people of Saskatchewan are bang on 

in all these fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we‟ve toured the province and met with constituents 

around the province and I know that the word on the street, on 

coffee row, from community to community, is that this party 

here, the Saskatchewan Party, is anything but fiscally 

conservative and anything but fiscally responsible. We hear this 

in Moosomin. We hear this in Carlyle. We hear it in Oxbow. 

We hear it in Weyburn. We hear it in Estevan. We hear it in 

Fort Qu‟Appelle. We hear it across this province. We hear it in 

Saskatoon. 

 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3369 

We hear it in Estevan an awful lot. If you go down there and 

you chat, what people expect is, they say, well we have oil and 

gas industry that‟s moving along very well and we have no 

excuse, no excuse to be in the kind of financial disarray that this 

government‟s put us in, Mr. Speaker. The people down in 

Estevan are astounded when they hear that the Bakken play has 

been such a strong revenue source for the province and that the 

treasury, the financial purse of this government, has been 

mismanaged by the Sask Party. And they‟re asking, where‟s 

their voice, Mr. Speaker? Where‟s their voice in making sure 

that the fiscal order is re-established? 

 

An Hon. Member: — You don‟t know what you‟re talking 

about. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the member from Moose Jaw North 

just says he doesn‟t know what he‟s talking about. We agree. 

He doesn‟t know what he‟s talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Sask Party is so busy spinning and denying the facts around 

recession, yet they won‟t address the issues around economic 

growth or putting things back in order so that people have jobs 

and the kind of expectations around quality of life that they so 

expect. 

 

The Sask Party — and don‟t get me wrong — the Sask Party 

fiscal mismanagement compromises the future opportunity of 

this province, the prosperity, and dashes hopes across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. To have a government presiding over a 

time where Saskatchewan should be truly moving forward and 

seeing the opposite happening, seeing us return to deficit 

financing, is disgraceful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Unfortunately the Sask Party has zero credibility as it relates to 

fiscal management. It‟s in fact an embarrassing return to 

conservative mismanagement that we recall in this province all 

too well from the 1980s, and the effect of that, Mr. Speaker, the 

cost of interest on that debt. 

 

There is little that Saskatchewan people despise more than a 

government that mismanages its finances — little they despise 

more. It goes against the grain of Saskatchewan people that 

believe in responsible management of their finances. 

Saskatchewan people deserve and expect a government that 

takes care of the present and plans for the future. Financial 

mismanagement gets in the way of all of that. It‟s the kind of 

mismanagement that‟s inexcusable and puts at risk the kind of 

prosperity and opportunity that Saskatchewan people and 

business should readily deserve and expect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan‟s economy has provided strong revenues, a 

position of strength for the treasury for this Sask Party 

government. And with this in mind, it has no excuse, no excuse 

but for its own mismanagement, and why we‟re in the financial 

wreck that we‟re in here today. 

 

No government has ever been left with such a strong position. 

Billion dollar surpluses, a red-hot economy firing on all 

cylinders, Mr. Speaker, from the New Democrats, built in 

partnership with the businesses and the people of Saskatchewan 

and along with New Democrat government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On March 18th, 2009, the Sask Party put forward a budget. I 

believe they called it Strong and Steady. It was anything but; it 

was the exact opposite. We challenged the government on their 

projections for the price of potash and each and every time they 

told us we were off base, Mr. Speaker. We offered our advice; it 

fell on deaf ears. We offered our advice; they chose not to 

listen. 

 

In fact on March 19th, 2009, the member from Kindersley 

ridiculed our member when he asked to clarify these 

projections. And what did he say? He said, I quote, “. . . he was 

too incompetent to understand that. And as a former Finance 

minister, that‟s absolutely reprehensible.” 

 

Well I‟ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that coming from the Minister 

of Energy and Resources is the embarrassment, Mr. Speaker. 

And those very words, Mr. Speaker, the very words here, 

incompetent and absolutely reprehensible, are the words that we 

here need to be applying today to the Minister of Energy and 

Resources, to the Finance minister, and to the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because that‟s what we‟re hearing 

and that‟s what we‟re seeing. 

 

And I think it‟s important that we recognize that our Premier, 

he really likes to be on TV shows like CNN [Cable News 

Network] or channels like CNN or BNN [Business News 

Network]. And it‟s likely, Mr. Speaker, that he‟s turned down 

all sorts of invites to appear and speak to mismanagement of 

historic proportions from a financial perspective. The biggest 

miss on one resource, 1.3 billion and growing. This is not the 

centre stage, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan people wish to 

occupy and we ask the Premier and the Sask Party to quit 

embarrassing our province with their lack of business acumen 

and financial credibility. 

 

Our potash producers are incredibly important to our province 

and to our province‟s prosperity. And these companies certainly 

were not caught off near as much as this government was, Mr. 

Speaker. And why is that? Well it‟s because these companies 

did their job, Mr. Speaker. These companies did their job. And I 

hear some heckling from the other side and I guess they still 

don‟t understand what was going on when the potash producers 

were scaling down production in historic ways in late 2008 and 

into 2009. 

 

Unlike the Sask Party, they paid attention to all the signs and in 

late 2008 and early 2009 they were drawing down production in 

historic ways. They paid attention when the University of 

Illinois who said, I quote, “Fertilizer prices . . . to decline in 

early 2009,” unlike this Premier and the Sask Party who denied 

the facts. And they paid attention, Mr. Speaker, when the 

Belarusian Potash Company, an exporter of potash fertilizers, 

cut the price of potash for Brazilian customers for the first time 

since 2006, on March 6, 2009 — before budget, pre-budget, 

with time for this government to respond yet they forge ahead 

blindly. 

 

Now when Brazil is allowed to pay a price, it‟s not rocket 

science that other nations of the world are going to also be 

fighting for lower prices, thus driving down prices. It was a 

straightforward fact for this government to recognize, reflecting 

the demand worldwide; demand that was greatly reduced by 

recessions and decisions by the largest buyers in the world — 

China, India, and Brazil. It was only commonplace and evident 



3370 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

that there would be a reduction in potash buying worldwide, a 

reduction in demand. And of course potash producers 

responded by massively reducing production, addressing 

supply, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But none of these facts, Mr. Speaker, none of these facts — 

global recession, signals from the biggest buyers in the world, 

analysts‟ suggestions of a reduction, or the many signals in our 

own backyard with the huge scaling down in production — that 

none of these signs, none of these signals were picked up by the 

Sask Party, who forged ahead. 

 

The facts were in front of them. They were in our own 

backyard. They were on the pages of the financial papers, Mr. 

Speaker, yet they ignored these or, Mr. Speaker, they 

disregarded them purposefully. I‟m not sure. So we have an 

industry who knew, the banks who knew, and I tend to believe 

that a civil service that knew. But this government remained in 

the dark. And I don‟t buy that. This government denied all 

information available to them and proceeded with a blind, gut 

feeling. 

 

There‟s only two explanations for the revenue mismanagement: 

either they put forward numbers that they knew were not true 

— think about that — they put forward numbers that they knew 

were not true, or they truly, truly had no sniff, not a clue, about 

what was going on in their own economy, Mr. Speaker. Those 

are the only two possible explanations. One is not more 

desirable than the other, Mr. Speaker. Either they tried to pull a 

fast one on Saskatchewan people, or they‟re incompetent. 

There‟s no other possible explanation — either one is damning 

and certainly both of them are inexcusable. 

 

And this government has denied the facts of mismanagement all 

the way along. It has been anything but transparent. In fact 

those members opposite were unable to release their first 

quarter information in a timely manner. Why was that? Was it 

that the Premier was too busy strutting his stuff for a meeting of 

our nation‟s premiers, or did he just want to pretend for a little 

while longer that things were all okay? 

 

For our Premier, who I understand is giddy about a federal run 

with the Conservatives, it was likely decided that announcing 

their miss, their shortfall that he had created on the biggest 

overstatement on one resource revenue source in our province‟s 

history, was likely not in his best personal interest just before he 

fluffed his feathers on the national stage with his fellow 

premiers. He wanted to pretend for just a while longer, Mr. 

Speaker. He wanted to hide that his house of cards had fallen, 

Mr. Speaker. So he delays the release. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But what might be good for his own federal career option was 

clearly not in the best interest of Saskatchewan people. The fact 

the Premier stalled a timely and important accountability 

exercise for his own personal gain says a lot, Mr. Speaker. It 

could be said that timely and transparent reporting of 

government activities is even more important when 

mismanagement has occurred, when a government has made the 

kinds of errors that the Sask Party has made — mismanagement 

that costs Saskatchewan people‟s . . . compromises important 

opportunities. The Sask Party government has not provided 

strong fiscal management. It‟s provided anything but, and it‟s 

been anything but transparent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we all pay for that, whether you‟re constituents in Indian 

Head-Milestone, whether you‟re constituents in Yorkton or 

Melfort or Estevan or Rosemont or Riversdale — all 

constituents pay for that. Whether you‟re up in Saskatoon and 

you‟re cutting a children‟s hospital as a result of a disorganized 

and disarray of financial management, it affects all constituents. 

Whether you‟re the Education minister and you‟re cutting $30 

million of children‟s infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, and delaying 

addressing plans, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s interesting that this government can throw up trial balloon 

after trial balloon that are popular and then shoot them out of 

the sky, Mr. Speaker, with what they think are no 

consequences. But there are consequences, Mr. Speaker. There 

are consequences, Mr. Speaker, and I believe in 2011 these 

members opposite are going to recognize those consequences. 

 

And they‟d like to hide this kind of stuff from the people of 

Saskatchewan. And this is just endemic of their behaviour, 

never telling the people of Saskatchewan the whole story — 

never telling the whole story. Last week the Speech from the 

Throne mentioned RBC‟s provincial outlook for September 

2009, but as per usual, they did not tell the whole story, Mr. 

Speaker. They neglected to tell the people of the province the 

headline in the report that states, “Saskatchewan — No longer 

escaping a contraction.” 

 

They forgot to tell the people of Saskatchewan that they 

cherry-picked a couple positive statements about next year, but 

they forgot to tell the people that the economy‟s shrinking here 

in Saskatchewan, right now at this point in time — a decline in 

our economy, a decline. But I suppose you can‟t have your 

pompoms in the air, cheerleading and spinning, and talking 

about an economic decline that‟s going on under this 

government. 

 

And the Minister for Enterprise is over here yukking it up and 

laughing. And I know he‟s just made it back from Kazakhstan 

and what I have to say, Mr. Speaker, is that when we‟re talking 

about economic recession, we‟re talking about statistics, about 

wholesale trade or manufacturing trade or exports, Mr. Speaker, 

I think that it‟s that minister right there that needs to be in tune 

— maybe not travelling the world, Mr. Speaker, but right here, 

Mr. Speaker, and tending to the economy and putting forward a 

plan, Mr. Speaker. And I think that‟s important for that member 

to know. 

 

And I think it‟s important as well that the member who‟s 

looking here, Mr. Speaker, and he seems to now be engaged in 

debate, and I‟d urge him to understand this one as well, that 

housing starts, Mr. Speaker, have plummeted. They‟re down 56 

per cent in this province at this point in time, lower, Mr. 

Speaker. And you have to go back a long ways to see the kind 

of numbers — all the way back to 2002, Mr. Speaker. Now 

there was a lot of gains, Mr. Speaker, from 2002 to 2007 and 

2008, and to see the kind of depressive economic statistics that 

the Sask Party‟s presiding over is rather embarrassing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we challenge the government to put forward a plan that 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3371 

isn‟t simply built on crossing their fingers and their toes and 

thinking good thoughts. 

 

So it gets down to a question of trust, lack thereof; a question of 

competence, or in better words, incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 

Last year we had the Minister of Finance who was talking about 

his cautious estimates, Mr. Speaker. Caution, Mr. Speaker, as 

he talked about his budget. In fact the same Finance minister 

after tabling his error-filled budget drove down to Moose Jaw to 

speak with the chamber of commerce, Mr. Speaker. And from 

the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, from March 25, I quote, “If he is 

wrong he thinks it‟s probably a good wrong.” 

 

It goes on, Mr. Speaker. I quote: 

 

Gantefoer said if there is an error in the ministry‟s 

estimates, it would likely be due to a conservative 

underestimate regarding the upcoming economic year in 

Saskatchewan, so residents can rest easy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from the truth. Rest easy? 

Rest easy, folks, he says? And then we have the biggest, most 

historic miss on one revenue source in this province‟s history 

— well over $1 billion, Mr. Speaker — and he says, just trust 

us. Well, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t trust them nor do the people of 

Saskatchewan. They don‟t in Weyburn. They don‟t in Estevan. 

They don‟t in Carlyle. They don‟t in La Ronge. They don‟t in 

North Battleford. They certainly don‟t in Moose Jaw North. I 

know that for sure. 

 

So I think it‟s worthwhile to look at some of the other 

commentary that‟s going on because we have some good other 

discussion that‟s going on, the columnists of our papers. And I 

quote Bruce Johnstone of the Leader-Post on September 5, 

2009. I quote, 

 

. . . I find the provincial economy has gone to hell in a 

handcart. 

 

Not only that, but the province‟s fiscal situation has 

deteriorated dramatically . . . 

 

So what happened to our formerly rosy economic outlook? 

 

What happened, Mr. Speaker, is mismanagement. What 

happened, Mr. Speaker, was broken down processes. What 

happened, Mr. Speaker, was a denial of the facts and going on a 

gut feeling. Or, Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve said before, forging ahead 

knowing that you had an unrealistic number because, Mr. 

Speaker, it seems unique, it seems odd, that the only number 

that‟s unique to Saskatchewan — that being potash revenues — 

is the number that this government misses so terribly. Either 

they didn‟t have the competence to get it right or, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s the only that they could fudge in their books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What are other commentaries saying, Mr. Speaker? Well we 

can go on. And Murray Mandryk of the Leader-Post on August 

26 says . . . and the article is titled “Gov‟t made Devine error.”  

 

[Inaudible interjection] . . . And the member from Moose Jaw 

North says that Mandryk doesn‟t say anything worth repeating, 

Mr. Speaker. And sometimes we don‟t always agree with Mr. 

Mandryk, Mr. Speaker. But I‟ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll 

tell you this, Mr. Speaker: we believe the freedom of the press 

and the role of the press, Mr. Speaker. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? On this occasion I truly, truly, truly believe in the 

words of Mr. Mandryk who says that the government made a 

Devine error. 

 

He goes on as well to say that “This happens to be the biggest 

government miscalculation since PC finance minister Gary 

Lane‟s 1986 budget,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Epic proportions, Mr. Speaker, we‟re seeing financial 

mismanagement in. He goes on and gives the rational 

discussion as far as why the Sask Party — and he calls it 

“idiotic spin” — why they seem to purport that no one saw this 

coming. And he talks about all the different facts that were 

available to this government, specifically a five-year average 

that excludes the anomalous year of 2008 that saw potash 

revenues at $259 million, Mr. Speaker — $259 million. This is 

a five-year trend average, excluding the anomalous year of 

2008. 

 

Well what does this government go out and choose as a 

number, Mr. Speaker? Not twice that 500 million; not three 

times that; not four times that. They picked $2 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. Where are we going? Higher. Where are we going, 

Mr. Speaker? Less rational. Where are we going? More 

mismanagement. That‟s what we‟re getting with the Sask Party, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the facts were in front of this government. That article goes 

on and explains that if Mr. . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — That article, Mr. Speaker, goes on to 

highlight that basically if this government wants to not be 

compared to that government of Grant Devine, then they better 

quit acting just like that same government as it relates to their 

finances. 

 

I think it gets down that question again that people across this 

province are asking in constituencies such as Melfort and 

Canora and Estevan and Swift Current. They‟re asking a 

question of trust and competence. . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . And the Minister of Education who had to cut $30 million 

of children‟s infrastructure shouts across that, no, people in 

Canora don‟t care about financial mismanagement. He suggests 

somehow that people in Canora are okay with financial 

mismanagement. 

 

And I challenge that minister, I challenge that minister, Mr. 

Speaker, that they have a huge problem, Mr. Speaker, with a 

government, a government creating a structural deficit at a time 

where things are strong within this province, or have been 

strong within this province, Mr. Speaker. And they‟re 

concerned at how a government can so poorly, poorly estimate 

its revenues. 

 

Never, never, Mr. Speaker, has a government missed one 

revenue source, such as potash, by over a billion dollars — let 



3372 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

alone a billion three, a billion four, a billion five. Wherever the 

dust settles, we‟re not certain on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we witness mismanagement. We witness a lack of 

transparency and accountability. It becomes a question of a lack 

of trust that Saskatchewan people are sharing and 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. Sask Party policies are failing our 

economy, Mr. Speaker. And I think that it‟s important for me to 

share some of the economic statistics with the members 

opposite, to make sure they understand what in fact they‟re 

leading here, Mr. Speaker, and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. There‟s been a 

couple of conversations going on across the floor. I‟ll ask the 

members to carry them on behind the bar. The member from 

Regina Rosemont has the floor. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate 

the time for caution and quiet as well because the Minister of 

Enterprise should really listen in to a few of these numbers here 

right now. What we know right now is some economic 

statistics, is that we have 700 fewer jobs year over year  . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And the member from Moose Jaw 

North heckles me when I say that we‟ve lost jobs. Many of 

those and some of those are his constituents, and for him to 

disregard it in the blatant disregard that he does is completely 

irresponsible. And I can be certain that in 2011 those 

constituents will likely be sending him a message. 

 

And I can point to the loss of 3,700 full-time jobs year over 

year in this province. Mr. Speaker, 4,700 layoffs in 2009, not 

counting I guess, the newest 1,100. So we‟re up to 5,800, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that unemployment has risen, that EI 

[employment insurance] recipients have increased by 44 per 

cent year over year, Mr. Speaker. We know that there‟s been a 

142 per cent increase in employment insurance recipients under 

the age of 25, Mr. Speaker, a huge problem for youth 

employment. 

 

We know that there‟s been a decline of 6,000 youth employed 

in this province. Plummeting housing starts down by 56 per 

cent. Consumer spending is down dramatically. Retail sales are 

down. Wholesale trade is down 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

International trade — and I ask the Minister of Enterprise to 

listen — are down 30 per cent. Manufacturing trade, 33 per 

cent. Livestock receipts down 26 per cent. Crops 29 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker. We see failing economic statistic after economic 

statistic, and these are indicative of the policies of that 

government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A few other comments that have been made about this 

government, Mr. Speaker, I reference Neil Scott from the 

Leader-Post on September 5, 2009, titled “Recession begins to 

hammer Saskatchewan.” I quote, “The slowdown has now 

officially hit Saskatchewan.” Leader-Post of August 15th, titled 

“National sales up, Sask. sales down,” Mr. Speaker. “Virtually 

every sector is down,” says Doug Elliott of Sask Trends. I 

quote, “The decline in the first half of the year „is quite 

remarkable. . . ‟” The decline is quite remarkable. 

 

Another article from August 8th, Mr. Speaker, is that “Sask. job 

drop „worrisome,‟” Mr. Speaker. And I see a note here from my 

colleagues, Mr. Speaker, and they‟re saying I should wrap it up 

in the next few minutes here, Mr. Speaker. And certainly I will. 

But the fact is, Mr. Speaker, I could stand before you for likely 

a good hour sharing the negative economic statistics, Mr. 

Speaker. But what we have to recognize when we‟re talking 

about statistics is that the effect to the real families, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province. The circumstances has gotten a lot 

more difficult for people in this province under the Sask Party, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a couple last wrap-up comments, Mr. Speaker, I guess the 

comment would be, why would we expect anything different, 

Mr. Speaker? Because it all starts at the top, Mr. Speaker. It 

starts at the top. And at the top for the Sask Party government, 

that Premier is not occupied, Mr. Speaker, by somebody with 

experience or leadership that this province is well served by, 

Mr. Speaker. We have an individual who built his experience 

underneath Grant Devine and Brian Mulroney, Mr. Speaker. 

And certainly when you do that, Mr. Speaker, you‟d expect that 

you‟d see the same kind of practice back here when it relates to 

financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the Premier, at one point, received a whole bunch 

of government money — $150,000 — to open up a Hall of 

Fame, Mr. Speaker. He assured government, Mr. Speaker, that 

he‟d have 34,000 visitors a year, Mr. Speaker, and that they‟d 

be highly viable. What we saw, Mr. Speaker, is that they only 

had 2,500 people a year, Mr. Speaker, 2,500 people a year. And 

what we see, Mr. Speaker, is a very similar circumstance as it 

relates to our revenues and our finances, our potash revenues, 

and miscalculations, Mr. Speaker. So we don‟t have a leader, 

we don‟t have a Premier that is going to be able to provide the 

kind of economic leadership that we expect and deserve in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Throne Speech put forward by that government is focused 

on the past, Mr. Speaker. This opposition is focused on moving 

forward, and we‟re going to continue to raise those issues. The 

Throne Speech, the Throne Speech failed to address forestry, 

cattle, and hog producers. It didn‟t address a labour shortage. It 

shortchanged small business. It‟s failing our Crown 

corporations. It failed the most vulnerable in Saskatchewan. It 

failed students. It failed seniors. And it failed the First Nations 

and Métis of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So while that government focuses on looking back and 

back-patting and cheerleading and spinning, we‟re going to 

focus on the realities of Saskatchewan and putting forward 

constructive policies to ensure that our prosperity is achieved, 

Mr. Speaker, for all people. 

 

And at this point, Mr. Speaker, I guess I‟d just simply like to 

say that with the kind of fiscal mismanagement that we‟re 

witnessing under this government, with the kind of economic 

failure that we see as a result of Sask Party failures, Mr. 

Speaker, that I can say to you unequivocally, that there‟s not a 

chance that I could support the Throne Speech. And I‟m very 

honoured and pleased to support the motion put forward by our 

honourable leader. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3373 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, with that elation from my colleagues, I should 

probably stop now, but anyway I‟ll take it where it‟s coming 

from. I think I see the odd member applauding from the 

opposite way as well, and I certainly hope that they continue to 

applaud throughout the speech — especially the member from 

Regina Rosemont who I‟ll refer to a bit later. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a great pleasure to enter into this 

debate and to rise from my seat in the legislature. And I take 

this role very seriously because it‟s an honour and a privilege to 

serve, and I know each one of us feels that in this House. And 

we can only do it by thanking those that allow us to perform 

this function. And I want to begin by thanking my wife Trish 

and my family, my son Carter, my daughter Paige, and our 

family who enable me to do this job. 

 

Trish has faced some challenges health-wise, but she‟s 

overcome those challenges and now she continues to give back 

to the community. She‟s undertaking a role as a speaker and 

performing some charity work for organizations in Saskatoon 

and area, allowing her to tell her story. 

 

The kids: Carter‟s 11 years old in grade 7 at Cardinal Leger; 

Paige is in grade 4, nine years old. They‟re both involved in all 

kinds of sports and all kinds of activities and just loving life 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Other people that allow me to do this job: my great constituency 

assistant, Beth Epp in Saskatoon, does a tremendous job 

fielding questions from my constituents and from around 

Saskatoon from many of the members opposite. And she does a 

great job doing that. And also the staff in my ministerial office 

as well, they do a great job in allowing me to do this job. 

 

I want to congratulate the new members in the legislature, the 

member for Saskatoon Riversdale and the member for 

Saskatoon . . . Regina Douglas Park. No, Douglas Park isn‟t 

part of Saskatoon quite yet, but . . . No, it was great to see the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale and her family here in the 

legislature and undertake her maiden speech. And she did a 

very good job, and we look forward to having her make her 

contribution in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

It‟s great to see the member from Regina Douglas Park back. 

And, you know, as in true fashion, he took that 2,500 vote 

plurality that was there by the former member and reduced it 

down to 500. So, you know, we can see with a trajectory like 

that — and I know that members opposite, they like numbers 

and they like statistics — so we ran the statistics. We ran the 

numbers. 

 

Taking a plurality of 2,500 in Douglas Park down to 500, if 

they did that across, it would be that old thing, you know, for 

the NDP. Look to your left; look to your right. They‟re not 

going to be there anymore because you‟d only have five or six 

seats left if those votes translated across the province. And I 

suggest, I suggest . . . The member for Saskatoon Riversdale is 

smiling. Well she knows that she might still be here. But there 

might be 15 or 16 others on the other side that the seats will be 

over here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to rise and to talk 

about the Speech from the Throne. It‟s a great title — isn‟t it? 

— “Moving Forward” in Saskatchewan. Moving forward is the 

focus of the Speech from the Throne. It continues the 

commitment that this government has to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know that we‟re not immune from what‟s happening in 

world markets. We know that we‟re affected by it, but we also 

know that we were the last ones in, and we‟re going to be the 

first ones out. And there‟s many statistics to prove that. I know 

the member from Regina Rosemont was citing some statistics. I 

have many, many others that I‟d like to discuss in the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of representing Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, a great constituency, a constituency that‟s 

growing and flourishing. I have to thank the honourable 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, the Minister of 

Immigration, for the work that he‟s done because, Mr. Speaker, 

it wasn‟t long ago that I was campaigning in 2001 and 2002 and 

2003 for that 2003 election and what did we see? When I went 

down the street in Saskatoon Silver Springs, door after door, 

house after house, people said come on in. I want to tell you 

about my family. I want to tell you about my son and daughter 

that had to move to Calgary or Edmonton or Vancouver. I want 

to tell you about how much I want them back here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well I listened to those people. All of us listened to those types 

of people, and that‟s why we were able to win seats in 

Saskatoon. We were able to win seats in Regina in 2007. And 

now when we go and look at our constituencies, I can walk 

down the street, and I can talk to people that have come to 

Saskatchewan from Europe, from Asia. They have come here to 

make a new life, to start their business, to take their business 

that they‟ve started elsewhere to bring it to Saskatchewan, to 

talk about making a new life here in Saskatchewan under a 

government, under a new vision for our province, Mr. Speaker. 

And that‟s why we see such growth happening in areas. 

 

Willowgrove for example, the heart of my constituency, will 

have some 8,000 people before long. Before long, my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, the one that I have the honour of 

representing, will be twice the size of a regular constituency, 

twice the size that it was in 2003 because of that phenomenal 

economic growth and because of immigration policies and a 

government that isn‟t afraid to set targets, to set targets and to 

actually meet those targets. And that‟s what we‟re seeing with 

our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My constituents, they‟re not political in the elementary sense of 

the word. They just want a common sense government that 

actually gets things done, and that‟s what they‟re getting from 

the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My constituents are telling me that they‟re very pleased with 

what we have accomplished so far. They know, they‟ve read 

closely that the document that we brought before them in the 



3374 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

last election, the promises that we made . . . Yes, we made over 

100 promises in that election, Mr. Speaker and we have kept 

every one, Mr. Speaker, every promise, every promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I know members opposite don‟t like 

to hear about it, but they‟re going to hear about it anyway 

because debt reduction affects everyone in Saskatchewan. It 

affects members that voted for them. It affects members that 

voted for us. We‟ve taken the debt from some $6.8 billion to 

$4.2 billion — a reduction of 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Speaking of reductions, reducing the tax rolls in the province by 

80,000 people, Mr. Speaker. Personal income tax reductions, 

that‟s what people wanted from the Saskatchewan Party 

government. That‟s what they‟re getting today, Mr. Speaker. 

My constituents are very pleased with the property tax 

reductions that have taken place, the largest property tax 

reductions that ever has taken place in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. They are very pleased with that. 

 

Members opposite had talked about the children‟s hospital, and 

that‟s something that we were committed to. That‟s something 

that members opposite talked about and talked about and talked 

about. We were the ones that actually made the announcement. 

We‟re the ones that are following through with the 

commitment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When the children‟s hospital and their board came to our 

government and said, let‟s get the government announcement 

out there so we can spur on the private sector, so more people 

can come forward and donate, Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly what 

has happened in Saskatoon and across Saskatchewan. And I 

want to thank people like John and Sonya Remai who have 

come forward and put their own hard worked dollars into that 

hospital; Les and Irene Dubé, Mr. Speaker, $6.5 million 

towards that contribution; the Harland Sanders Foundation and 

many, many others who I know will be making that 

contribution and doing their part to join with the government to 

join with the Saskatoon Health Region and the Children‟s 

Hospital Foundation in ensuring that not only do we have a 

children‟s hospital, but we have one of the best children‟s 

hospitals in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had numerous constituents call me since the 

Throne Speech to say that they are thrilled with the fact that 

we‟re finally going to address surgical wait times in 

Saskatchewan. They‟ve been waiting for a long time. Those 

long waiting lists have been there for most of the 16 years that 

the NDP was in place. Those waiting lists have grown and 

grown and grown, until they‟ve come to a crisis proportion. So 

finally somebody had to do something, and that‟s why our 

Minister of Health, in articulating it through the Speech from 

the Throne, has said that there will be a three-month wait within 

four years, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health should be 

congratulated for doing the work that I would suggest should 

have been done, that he wanted done, when the opposition was 

in government but they wouldn‟t touch it, Mr. Speaker. They 

wouldn‟t touch it at all because their political process of course 

got in the way of doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve spoken about other great things that this 

government has done. Twinning of the highway, Highway 11, 

we haven‟t talked about that for a while. That‟s happening, Mr. 

Speaker. Many of my constituents are very, very pleased to see 

that happen. $15.7 million for the vaccine centre at the 

University of Saskatchewan. And of course, the renovation and 

expansion of the Queen‟s Bench Court House, now I hope not 

many of my constituents will have to use that courthouse, but 

nevertheless it‟s infrastructure that we need and infrastructure 

that was long overdue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in speaking to constituents, whether it‟s at hockey 

rinks or grocery stores or at the soccer centre, there‟s one thing 

that people have told me. They said the Saskatchewan Party 

government, whether we agree with you or not, at least you‟ve 

had the fortitude to make decisions, instead of sitting on your 

hands. Yes, it‟s something that we have to congratulate our 

Premier and every one of my colleagues on, that decisions were 

made. Decisions were made in a responsible manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk again about the privilege of the 

responsibilities that I have in this legislature, and specifically 

I‟m responsible for Enterprise Saskatchewan, the Minister of 

Trade, the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, the 

Saskatchewan entertainment facility. Mr. Speaker, all of these 

are areas that I take great responsibility with. 

 

SaskEnergy for example is a Crown corporation that I‟ve had 

responsibility for since we‟ve become government. It‟s a Crown 

corporation that has provided Saskatchewan residents with gas 

rates that were the lowest in the country for seven of the last ten 

years, Mr. Speaker. Today it‟s not only the rate and the 

commodity that they provide, Mr. Speaker; it‟s their 

commitment to serving Saskatchewan residents. Today as we 

speak, there are 34 construction crews out across Saskatchewan 

servicing farmers who need gas for drying their grain, servicing 

new businesses, servicing some 450 communities, Mr. Speaker, 

with extra gas hook-ups and providing that service, and again 

doing it at the lowest possible cost, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s what a Crown corporation should do. That was our 

commitment to use the Crown corporations to provide that 

service, and again, Mr. Speaker, that‟s indeed what this 

Saskatchewan Party government has done. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

indeed what this Saskatchewan Party government has done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have connected more people in the last three 

years — some 15,000 new customers — than the entire decade 

that the Leader of the Opposition was in Alberta. So three years, 

15,000 new connections in 10 years . . . and I want to present 

this fact because it‟s a fact that the Leader of the Opposition 

should know because in 10 years, in living in another province 

and paying higher rates for most of that time than SaskEnergy 

was charging, that‟s a fact that he should know, and I‟m happy 

to provide it for him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing is SaskEnergy offers stable rates for 

Saskatchewan residents. They‟re an insured rate. They‟re a 

hedged rate if you like. So it doesn‟t have the variancies of the 

total market variance, and that‟s an important factor as we look 

into going forward in Saskatchewan and ensuring again that 

Saskatchewan residents have the lowest possible rate. Not only 

are they focusing on the rate, but they‟re looking at innovative 

expansions like the flare gas expansion. And the members 

opposite will know all about it because I know that they‟ve 

served as critics and have looked at this area, and it‟s something 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3375 

that‟s happening. 

 

Also the involvement in CO2 capture and transmission 

opportunities, working together with the Petroleum Technology 

Research Centre at the University of Regina is something that 

SaskEnergy is doing, Mr. Speaker. They‟re continuing the good 

work on hydrogen vehicles and gasoline vehicles and the dual 

vehicles that they‟re able to put forward. And, Mr. Speaker, 

SaskEnergy is taking its role as a leader in conservation very 

seriously. Some 52,000 customers participate in conservation 

programs, Mr. Speaker, one of the best records in the country 

bar none. And for that, I am very proud of the good people at 

SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about other areas of my 

responsibility. One of the areas is the new Saskatchewan 

entertainment facility that we‟re taking a serious look at. To 

date 100 organizations have met with officials and consultants 

in looking at the possibilities going forward of a new stadium in 

Saskatchewan. We have worked with the very best consultants. 

We really appreciate the partnership of the city of Regina, the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders, the federal government and the 

provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Right now the consultants are half-way through their work. 

They‟re looking at a facility about the size of 33,000 seats and 

can be expandable to 45 or 50,000 seats. And we know that it‟s 

something that the hon. members opposite have been provided 

with some information on, will be provided with more 

information. And we know that we have support from many of 

them as well. 

 

I think it‟s an important function that we all have to look at and 

see how we can move forward in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another area of responsibility that I have is STEP, the 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. And very recently 

I travelled to Kazakhstan and had an opportunity to interact 

with STEP officials and talk about Saskatchewan companies. I 

accompanied officials from Cameco and was able to meet with 

various ministers and articulate the good partnership that we 

have with Cameco here in Saskatchewan, and the good 

partnership that that company has around the world. 

 

They indeed set the example for how a partnership would work. 

They are partnered with the Crown corporation in Kazakhstan 

of Kazatomprom. And what they do is they take Canadian 

standards. They take standards that are very high and adopt 

them around the world. And for that, the Cameco and Inkai 

facility there is seen as a world leader. 

 

And people like Jerry Grandey and Tim Gitzel, people that are 

top-level executives in Saskatchewan here should be 

congratulated for the work they did. And it was indeed a 

pleasure to accompany them and to talk to the Kazakhstan 

government about the good work they‟re doing. 

 

Another area of responsibility I was able to exercise is 

accompanying 10 companies from Saskatchewan and going to 

one of the world‟s largest agriculture shows, the ag expo in 

Kazakhstan, and accompanying companies like Bourgault and 

Schulte and Doepker and Morris and Brandt and Degelman, and 

not only helping to present them to the world but to talk about 

the agreements that they are signing. And I know that Bourgault 

and Schulte and Brandt have signed those agreements. I helped 

participate in those agreements. And I congratulate those 

companies, and I wish the others well because I know some of 

them are still there and doing good work. 

 

The third area of my recent trip was university related. And we 

had Dr. Karen Chad and Dr. Peggy Schmeiser go and talk about 

the University of Saskatchewan and the partnerships that we 

could draw with the many Kazakhstan universities. So it was a 

good trip, and I look forward to informing members more fully 

on the trip that we had. 

 

And for that I want to congratulate Lionel LaBelle who heads 

up STEP and Mr. Tim Marshall who is indeed an expert in Asia 

and India relations for Saskatchewan and does tremendous 

work. So today I want all members to publicly thank the people 

that do the good work in the trade operations for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Enterprise and Minister 

Responsible for Trade, I‟m pleased to say that Saskatchewan is 

indeed moving forward. The Saskatchewan story is being told 

in many places, in many ways, in many markets around the 

world. It‟s being told in Canada. It‟s being told in Kazakhstan. 

It‟s being told around the world. 

 

However there is little doubt, absolutely, that we have been 

affected by what‟s happening around the world, Mr. Speaker. 

But since our early days as Canada‟s breadbasket — we indeed 

did feed the world at that time — we have been a province of 

exporters. And that hasn‟t changed. The only thing different 

now is that the products we offer and the enormous value that 

they hold. It‟s the diversity of markets that we connect to. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not mention 

today one of the greatest exporters in Saskatchewan today is 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And they are celebrating 

their 20th anniversary of becoming a publicly traded company 

in Saskatchewan. They‟ve taken a net capitalization of $1 

billion; they built it up to some $65 billion. It‟s retreated a bit 

into the 30, $40 billion range. But indeed people like Mr. Bill 

Doyle and Mr. Garth Moore and others, and the 15 to 1,600 

people that work in Saskatchewan every day have done a great 

job, and for that, Mr. Speaker, they should be congratulated. 

 

It was with great pride, I think, that we all . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Yes, you bet they deserve a hand. 

 

I think we all had great pride when we saw Mr. Mayo Schmidt 

in our legislature today, introduced by the Premier and 

introduced by the Leader of the Opposition and congratulated 

for taking the old Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, turning it into 

Viterra, and winning the prestigious award for the CEO of the 

Year in the entire country. So, Mr. Schmidt and the entire 

Viterra team, thank you very much for what you‟ve done for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that Saskatchewan has undergone a 



3376 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

remarkable period of growth and prosperity in the last couple of 

years in spite of the troubles around the world. This is what has 

made this province the active place that it is today. We‟ve 

overcome national and international trends. Our business and 

our people have worked hard to create a competitive and 

prosperous environment. It‟s a climate that shows that we can 

withstand economic challenges and we can rise above them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan is where we continue to have one of the top 

results of provinces with the topic of business optimism. I‟ll be 

meeting later today with the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business, and I know that we all look forward to 

their annual reports. But again, their latest report shows that 

Saskatchewan businesses have the optimism, have the greatest 

amount of optimism going forward, and that is largely because 

of the hard work that their members do in ensuring that that 

does happen. 

 

We‟ve been fortunate in Saskatchewan, not simply with what 

we have to work with — we are blessed with many resources 

— but what we chose to make of it. We are not meeting the 

global recession by treading water, by retreating into isolation, 

but we are maintaining the status quo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of all that, we are still setting employment 

records in our province, Mr. Speaker. Despite the effects of a 

global recession, Saskatchewan is entering into recovery with 

the lowest unemployment rate in the country and the fewest per 

capita EI recipients in the nation. 

 

Our population is growing. Mr. Speaker, for the communities of 

Meadow Lake and Martensville for achieving city status in the 

same year — the first time that that‟s happened since 1912 or 

1913 — it is indeed a great pleasure to see that happening. And 

I know members from all sides of the House will congratulate 

their communities on their growth, and we know that there‟s 

more to come as well, Mr. Speaker. We know that we will be 

welcoming other communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard various statistics bandied about in the 

legislature. One that I want to talk about certainly is capital 

investment in Saskatchewan. And that is one of the foremost 

statistics that people look to. Whether you‟re a banker, whether 

you‟re an economist, whether you‟re a university professor, 

whether you‟re a farmer, whether you‟re a business person, 

whether you‟re a student, you look at capital investment. And 

Saskatchewan has a record, Mr. Speaker, of some $14 billion, 

which is a substantial achievement. And we know that that‟s 

going to continue to improve. 

 

Foreign firms account for some 8 per cent of that, and that 

percentage is growing, Mr. Speaker. We can tell that the global 

mining sector, that mineral exploration in Saskatchewan has 

reached an all-time high this year. We were indeed the top 

mineral producing province in the country, bar none. And for 

that, the miners and the people in the industry should be 

congratulated in Saskatchewan. 

 

We possess almost a third of Canada‟s agricultural 

biotechnology industry. We have infrastructure. We have 

research and development. We have clusters. We have 

advanced technology. We have a competitive business 

environment, all supportive of innovation, growth, and 

expansion. And, Mr. Speaker, for that I want to thank the 

contribution of the Enterprise Saskatchewan board, a board of 

private sector individuals that meet on a monthly basis that 

advise this minister and advise this cabinet on how to reduce the 

barriers to growth in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the record speaks for itself. Those barriers 

are coming down, the Saskatchewan economy is growing, and 

indeed all Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, are benefiting 

from that. And for that I want to thank the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan board for all the work that they‟ve done. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan tracks many indicators in 

Saskatchewan‟s economy, and just very quickly I want to run 

through some of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the highest growth rate in real GDP [gross 

domestic product] — right here in Saskatchewan. The second 

highest employment growth rate — right here in Saskatchewan. 

The third largest percentage gain in population, Mr. Speaker — 

right here in Saskatchewan. The highest growth in personal 

disposable income, the second fastest growth in manufacturing, 

Mr. Speaker, all in one year — all in 2008. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite, they howl and with glib they say, oh well, maybe the 

2009 statistics aren‟t going to be quite as good. Well maybe 

they won‟t be, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you the people that 

are responsible behind the scenes, they value a government that 

will stick with them through thick and thin and ensure that they 

come out on top and that‟s indeed what will happen, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a government that not only talks about the 

good times, Mr. Speaker. When there‟s struggles out there, 

we‟re with those companies for sure, and we will be there for 

sure when they come out of this and continue to lead the 

country. So there will be no laughing. 

 

Members opposite beside me have reminded me about the 

reaction, what the NDP government did when the times were 

tough. What did they do? Did they consult? Did they come up 

with innovative ideas? No, Mr. Speaker. What did they do? 

They raised taxes each and every time. They raised the PST 

[provincial sales tax]. They raised corporate taxes, well 

whatever tax, you know — everybody can afford to pay a little 

more tax to the government. Mr. Speaker, you will not see that 

from a Saskatchewan Party government, that‟s for sure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the Enterprise Saskatchewan 

and the enterprise region program — taking 13 regions that are 

across the country and making sure that they are able to 

compete, not only with the community down the road, not any 

more, but compete around the world. And that‟s what the 

economy of Saskatchewan is all about, being able to be 

competitive. That‟s what the economic region program is doing 

and that‟s what it‟s doing very well. And it‟s building upon the 

REDA [regional economic development authority] program that 

members opposite put forward, and I would say it was a good 

foundation to build upon, but we‟re taking it to the next step. 

That‟s what needs to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have many, many other areas of that I‟d like to talk about: 

small-business loans in Saskatchewan, the 200 loan associations 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3377 

that rely on the volunteers across Saskatchewan and the work 

. . . They‟re the ones that are making this economy hum. 

They‟re the ones that are doing it. They‟re the ones that should 

get the congratulation, and they will from this government, Mr. 

Speaker, not from the nonsense offered by the members 

opposite. Mr. Speaker, it‟s indeed nonsense that they are 

offering and it is nowhere in the debate of the Speech from the 

Throne. 

 

What the Speech from the Throne really does when you 

summarize it all down, it articulates the vision of our Premier, a 

Premier who I think that members opposite can‟t argue is 

visionary, is somebody who is becoming a leader in this 

country. Not only in this country. I had the opportunity to 

accompany him to Washington, DC [District of Columbia] 

where some of the highest decision makers in the United States 

had an opportunity to hear from our Premier about his vision for 

our province. 

 

It‟s a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, as a minister, to travel across this 

country and hear from people in every province, boy we wish 

we had your Premier in our province. And I hear that whether I 

go west or I go east. I hear about the vision, about this young, 

dynamic Premier in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

indeed what the vision of this Throne Speech is all about. It 

talks about where we go from here. It talks about keeping those 

promises. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as we‟ve seen in the Speech from the Throne, 

it talks about making more promises and identifying them, not 

waiting for an election, as has happened with the NDP 

government. We‟re doing it now. We‟re doing what the people 

of Saskatchewan have wanted us to do. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

will keep doing that as long as the Saskatchewan people have 

confidence in us. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am pleased to vote in 

favour of the Throne Speech. I will certainly be voting against 

the amendment, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to working 

for the Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Being very close to the time of 

recess, if that‟s all right with the members, we will put this 

House in recess till 7 o‟clock tonight. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3343 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3343 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3343 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3343 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3344 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3344 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3344 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3344 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3344 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3344 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Assembly Elections 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3345 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3345 

 International Day of Climate Action 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3345 

 Paralympic School Week 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3346 

 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3346 

 Prince Albert High School Junior Girls Volleyball 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3346 

 Walk of Stars Recipient in Saskatoon 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3346 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Staffing in Health Care Facilities 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3347 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3347 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3347 

 Immunization for H1N1 Influenza 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3348 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3348 

 HealthLine Resources 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3348 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3348 

 Options to Expedite Surgical Procedures 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3349 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3349 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3349 

 Release of Information 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3350 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3351 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3351 

 Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Question of Privilege 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3352 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3352 

 

 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3353 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3355 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3360 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3364 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3366 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3373 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


