




















































Hansard: March 11, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 31A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 11, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2209 

 March 11, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two gentlemen sitting in your gallery, Mr. Terry 

Nylander and Mr. Trevor Park. I just had a very productive 

meeting with these two gentlemen. They’re members of the 

Blue Goose Energy Corporation that are looking at setting up 

shop here in Saskatchewan, and we are very, very supportive of 

that. So I would ask all members of the Assembly to please 

welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce to you and through to the members of 

the Assembly, three guests that are seated in your gallery. They 

are Mr. Jamie Bresciani. He is the principal of Miller High 

School in Regina. He’s accompanied by his mother, Mrs. 

Dorothy Bresciani, and by his son, Mitchell Bresciani, who is a 

student at LeBoldus High. And if they could just stand to be 

recognized by the members. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the legislature, 11 

students from Discovery Learning Foundation in Regina 

Lakeview along with their teacher, Mr. Wayne Medwid, and I 

ask all members to greet them here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to members of the House, I’m 

very pleased to introduce a gentleman in your gallery, Allan 

Atsu who is visiting us today from Moose Jaw. Allan taught 

instrumentation at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] Palliser Campus in Moose Jaw. I’m 

very pleased that he could join us this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce a 

long-time friend, a former defence partner, a great hockey 

player, Dennis Ulmer who now is working in Regina; I believe 

with Investors Group. 

 

But for many, many years most of his career, teaching career, 

was in Notre Dame, and certainly had probably an influence on 

a number of the hockey players that went through Notre Dame. 

It’s pretty well renowned as a hockey builder, as a player 

builder for the NHL [National Hockey League]. And Dennis, I 

know, has probably had a pretty instrumental part in many of 

those careers, along with his two sons who have also had a 

pretty good career. I know his one son was able to play the last 

few games with Wayne Gretzky when he was with the New 

York Rangers. So I’d like all members to welcome Dennis to 

the Assembly today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know these 

workers provide valuable services for some of the most 

vulnerable members of our society, including people living with 

mental and intellectual disability, women and children in crisis. 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And these petitioners come from various communities through 

Saskatchewan including Indian Head, Melville, Raymore, 

Grenfell, Wolseley, Lestock, Cupar, and Windthorst. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to present a petition today in support of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital. The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, note that 

the existing nearly 100-year-old structure is in much need of 

replacement, and they ask the Legislative Assembly to: 

 

. . . call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to 

immediately recommit funds and resources for the 

continued development and construction of a new 

Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and provide the 

Prairie North Regional Health Authority with the authority 

necessary to complete this essential and much-needed 



2210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners all hail from the community of The 

Battlefords. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and present a petition once again in support of the 

expansion of the graduate retention program here in the 

province. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition, some are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan, from the 

University of Regina, as well as a number of health care 

professionals practising in the province who hold graduate 

degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 

that supports minimum wage earners that are struggling with 

the cost of living. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing the Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Estevan, Mr. 

Speaker. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to present a petition on behalf of the residents of Duck Lake 

who are looking for assistance from this government with 

respect to having affordable, quality drinking water. And the 

prayer reads as such: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfill its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

They humbly pray. 

 

And I so present on behalf of the good residents of Duck Lake. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Regina Educator Named Outstanding Principal 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to recognize Mr. 

Jamie Bresciani, the principal of Miller High School in the 

constituency of Regina Douglas Park, for being selected as one 

of Canada’s outstanding principals for 2009. 

 

Mr. Bresciani is one of 31 principals being recognized this year 

by The Learning Partnership, Champions of Public Education 

Across Canada. The nominees are judged on characteristics of 

outstanding principals, partnerships with parents and 

community, and a change initiated by the principal that resulted 

in higher student achievement. 

 

Mr. Bresciani has worked to bring teaching strategies into the 

Regina separate school system to identify different types of 

learners in a classroom, and then matched lesson plans with 

how they learn. 

 

His nominator describes him as a humble man who is a strong 

academic leader and has a great personality. Mr. Bresciani also 

relates well to his students and is a strong committee leader 

within the Regina separate school system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is fortunate that we have 

outstanding educators like Jamie Bresciani to ensure excellent 

learning opportunities for young people in our education 

system. Please join me in congratulating Mr. Bresciani for his 

achievement, and to recognize him for his contribution to 

quality education. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Youth for Christ Banquet 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Monday night at 

TCU Place in Saskatoon, I had the honour to attend the Youth 

for Christ banquet and appreciation supper. The theme of the 

evening was Hope and Potential in Every Young Person. Every 

young person, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Youth for Christ operates mainly in inner-city neighbourhoods. 

The different programs offered by Youth for Christ were 

highlighted throughout the evening, along with many powerful 

stories and testimonies from youth involved with or affected by 

the staff and volunteers, being the hands and feet, and showing 

the love of Jesus Christ. 

 

Project Serve takes youth on missions around the globe. The 

Zone is a youth centre in Hague. The Edge, a summer skate 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2211 

camp. Disorganized Sports and Gymblast takes activities and 

sport to communities and schools, along with a positive 

message of Christian faith, and to discover ways to serve others. 

 

The evening wound up with Dallas Pelly, a young Aboriginal 

man, telling his story of how this organization has helped him 

overcome his past and become a strong role model and leader 

for his people. 

 

And finally, my seatmate and friend, the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest, as the keynote speaker, shared his story 

to the capacity crowd of how the acts of a few people in his life 

showed him he had hope and potential. And his very powerful 

message that all young people, even those surrounded by 

prostitution, drugs, violence, and thoughts of suicide, have that 

same hope and potential. 

 

Congratulations to Youth for Christ in a successful event, and 

many more to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Regional Health Authority Volunteer and Spiritual Services 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

acknowledge and commend the work of the Prairie North 

Regional Health Authority’s volunteer and spiritual services 

department, its coordinator, Darlene Kingwell, and two 

individuals, Brian Arcand and Ray Fox, who have been named 

and are now acting as volunteer Aboriginal chaplains within the 

region. 

 

According to Kingwell, Prairie North believes that attention to a 

person’s spirituality has a significant impact on his or her health 

and healing during times of illness. Client-centred care 

embraces the physical, emotional, social, and spiritual needs. 

 

Ray Fox is well known as a justice worker, a city councillor, 

and most recently The Battlefords Citizen of the Year. Brian 

Arcand is a former police officer and, more recently, an 

ordained minister. 

 

Fox says Aboriginal patients appreciate being able to talk to 

someone in their own language, especially in matters of faith. 

The two volunteers visit health facilities in The Battlefords, and 

also the Battlefords Correctional Centre and the North 

Battleford Youth Centre in the same capacity. I ask all members 

of the Assembly to join me today in commending these 

individuals and this program for their caring and valuable 

contributions to patients and families across the northwest part 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Agricultural Safety Week 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, March 

11 to 17 has been proclaimed Agricultural Safety Week here in 

Saskatchewan, and is being held in conjunction with Canadian 

Agricultural Safety Week. It’s during this time that we are 

reminded of the necessity of following safe farm practices. On 

average there are 113 Canadians killed and 1,500 hospitalized 

in farm-related accidents each year, according to the Canadian 

agricultural injury surveillance program. 

 

Saskatchewan Agriculture provides funding to the Canadian 

Centre for Health and Safety in Agriculture to deliver safety 

initiatives and services for farm and ranch families. More than 

165 of the province’s rural municipalities also contribute to 

these projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to improving all 

aspects of agriculture and rural life in our province. As recent as 

today at the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] convention in Saskatoon, the Premier 

announced a number of new and enhanced programs for rural 

residents, including a reinstated farmyard line relocation 

program. SaskPower is also introducing initiatives for rural 

residents to help reduce the risk of power line contacts and 

improve productivity in farming operations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and this government realize the 

contribution of farmers and ranchers. While this week is 

recognized as Agricultural Safety Week, it is important that 

emphasis be put on safety during the busy spring season, and 

that’s coming and hopefully coming soon. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Recognition of First Responders 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in February, 25 students from the community of 

Moose Jaw were involved in a bus accident. The children were 

between the ages of 4 and 17. But, Mr. Speaker, there is no 

need to worry because it was a mock bus accident, and the 

students were there to act out a variety of injuries that may be 

seen in an actual crash. All this was for first responders, an 

extension of emergency medical service, and for them to gain 

knowledge and confidence to handle situations that may be 

presented to them. 

 

First responders are called and immediately fly into action. 

Their duties are to attend to victims, in many cases before an 

ambulance can arrive, and often they stay with the families 

after. They do what they have to do and then they return to 

being anonymous. 

 

Training to become a first responder involves 40 hours of 

classroom study and a prior certification in CPR 

[cardiopulmonary resuscitation]. People interested in becoming 

a first responder can access information from their local EMS 

[emergency medical services]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was the ninth annual conference that was held 

in Moose Jaw and it will be held again next year in Moose Jaw, 

where there will be special events to mark their 10th 

anniversary. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 



2212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

congratulating and thanking these individuals and coordinators 

who serve our communities as first responders. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Red Cross Month 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March is Red 

Cross Month, and I would like to take this opportunity to 

recognize those who have helped make this an internationally 

well-regarded organization. 

 

Founded in 1896 as an affiliate of the British Red Cross society, 

the Canadian Red Cross society is one of 186 national Red 

Cross and Red Crescent societies around the world. In May the 

Canadian Red Cross will celebrate its official centennial as the 

anniversary of its establishment as a fully Canadian 

organization. 

 

Over the last century the Red Cross has been there to lend a 

helping hand to those who have fallen on hard times due to 

disaster. As well as providing training services in areas such as 

first aid, many people have also benefited from the work of the 

Red Cross in their efforts to reduce drowning deaths in Canada 

through their water safety services. Through these measures and 

many more, the Canadian Red Cross touches the lives of many 

Canadians. 

 

Through more than 6,800 employees and over 63,000 

volunteers, the Canadian Red Cross continues to make a 

difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 

thanking the Canadian Red Cross for their amazing dedication, 

their dedicated workers, for over 100 years of service serving 

Canadians here and people abroad. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Scott Blues win City Basketball Championship 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday night I 

had the thrill of being on hand at the University of Regina to 

cheer on Coach Corey Matthews and the Scott Blues as they 

won their second straight city championship. That makes it four 

trips to the city finals in the past five years and a total of three 

city championships in that period. I know I speak for everybody 

at Scott and in the neighbourhood of north central Regina by 

saying, way to go, Blues; we are all very proud of you. 

 

The game saw the Scott Blues win the Regina Intercollegiate 

Basketball League junior boys’ small school title with a 77 to 

53 win over the Martin Monarchs. Coach Ian McKillop and the 

Monarchs put up a valiant effort. Their local MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly], the member for Rosemont, was 

there to cheer them on and recovered from the defeat just in 

time to help present the medals and the trophy after the game. 

 

Back to the Blues, Mr. Speaker. I want to highlight the play of 

high scorers Jordan Allary with 23 points and Jordan Cassie 

with 16, but it really was an all-round team effort that carried 

the day. I think of the hard work of Daynen McKay or the 

spirited play of five-foot-oh point guard, Jarred Mosquito. We 

are all very proud of you. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a sincere thank you very 

much to Coach Corey Matthews. Whether with the Blues, the 

North Central Lakers, or Team Saskatchewan for the North 

American Indigenous Games, Coach Matthews makes a 

tremendous difference in the lives of many young people, 

particularly First Nations and Métis young men in north central 

Regina. Corey Matthews is a champion, Mr. Speaker, but even 

better than that, he shows the way forward so that so many 

others might share in the victory as well. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Infrastructure Funding 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in his welcoming address to delegates at the SARM 

convention, Dave Marit said infrastructure in rural 

Saskatchewan is in a state of crisis. Mr. Marit is calling on this 

government to step up to the plate and provide rural 

municipalities with an additional $95 million for infrastructure. 

To the minister: will he agree that there is a state of crisis in 

rural Saskatchewan, and can rural municipalities expect an 

additional 95 million for infrastructure in the upcoming budget 

in addition to revenue sharing? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is 

indeed, as the member says, a crisis in rural infrastructure, and 

she knows it very well. Actually she and her government stood 

guard while it happened. Mr. Speaker, for 16 years the members 

of the former government ignored the urgent needs of 

Saskatchewan’s municipalities with respect to infrastructure. 

Even worse, they clawed back two-thirds of a billion dollars in 

provincial funding that was intended to enable municipalities to 

address those infrastructure needs. Shameful, Mr. Speaker, 

shameful. 

 

The NDP [New Democratic Party] created the infrastructure 

problem we see all over the province. That is why we delivered 

$100 million in infrastructure funding unconditionally . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2213 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That is 

why we delivered $100 million in infrastructure funding to 

Saskatchewan’s communities. That is why we announced a new 

program to cover the entire cost of municipal borrowing for 

infrastructure projects. And that is why we have worked hard 

with our federal government colleagues to make sure that the 

Building Canada fund dollars for local infrastructure projects 

come to Saskatchewan communities. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

turned their backs on Saskatchewan’s municipalities . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the president of SARM 

was clear that there is an infrastructure crisis in rural 

Saskatchewan, and as SARM President Dave Marit points out, 

fixing roads and bridges is essential to the future growth of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, rural municipalities need more than a 

renewed gopher control rebate program. To the minister: is this 

government prepared to provide rural . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member has the right to place her 

question without interference. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow can place a question. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To the 

minister: is this government prepared to provide rural 

municipalities with an addition 95 million in infrastructure 

money which is so essential to the growth and future growth of 

the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a delightful thing 

indeed when we see the members of the opposition expressing 

sincere interest in the interests of rural Saskatchewan, 

something they ignored for 16 years in a row. Where were they 

all those years? What were they thinking? They abandoned 

municipalities, both rural and urban. 

 

We’ve actually turned everything around 180 degrees. That’s 

why we’re coming forward with $100 million in unconditional 

infrastructure. That’s why we’re coming forward with all of 

these other programs, working with our colleagues in the 

federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they abandoned municipalities all over 

Saskatchewan. We’re doing exactly the opposite — we’re 

looking after their needs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the 

Saskatchewan Party will not be providing rural municipalities 

with the additional 95 million they need to address the rural 

crisis. The minister danced all around the question. 

 

To the minister: since the Sask Party will not provide rural 

municipalities with an additional 95 million that they so 

desperately need, can rural municipalities expect permanent, 

long-term property tax relief in this budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another 

issue with a long and sad history indeed. This isn’t something 

that’s brand new. This has been something that’s been hanging 

over the heads of municipalities for 16 years. I know that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — As a former city councillor right 

here in the city of Regina, I know fully well that the folks on the 

opposite side of the House when they were in government, 

when they had a chance, abandoned, they turned their backs on 

municipalities. 

 

Two-thirds of a billion dollars. The member who asked this 

question actually personally voted to withdraw nearly $20 

million from her own community. Moose Jaw could have used 

the $20 million for safe, clean drinking water. Moose Jaw could 

have used that money for roads and street repairs. They didn’t 

get it because it was denied by that member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Effect of Economic Situation on Pension Plans 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, in 2002 Allan Atsu of Moose 

Jaw was diagnosed with occupational asthma. In 2004 he was 

forced to leave his job as a program administrator and teacher, 

and he has been receiving workers’ compensation ever since. In 

accordance with The Workers’ Compensation Act, Mr. Atsu 

will soon be forced to retire and to access a pension that has 

been devastated by global recession. 

 

My question is to the Minister Responsible for the WCB 

[Workers’ Compensation Board]. What is he prepared to do for 

people like Mr. Atsu who are forced to draw on pensions that 

have been so greatly affected by an economic crisis? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously it wouldn’t be 

appropriate to get into specific cases regarding the WCB. I can 

say that as part of our due diligence, obviously we’re keeping 

an eye on the funds relating to the WCB. And it’s something 

we’re very attentive to, especially in these uncertain times. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



2214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member responsible for 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s platitudes are 

little comfort to the people that have their pensions destroyed 

by a global recession. Mr. Atsu estimates that he lost more than 

70,000 during the economic crisis, and he will soon be forced to 

absorb those losses because of his forced retirement. The 

minister and his officials have now received nearly half a dozen 

letters from Mr. Atsu imploring them to defer retirement so that 

his pension has time to recover. 

 

To the minister: is he prepared to step up to the plate and 

protect Mr. Atsu and many other Saskatchewan people who are 

being robbed of tens of thousands of dollars? And what is he 

doing, what is he doing, what is that minister doing to save their 

pensions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously it’s with great 

empathy that we’re looking at a number of funds right across 

Canada fluctuate in these times of uncertainty. What we can 

say, Mr. Speaker, again without going into any specific cases 

which wouldn’t be appropriate in this setting, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re attentive to these fluctuations and obviously we continue 

to monitor the WCB. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, he’s been looking. What we 

want is solutions. People want solutions. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Atsu isn’t the only one in this situation. Others across the 

province will be forced to retire and absorb massive pension 

losses. 

 

The men and women who have worked to make our province 

the finest in Canada are watching their qualities of life erode 

along with their pensions. And the minister, as we just heard, 

has offered nothing but form letters and rhetoric. He’s looking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Allan Atsu didn’t invest his money personally, but 

he is the one being forced to suffer the consequences now that 

it’s gone. 

 

To the minister: is he finished with looking, with his empty 

words for pensioners of Saskatchewan? Will he commit today 

to do something for those like Mr. Atsu, those forced, Mr. 

Speaker, to deal with the realities of the global financial 

meltdown? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn’t be 

appropriate to comment in individual cases. It’s something that 

we’re attentive to, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something that is being 

experienced right around the world. Obviously, it’s with a great 

degree of empathy, Mr. Speaker. What we can say in Canada is 

we’re fortunate to have a system like WCB that helps as many 

people as it does. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskWater Services 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

SaskWater needs to remain financially healthy if it’s going to 

be able to provide safe, clean, and affordable water for 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Industrial clients currently represent some two-thirds of 

SaskWater’s total water sales volumes. The Meyers Norris 

Penny report that was done for SaskWater and referred to 

yesterday recommends that SaskWater should “. . . focus the 

majority of its efforts on the industrial market to seize industrial 

opportunities, and improve overall financial viability.” 

 

Then an analysis prepared for SaskWater states that “A decision 

to remove [I’ll say it again — a decision to remove] new 

industrial projects from SaskWater’s mandate will have major 

negative consequences for the corporation.”  

 

To the minister: will he allow SaskWater to find the new 

revenue streams it needs to remain financially healthy and 

viable so it can provide communities with safe, affordable 

water? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 

question to the hon. member. The money that SaskWater is 

going to need going forward is going to be substantial. The 

concern here is on the residential side. The industrial side, there 

is options available for companies and businesses. SaskWater 

provides some of those; also they’re provided by the private 

sector. 

 

On the residential side — and I believe this is where SaskWater 

has to focus going forward — we had a discussion about this at 

SARM this morning, and many, many communities are 

concerned and challenging their government to look further on 

the residential side. We are reviewing the Meyers Norris Penny 

report. We are looking at how SaskWater can provide those 

services to communities across Saskatchewan. I can tell you it’s 

a concern for each and every community, and it’s a concern for 

this minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2215 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if you lop off two-thirds of 

the potential of any corporation, it’s clearly heading for trouble. 

They’re about privatization, that’s what they are. The minister 

says he’s reviewing Meyers Norris Penny report and suggests 

he’s not yet made up his mind, but the truth is, we know he has. 

 

[14:00] 

 

In private meetings, for example on January 15 of this year, 

representatives of CEP [Communications, Energy and 

Paperworkers Union of Canada] met with the minister. Minutes 

of that meeting are available online, Mr. Speaker, and they 

reveal that when asked about the future of SaskWater, the 

minister responded saying, “Change is always difficult and 

disconcerting.” 

 

Well SaskWater’s Moose Jaw head office staff and its 

employees, totalling over 90 around the province, are really 

wondering, Mr. Speaker. They want the minister to explain 

what he meant. What change did he believe that the SaskWater 

90-plus employees would find difficult and disconcerting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, changes are a 

reality. SaskWater is a modest corporation in our province 

that’s facing a very huge challenge going forward — a huge 

one, and a growing challenge. We are going to be looking at 

SaskWater and seeing how it can best change, if necessary, or 

develop in a way to address the needs of the largest portion of 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

It’s something that needs to be done; it’s something that 

probably should have been done years ago, Mr. Speaker, but it 

needs to be done. And this government will do, as we do in all 

Crown corporations, look at the responsible way of doing it, 

and provide a road map to do that. That’s our commitment to 

Saskatchewan people. If that involves some change, we know 

that members opposite, they haven’t changed much in 16, 17 

years. They don’t like change. This government is not afraid of 

change. They will do it in a compassionate way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an analysis of 

Saskatchewan’s role in industrial water infrastructure projects. 

And it suggests that one of the outcomes of a decision to 

remove new industrial projects from the mandate of SaskWater, 

and the analysis states, and listen up, “Substantial layoffs would 

take place from the corporation’s existing staff complement.” 

 

Big joke, Mr. Speaker. “Substantial layoffs would take place 

from the corporation’s existing staff complement.” 

 

To the minister: is this the change he thought SaskWater staff 

would find difficult and disconcerting? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, what we’re looking 

at with SaskWater is taking on additional responsibilities, 

certainly on the residential side where communities are saying 

they need it the most. On the commercial side, on the industrial 

side, there are other options available for companies going 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

SaskWater is tasked at doing their work in a commercially 

responsible manner. They’ve done so, tried to be a break-even. 

They’ve lost some money over the last period of time. What the 

Meyers Norris Penny says, if you increase the industrial side, 

you may be able to break even. 

 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, is what do we do with the 

communities going forward that want safe, reliable water. We 

want to provide them as much option as is possible. If that 

means some changes for the mandate for SaskWater, that’s 

what we will undertake to do to provide that service — service 

that wasn’t provided by the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Why is this such a 

difficult issue for the government and the minister? Industrial 

customers already represent two-thirds of SaskWater’s 

customers, and these customers are obviously seeing the benefit 

of utilizing SaskWater’s services. 

 

The analysis of SaskWater’s role in industrial water 

infrastructure projects explains the many benefits for industry in 

using SaskWater’s services including “Having the province’s 

Crown water utility involved in industrial projects provides a 

regulatory, competitive advantage for Saskatchewan.” 

 

To the minister: why is he so determined to make this so 

difficult? Why is he so blind to the potential contribution 

SaskWater could make to creating jobs and creating economic 

activity throughout Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it’s all about 

priorities and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s all about priorities. And clearly the priority going 

forward for SaskWater is the responsibility on the residential 



2216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

side. On the industrial side, there are private options, there are 

public options available, Mr. Speaker, and that is something 

that is available. The capital needs for SaskWater are going to 

be enormous. We have to make a decision whether we focus on 

one priority or the other right now. 

 

And I can tell you, and if members were at SARM this morning 

— I’m not sure any of them were — they would have heard 

very clearly from communities across this province that that’s 

the direction that they wanted. That’s the direction they were 

giving me: make sure that communities have safe, reliable 

water. That’s what this minister will be doing, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what this government will be doing, and it’s the right 

thing to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Proposed Enhanced Driver’s Licence 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Privacy 

Commissioner continues to raise concerns about this 

government’s move to create an enhanced identity document. 

Today on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news, the 

Privacy Commissioner listed his three main concerns with the 

identity document which were: how is Saskatchewan going to 

protect the information gathered; how to ensure that those who 

apply for this program are given free and informed consent and 

understand the risk involved; and three, they contain radio 

frequency identification tags that were designed for tracking 

merchandise in warehouses, not the movements of people. 

 

Along with these concerns, we know that these cards are going 

to cost between $50 and $80. SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] said they will cost no more than $50 to a person who 

receives one. This means the government is subsidizing the 

balance. Can the minister assure this House the people of 

Saskatchewan will not be suffering a rate increase, an SGI rate 

increase, as a result of their decision to adopt these cards? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated in 

the House yesterday, we’re looking at best practices models 

across Canada for how to go forward with an enhanced driver’s 

licence. Our prime concern is providing that service to 

Saskatchewan people. Our message to Saskatchewan residents 

— to families and to children and to moms and dads — is get a 

passport in our province. That’ll enable you to have border 

crossings by land, by air, and into other countries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’re doing is we’re discussing things with the Manitoba 

government, with the Alberta government. We’re looking at 

best practices. Manitoba has gone forward and hired individuals 

already. Alberta has decided that their driver’s licence is 

sophisticated enough that they don’t have to do any changes 

going forward, and they’re going to try to negotiate on a 

bilateral basis with the Department of Homeland Security.  

We’re trying to do it in a cost-effective way that will be 

responsible, that it’ll be up to the individuals to choose whether 

they want this particular identification . . .  

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker. Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the 

Privacy Commissioner went on to say that Alberta has already 

dropped their plan to implement the program in that province. 

This morning the Privacy Commissioner re-stated what the 

Alberta minister of government services said last fall. These 

driver’s licences simply have, “Too much cost, for too little 

benefit.” 

 

Clearly this issue has not been well thought out in 

Saskatchewan. There are significant technological concerns. 

There has been no privacy impact assessment done by this 

government even after they said they would do one. And this 

legislation is the worst in Canada. In fact, when asked if he 

would be getting an enhanced driver’s licence, the Privacy 

Commissioner said, “I’m certainly not going to apply for one.” 

 

We all know how much the Saskatchewan Party loves to 

emulate their big brothers in Alberta. To the minister: will they 

follow Alberta’s lead, their best practice, and drop this 

program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, as with many other 

things, for 16 years the NDP government did no changes, no 

changes whatsoever to the driver’s licence. I think members 

will agree we have a very modest licence in Saskatchewan. It’s 

a two-piece paper licence. Alberta made the decision to go with 

the more complicated, more sophisticated licence and they’ve 

agreed to try to convince the Department of Homeland Security 

that that is sufficient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind members opposite what’s happing next 

door in Manitoba . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be 

political on this matter, but I did, I did speak to the minister in 

Manitoba, Mr. Chomiak, and he said that they are going 

forward with . . . They’ve hired 50 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not above working together with different 

governments. We look across the country, look at their best 

practices and enact those. We’ve received . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The enhanced 

driver licence program needs to be scrapped. But the problem is 

bigger than that, Mr. Speaker. The other part of this Bill is the 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2217 

one that deals with volunteer firefighters who are promised 

green flashing safety lights for their vehicles by this 

government. The government even had a photo op in the 

rotunda of this legislature of the green flashing light. But 

because this government has incompetently rolled the 

provisions of this Bill that contain changes to the driver’s 

licence, the whole Bill is now in jeopardy. 

 

To the minister who tabled this Bill: will he commit to tabling 

amendments to this legislation to drop the enhanced driver’s 

licence component so that the rest of the Bill can be saved for 

the sake of our volunteer firefighters? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the voluntary 

firefighters . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

volunteer firefighters initiative presented by this government 

was well received across the province. And we continue to want 

to move that portion of the legislation forward as quickly as 

possible. With the hon. members’ concurrence, we will see to 

do that as soon as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] minister clearly gave the 

impression to this House that he had discussed the issue of 

enhanced driver’s licences with the minister responsible from 

Alberta as recently as last week. I quote from yesterday’s 

Hansard, page 2199: 

 

Every province in Canada right now is looking at how 

they can comply with that. As recently as last week, I 

chatted with the minister responsible from the province of 

Manitoba and the minister responsible from the province 

of Alberta. We’re looking at best practices . . . [on] how to 

do that. 

 

But this could not be the case, Mr. Speaker. On October 27, 

2008 last year, there’s a quote by the Minister of Service 

Alberta, Ms. Klimchuk, on the page 1539 of the Alberta 

Hansard where she informs the Alberta legislature that the 

Alberta government is not proceeding with this plan. 

 

To the minister: why did he tell this House that he consulted 

with the Alberta minister last week, when he clearly had no 

knowledge of the Alberta situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — It’s funny sometimes, Mr. 

Speaker. Sometimes the answers come before the questions are 

asked. I can refer to my earlier answer, that I talked to the 

minister from Alberta, and she said that they are not going to 

proceed with the enhanced driver’s licence, but they’re going to 

use the card that they have that is sophisticated. They’re 

concerned about the Department of Homeland Security 

regulations and the changing criteria, as are we. Every province 

is, every province is looking at it a little differently because the 

way things are moving forward. 

 

What we have is a situation where we have Manitoba — NDP 

Manitoba — going full speed ahead, hiring some 50 people 

already, and we’ve got Alberta next door that decided they’re 

not going to do it. Mr. Speaker, our licence that we have in 

place is less sophisticated than Alberta. And for whatever 

choice the previous government made, that was not improved. 

At some point in time we’re going to have to look at an 

enhanced driver’s licence or an enhanced identification card in 

Saskatchewan because ours has not kept up with the times. 

 

Right now what we’re going to do is we’re going to look to 

Alberta, we’re going to look to Manitoba, come up with a best 

practices. We’re going to take the Privacy Commissioner’s 

concerns and work forward with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

[14:15] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Additional Funding for Water Infrastructure Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the 2008-09 budget, this government announced a 

$6 million farm and ranch water infrastructure program. The 

program provided for financial support to help farmers, 

ranchers, RMs, First Nations in southwest Saskatchewan 

develop long-term water resources. Producers in southwest 

Saskatchewan had been dealing with drought for several 

consecutive years with little provincial government assistance 

prior to this program. 

 

Eligible projects include dugouts, wells, and pipelines. We were 

able to work with the federal government to secure an 

additional $9 million for this program, and this program to date 

has been a fairly good success. We received nearly 3,400 

applications, including 17 on farm well and pipeline projects, 

1,500 dugouts, and nearly 80 applications for community wells. 

As a result of this demand the program budget has nearly 

doubled to $29 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Friday we announced the provincial 

government is committing to an additional 5.2 million for the 

program to help ensure all eligible projects will receive funding. 

The federal government has also come to the table and is 



2218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

committing their 60 per cent share, with an additional $8.8 

million for this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a very successful program for 

farmers and ranchers in the Southwest and we will see the 

results of this initiative for many years to come. 

 

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the program’s producer 

advisory committee, Dave Marit, Doug Steele, and Larry Grant 

for their input into this program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

official opposition critic, I want to thank the minister for 

sending a copy to me prior to the sitting of the House at 1:30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is the fourth time that I’ve heard 

this particular announcement in the last week, as the minister 

spoke about it yesterday at SARM; he spoke about it last night 

in the House when we were reviewing supplementary estimates; 

he spoke about it last week when he announced the further 

funding to the program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that there are a number of producers and ranchers that 

just sit outside of the designated area by the province of 

Saskatchewan and they’re not eligible for any kind of support, 

and will be watching with interest to see whether or not this 

program can be expanded across the province, as producers are 

dealing with drought in other regions and other areas of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is a good program. It’s a timely 

program, and we’re looking forward to announcements coming 

out the next provincial budget that would expand and enhance 

this program for other producers and ranchers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 

 

Additional Funding for Municipalities 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 

some exciting, and given today’s debates, some very topical 

news to report on behalf of the Ministry of Municipal Affairs. 

 

On February 2, 2009, the Premier announced a $500 million 

economic booster shot to keep our economy strong in these 

uncertain times — 131.6 million of these dollars, of that booster 

shot, is going directly to municipalities. 

 

First, we are providing $31.6 million to municipalities through 

the Building Canada fund-communities component or BCF-CC 

as it’s called for short. This is a joint federal-provincial funding 

program supporting important infrastructure projects across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Typical examples, Mr. Speaker, are $645,400 going to the RM 

[rural municipality] of Mervin for a new water treatment plant, 

$833,000 to the town of Osler for a lagoon expansion, and 

$3.97 million to the city of Weyburn for a sewage lift station. 

These projects are extremely important for municipalities, 

allowing them to replace aging infrastructure and to 

accommodate unprecedented growth in their communities. We 

hope to announce a second intake for the BCF-CC program in 

the very near future. 

 

Second, the municipal economic enhancement program or 

MEEP is a $100 million program which provides per capita 

funds to municipalities for infrastructure. This is a program that 

municipalities have been requesting for many years, and 

Saskatchewan’s new government has delivered it. At the recent 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

convention where the Premier announced this new program as 

part of the $500 million economic booster shot, delegates 

warmly applauded the news. Municipalities welcome and 

appreciate the work that we’re doing for them. We believe in a 

respectful government-to-government relationship with our 

province’s municipal leaders, and programs such as MEEP are 

an illustration of the success of this new partnership. 

 

We congratulate all municipalities that are receiving funding 

under the BCF-CC and we are confident that communities will 

use their MEEP money to get shovels in the ground as quickly 

as possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, first and foremost I’d like to thank the minister for 

sending across a copy of his statement this afternoon. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would agree that it’s good news for municipalities 

right across the province. I don’t think any of us in any of our 

communities don’t know of a number of projects that our 

community, or our city, town, hamlet, rural municipality is 

looking for funding for. 

 

In discussions the other night in committee, when we had a 

discussion with the minister on this program and the funding 

and where it’s going, we were assured that there was a very 

quick application process. And the minister also expressed his 

expectation that the money would flow to the municipalities 

quite quickly. So we’re looking forward to that. 

 

Now other than that though, Mr. Speaker, there was not a great 

deal of information available as to the actual projects that had 

been applied for to date. But the department was quite clear, 

and the minister, that this information would be forthcoming 

back to the committee by the end of this month. So it’s always 

interesting to see how many of the projects are new, how many 

are ongoing in the planning stages, how many are shovel ready 

and will be on the move this spring. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to seeing that information 

towards the end of the month. But we did have a fair bit of 

discussion the other day in committee about how this package 

has been sold through the media and to the various groups. The 

minister even said in his statement that this is a program that 

municipalities have been requesting for many years, and 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2219 

Saskatchewan’s new government has delivered it. 

 

But it’s gone nicely from being additional infrastructure money 

moved up from next year’s budget into the current budget, to 

now being a stimulus or a booster package for the economy. 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s really no guarantee that there’s new 

jobs being created, so I don’t know how you would call it a 

stimulus package. It’s definitely something that municipalities 

have been asking for, and it really should be called what it is — 

support for the municipalities across this province. Thank you 

very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies to report that it has considered certain estimates and 

to present its fifth report. I move: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of Crown and 

Central Agencies: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

I recognize the Chair of the Economy Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

fifth report. I move: 

 

That the fifth report on the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair on the 

economy: 

 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions no. 253 through 260. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 253 through 260 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 69 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 69 — The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 

2008/Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des 

ordonnances alimentaires be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 

almost all of us would agree that we have a social responsibility 

to children, to the next generation. And I think almost everyone 

would agree that that being the case, the primary responsibility 

for the care and raising of children whenever possible, and it’s 

not always possible, but whenever possible is first and foremost 

the responsibility of the children’s parents. And that’s what 

maintenance enforcement is largely about, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s what the office of maintenance enforcement in 

Saskatchewan is largely about. And that’s what this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, is about — ensuring that children have the support 

that they need, that they deserve, and that people who have 

responsibilities to those children fulfill those responsibilities 

and discharge them. 

 

And that means, Mr. Speaker, that a debt, an obligation for 

child support is not like other debts; it’s not like other 

obligations, Mr. Speaker. And protections that exist in various 

pieces of Saskatchewan legislation to protect debtors from 

onerous responsibilities that they may have very well been 

willing to fulfill but cannot fulfill do not apply when it comes to 

the enforcement of these kind of orders. And information that 

would usually be kept private from most creditors is not kept 

private when it’s for the benefit of the child, when the child is 

the creditor. 

 

Saskatchewan has, I believe, great reason to be proud of its 

record in this respect, both its legislative record and at the 

administrative level. There’s perhaps one province in the 

country that might do better enforcing maintenance orders, that 

might have better collection rates. But Saskatchewan is always 

at the top — if not the top, at worst second place, Mr. Speaker 

— in providing that the orders for the support of children are 



2220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

followed. 

 

And there are, of course, over time, need for changes either 

because of the nature of the economy or the nature of how 

people deal with money. And there are always improvements 

that can be made. And certainly one of the areas that I pressed 

for as minister of Justice when talking to the federal 

government is greater co-operation from the Canada Revenue 

Agency as to receiving the information that would make it 

possible to better enforce child support orders and allow for the 

maintenance of children by their parents, first and foremost, 

when that is possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This legislation is legislation, I didn’t want to say . . . I almost 

said tinkering, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t want to say tinkering. 

The legislation does make changes to the maintenance 

enforcement regime. We’ll want to ensure that those changes 

are to the benefit of children in the province of Saskatchewan 

and make the operation of the office more effective while 

ensuring that it continues to operate in a fair manner, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And because of that work of ensuring that the legislation, the 

principles of which we do not challenge, but to ensure the 

legislation has the intended effect of improving the 

circumstances for children in the province by improving the 

operation of the maintenance enforcement office and its ability 

to enforce maintenance orders, I propose that we move this 

legislation to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 69, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this Bill will be handled 

by the Intergovernmental Affairs Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill is referred to Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The Labour 

Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

to make a few comments on the Labour Market Commission, 

Bill No. 46. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d first like to start my comments reading into the 

record some of the comments made by the minister responsible, 

the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister read into the record his 

comments, he had this to say. He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the critical importance of labour issues 

with respect to our economic momentum and the quality 

of life for the people of this province, [he said] we must be 

bold, timely, and above all proactive in our approach to 

them. It is our mandate to do so and indeed our 

responsibility to those who have given us this mandate. 

For this reason several key amendments are contained . . . 

[Mr. Speaker.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, he went on to say: 

 

Because of the major labour issues related to this goal, it is 

necessary for Enterprise Saskatchewan to have a close 

working relationship with the Saskatchewan Labour 

Market Commission. To this end, the revised wording of 

the Act lists one individual appointed by the minister to 

represent the agency. [And] This amendment will allow 

this close working relationship with the agency. 

 

He went on to say: 

 

Also the commission board currently has 19 members. The 

recommended amendments reduce the size of the board to 

11 members in order to enhance its efficiency, its ability to 

react in a more timely fashion, and continue to ensure the 

diversity of its representation. 

 

One further amendment was: 

 

The recommended amendments also limit board members 

by . . . two-year terms rather than unlimited three-year 

terms. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just some general comments first regarding 

this Bill. Mr. Speaker, the government has the responsibility to 

help Saskatchewan meet the many challenges that come with 

economic growth. We agree with that. 

 

Saskatchewan is currently experiencing some interesting labour 

situations, and again there’s a large gap between what this 

government is doing and what in fact it should be doing, Mr. 

Speaker, to address these concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have on this side of the House a great deal of 

respect for the work that the labour commission has done in this 

province. And again, this legislation is based on the 

government’s belief that the current Labour Market 

Commission is an impediment to economic growth, Mr. 

Speaker. I would say to the government across the way that in 

fact this is not the case. But it seems to be the thinking around 

this issue when they made the amendments. 

 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2221 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns that we have is rolling 

the Labour Market Commission into Enterprise Saskatchewan, 

and what effect is that to have the Labour Market Commission 

under Enterprise Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I would say that 

the one intent here, that it not only appears but is the weakening 

of labour here in the province. 

 

And as usual, Mr. Speaker, who did the Sask Party consult with 

before drafting this legislation? This has become the style, this 

has become the brand, Mr. Speaker, of the government — of 

drafting legislation, passing it, and without consultation. The 

processes have become quite evident, Mr. Speaker, as we 

noticed earlier today in question period around the Bill 

regarding The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, and the concerns 

raised and the answers from the minister which most certainly 

were not coherent or clear. Mr. Speaker, this has been also in a 

number of other Bills presented by this government which have 

simply been not well thought through, not well thought out. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, one of the other concerns is Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is very much an unknown entity. And we, as I 

stated earlier, are not in favour of it being folded into the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan as has been done. 

 

We have heard on a number of occasions that, we’re trying to 

remove impediments to business and economic growth. Mr. 

Speaker, the definition of that, I would say what we see on this 

side is in fact that it is in fact a weakening of labour here in the 

province. 

 

And it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this Act is all about 

getting different groups together to talk about our economy. 

And just at the time when we need that — in terms of what 

we’re facing in the global situation, and in Canada and in the 

United States — we have a government bent on not working 

together, not working together, in fact going off on their own 

and proposing legislation at the very heart. And it is somewhat 

contradictory, Mr. Speaker, that legislation which purports to 

have all sectors of this province working together in fact is 

brought in without any consultations, any consultations 

regarding members who are put on the Labour Market 

Commission. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so isn’t it funny that an Act that purports to 

bring different sectors together to discuss our economics or the 

economics of this province, and in fact that is done without 

consultation of any of the parties in the province, was simply 

put forward? And this is somewhat, I guess, disconcerting on 

this side that in fact that there could so much hypocrisy put into 

one Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ask, who was it that was consulted in terms of 

changes to the Act? We ask, who was consulted in terms of the 

people that were brought on to the Act? Where was the 

discussion? Where is there a discussion paper to involve the 

people of this province, to involve the opposition, to involve 

members of the society in Saskatchewan, members of 

Saskatchewan society regarding this very important, the Labour 

Market Commission? 

 

One of the groups, Mr. Speaker, one of the groups that was 

completely eliminated was the not-for-profit sector. It was 

almost like the minister felt that this was not an important 

group, that they had nothing to contribute. 

 

You can always argue, you can always argue, Mr. Speaker, that 

you reduce a body and perhaps it can create efficiencies, but I 

think the . . . Where is the analysis in terms of what is gained 

and what is lost, Mr. Speaker, when you reduce the numbers of 

appointments on there? And what sort of approach . . . And 

we’ve seen that approach in a number of ministries where in 

fact we put forward legislation, consult, and that even when 

they do consult, Mr. Speaker, it is very confined. They 

determine who they consult with, and I think so far the 

experience of the groups who have worked under that, that they 

have thought that that is a sham, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 

democratic; it’s a sham. And they have walked out of those 

consultations thinking that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I was on the topic of the numbers, on the 

numbers of people that were named to the board. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it is doubtful, and in fact it is more than doubtful. We 

have reason to believe that no one was contacted regarding 

inputs from labour and business to the people appointed to the 

boards. And this does cast rather a negative shadow on this 

enterprise, I guess, in the Ministry of Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you go from 19 to 11, we have to look at 

what exactly the Labour Market Commission was to achieve. 

And do you actually achieve any efficiencies when you go from 

19 to 11? And exactly what are those efficiencies? And if 

they’re only efficiencies but you lose what this, the Labour 

Market Commission, was actually to do, and that was to look at 

the economy, make suggestions, have input from different 

sectors, and you would wonder, Mr. Speaker, whether 11 

people can actually do that, Mr. Speaker. And these are no 

doubt people of high quality, Mr. Speaker, but what we are 

looking at here is bringing people in from all sectors of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other thing that is somewhat concern is the 

legislative responsibility going from the Advanced Education 

and Labour to the Ministry of Enterprise and Innovation. 

Training and education were a large part of the Labour Market 

Commission, Mr. Speaker. When you look at the training that 

we need for workers, the discussions we’ve had on bringing 

more people to Saskatchewan, part of that is training for our 

economy, Mr. Speaker. And yet we have this very important 

commission moved from one ministry where it seems to be a 

natural fit into Enterprise and Innovation, into Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. And what message does that send, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So what we have is, we have no consultation of groups in terms 

of putting people on the market commission, Labour Market 

Commission. We have a movement of this very important body 

from one ministry to another, and I would venture to say that 

the . . . My concerns would be, for the record, Mr. Speaker, that 

it sends the wrong signal to the province. This government has 

always said that they knew how to manage the economy and I 

wonder, when they do things like this, when they do, when they 

make moves like this, what message it sends. 

 

To reach out to be inclusive, Mr. Speaker, is one of the 

important things that we should be looking at when we enter 

into establishing a Labour Market Commission — as we did, 

Mr. Speaker — to make that commission reach out to all our 



2222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

sectors, reach out to all of the people of Saskatchewan. And I 

believe that that’s what we did, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And I see this as a regressive step backwards, and I would say 

that in fact that does not allow the commission to work as 

effectively. Even if you have good people in there, Mr. Speaker, 

they would be somewhat hamstrung by not having all the input 

possible that they could have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, probably at this time just in terms of the Labour 

Market Commission and the what they were . . . the initial part 

for the commission, the mandate for the commission, if I may: 

 

. . . was formed on the basis that labour market planning 

and coordination is best achieved through a partnership 

between labour, business, education and training institutes, 

government and others stakeholders to essentially 

“connect the dots” within . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, “The Saskatchewan labour market commission 

will have an industry focus on providing advice to 

Saskatchewan’s key strategic labour market issues.” 

 

Those are the pillars, if you may, that we establish, under which 

we establish the Labour Market Commission. Mr. Speaker, 

those are important things that people feel that their input would 

be acknowledged, that their input would be respected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of that . . . formed on the basis that the 

labour marketing and the coordination is best achieved through 

a partnership between labour and business, education, I don’t 

sense that there is a partnership building process, or if in fact 

that that is the idea of the Saskatchewan Party of what they 

have embarked on here, since they have come to government as 

a partnership. 

 

And working together then, I’m afraid that, in fact, they have 

not been listening to the people of Saskatchewan because there 

are a lot of people out there who would disagree that, in fact, 

they are building a partnership, Mr. Speaker. In fact, what they 

are doing is perhaps driving wedges into Saskatchewan, and I 

fail to see a partnership developing between business and 

labour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you don’t consult with existing members in 

terms of, if you have no faith in consulting with existing 

members in terms of when you’re forming the new commission 

or that there will be changes, I think it sends a fairly strong 

signal that Big Brother knows best and that we are again afraid 

almost to deal with what we might hear. We might hear from 

the people of Saskatchewan that they would say to us, you 

should speak to everyone. You should be inclusive. That is the 

way you build partnerships, not by attempting to leave out 

various important segments in our society, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we hear different occasions the labour 

supply causing stress for business. It really strikes me as odd — 

well more than odd, Mr. Speaker — really does cause me to 

wonder what is the thinking on the other side. And again I just 

mention the number of Bills. And we hear it this afternoon, The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, trying to fumble our way 

through something that wasn’t quite thought through, maybe 

just a little hasty, Mr. Speaker. And so I would think again we 

have a little too much haste here. 

 

[14:45] 

 

In fact it’s a wonder that after all that they have been through 

that they still pursue this sort of no-consultation approach. I’m 

not sure when they will get the message that consultation is 

important. But hopefully, Mr. Speaker, they will before . . . I 

would hope before 2011 because I think they’re going to wake 

up to quite a nasty little surprise on November in 2011, Mr. 

Speaker, because this is definitely creating huge concerns 

throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole business — and I think you can judge 

— if you’re going to deal with issues of labour shortages or 

labour retraining, we need the buy-in of everyone. You form a 

Labour Market Commission because you get the buy-in of 

everyone so the people can work co-operatively. If in fact they 

enter into this enterprise, if they enter into a commission and 

there are suspicions or people have been left out, I don’t think 

you have the trust of those people to work and perform as 

productively as it could be. 

 

The idea, Mr. Speaker, is an excellent idea. We want — I 

believe on this side or the other side of the House — we want 

Saskatchewan to be number one in the country and continue to 

be number one. But this sends all the wrong signals, Mr. 

Speaker, it sends all the wrong signals to all those concerned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issues of accountability and transparency as 

well. With these changes, as I mentioned previously, the 

members on the existing board were not contacted — the Chair, 

the Vice-Chair, the two Chairs. There are questions, Mr. 

Speaker, that have been raised with us that in fact nobody knew 

that these changes were coming. 

 

The legislation, Mr. Speaker — one of the other things — 

removes the onus to consult organizations representing business 

and labour before appointing boards. Now when you look at 

this, and if you accept that the premise of this is the 

co-operative efforts between labour and business, and in fact 

that you assume, Mr. Speaker, that you know what’s best and 

put it in there, it does cast a rather negative cloud over the entire 

situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you lose the buy-in, when you lose the 

buy-in of these people, I would say you have . . . There are 

many problems that start arising. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of labour and in terms of increasing and 

in terms of people coming to our province, there’s also a 

component here that we should not miss, and that is the 

component of immigration, Mr. Speaker. The immigration, and 

in terms of what we did and what we started, and I would hope 

that in a lot of cases the government opposite adopted a lot of 

the programs that we started, even cut ribbons on the projects 

that we gave money to. 

 

And again, I just think the . . . Some of things in terms of 

immigration. What it was the new graduate tax exemption that 

we put in, and again, they cut back on that. They cut back on 

that, Mr. Speaker. They cut back on the labour commission, and 

it shows, Mr. Speaker. Because I would believe that any, any 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2223 

person would think, in a common sense approach, would think 

that you have to, when you form a commission, that you’d have 

to form it under trust, that you would have to have the buy-in of 

all the parties. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we as well, when we established the Labour 

Market Commission brought together labour, business, First 

Nations, Métis, and one other thing, the training system, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said. And these people were to provide strategic 

advice, Mr. Speaker, on labour market trends, issues, and 

strategies. That we would bring together the entire sort of 

society, various sectors that we had that we saw out there, bring 

these people together under a positive, Mr. Speaker — as 

opposed to a negative — sort of appointment, a positive cloud, 

and have all of these people sit together and give advice. And 

give advice. 

 

And when you bring a commission of that sort together to do 

that, Mr. Speaker, you should allow them to do the work, allow 

them to do the work that is necessary so that they could in fact 

provide you with ideas. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is the people 

of Saskatchewan that in fact are important here and do provide 

us with the ideas, Mr. Speaker. They’re in fact the creative 

energy that we need in this province to move it ahead. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we did enhancements to saskjobs.ca website 

to meet the needs of job seekers, and now we hear every day the 

members opposite talk about the site. We developed a number 

of campaigns to market the SaskJobs, Mr. Speaker. We put in 

39.2 million into investment and trade trainings and created 

over 2,100 opportunities for Saskatchewan learners, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they were training for all sectors that were put in 

here. There were ideas that came from the Labour Market 

Commission. And, Mr. Speaker, we had something that was 

positive in moving forward. This is one of the things that I think 

that rises above political and partisan partisanship. And as it 

should, Mr. Speaker, as it should. Because when you deal with 

something like the Labour Market Commission and you inflict 

or create issues of this trust, the commission itself cannot work 

as well as it might be expected to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could talk about in terms of some of the factors, 

in terms of the tightening of the market conditions. But we 

have, Mr. Speaker, what is also coming here is the global 

market, some might say meltdown, but economic crisis. And 

what better time, what better time then to have a Labour Market 

Commission that can give you advice, give you advice on what 

is happening in all sectors of Saskatchewan, in all the corners of 

this province. 

 

And at a time like that, Mr. Speaker, at a time like that when we 

need to provide the stimulus, or we need to provide direction, or 

we need to provide the training, or we need to provide 

immigration, it is the wrong time, Mr. Speaker, to close the 

doors and tighten up and create distrust in a body like the 

Labour Market Commission that could be of so much 

assistance, Mr. Speaker — so much assistance to this entire 

Assembly, not only to the government. 

 

To have people input, Mr. Speaker, it’s a democracy at work. 

And, Mr. Speaker, people have been asking, asking for that type 

of input. And I think when we open the doors and we feel we 

are . . . Mr. Speaker, when we have, I guess, the ability, the 

ability and the confidence to allow input, that becomes very 

important, Mr. Speaker. Because if you have the confidence to 

listen to divergent views, Mr. Speaker, you are better for it. 

 

So we have a global economic crisis. We don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker, what is coming. There are things that are happening, 

Mr. Speaker, and some are in our control and some are not. And 

what better time, Mr. Speaker, to have a body that feels 

confident enough and is supported by the government to make 

suggestions. And that is at the heart of what is causing the 

problems here, Mr. Speaker, is that the members opposite, the 

government, I have a sense that they’re not feeling confidence 

in this group, in the Labour Market Commission. Not having 

confidence to allow people to enter in to sit on this commission 

and express their views, so that they can deal with this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal Conservatives coming out with 

budgets that they said would be balanced, and two months later 

or a month later saying that they wouldn’t be balanced, and now 

they’re on board with the stimulus package. Mr. Speaker, with 

the rest of the countries in the world, can you image that — a 

country so isolated, a government so isolated that they could not 

see what was happening around them. 

 

And I think that is the Labour Market Commission, that with 

people like that could enhance understanding of what is 

happening there. And I find it, well, Mr. Speaker, it’s sad. It’s a 

sad day here in Saskatchewan when we are unable to trust 

people’s input. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my comments in this area — whether they be on 

the immigration file, whether we’re talking about students — 

this is an overall approach that we have to take. The Labour 

Market Commission was set up to that, and I think there’s been 

some damage inflicted on it. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has moved second reading of Bill No. 46. Pardon 

me. I thought I heard reference to committee. The member has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 79 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Regina-Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased today to stand and comment on Bill No. 79, An Act to 

amend The Education Act, 1995. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

small amendment, but one that could have quite a significant 

impact in a number of ways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This amendment simply lengthens the period of time that a 

school of opportunity can remain in place, from two years to 

three years, at the discretion of the minister. But, Mr. Speaker, 

that raises a number of concerns. Is this change simply for 

political reasons, Mr. Speaker, so that schools would not have 

to be closed in a year of an election? Or is this truly about 

giving communities the opportunity to show that they have a 

plan and are in fact growing, and the need of that school may be 

required in years beyond that three-year period, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the surface this looks like simply extending 

that deadline beyond the next provincial election and if that’s 

the purpose, Mr. Speaker, that makes no sense whatsoever. That 

simply allows the government not to have to make difficult 

choices in an election year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the more appropriate way to deal with this, the 

more appropriate way to deal with this, Mr. Speaker, would be 

to make the term indefinite. Because, Mr. Speaker, it is not 

always manageable, the eligibility or the potential of a 

community to grow within a short period of time. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if a community is showing signs of growth and the 

potential to reach a level that the school would be viable in a 

four-year period, would we want to shut that school down, Mr. 

Speaker, and then be faced with a situation where we’re busing 

children extended periods of time, where if we would have left 

that school open one more year, those children would have been 

able to not have to be bused for an extended period of time? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the concept of making it longer isn’t 

necessarily a bad one but, Mr. Speaker, I believe it should be an 

indefinite period of time, reviewed each year by the minister in 

order to look at the individual circumstances that each 

community faces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the surface, moving it from two to three years 

looks like simply a political move. If it’s truly to give 

communities a longer period of time to show that they in fact 

can grow to a level that would require the school to remain in 

the community, well then we’re very supportive of that. We’re 

very supportive because we want our communities to grow and 

we want our children to go to school as close to home as 

possible. And we want those families to not have to see their 

children ride for hours on a school bus, Mr. Speaker. We all 

want that on both sides of the House — I’m sure we do. I’m 

sure that we all care about the children in rural communities, 

Mr. Speaker, who have to travel for hours on buses, potentially, 

to and from school. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the more appropriate course of action would 

not be to extend it one year because on the surface that looks 

like simply a political move to get beyond the next provincial 

election. The appropriate course of action would be to make it 

indefinite, Mr. Speaker, and have an annual review by the 

minister. So the minister could in fact review what those 

communities are doing, the growth within the communities, the 

potential for growth over the next two or three years beyond 

that, Mr. Speaker, so that it’s not a firm, hard deadline, so that 

we can be flexible to meet the needs of communities, meet the 

needs of families, meet the needs of those children in those 

communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The idea itself is not bad. But the change put forward limits the 

ability of that board of education, limits the ability of the 

community to have perhaps enough time to show that that 

school in their community is viable. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe we need to give communities the opportunity to show 

that in fact that they are growing; they’re changing; new people 

are coming to the community. And that doesn’t always 

necessarily occur in an absolute, defined time frame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other concern I have is that we have been 

experiencing unprecedented economic growth in the province 

of Saskatchewan over the last about four years now. It’s been 

growing and continuing to build. But we’re now in an economic 

situation where that may, for a year or two, slow down, or at 

least for a period of time slow down because of factors outside 

control of our own province, factors that are affecting growth 

throughout the world. And we may not see that growth be as 

strong over the next number of months, or maybe year, year and 

a half, two years. And I’d hate for these communities to lose the 

opportunity simply because of an economic downturn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a responsibility to do what’s right for the 

families of Saskatchewan and for the children of this province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, extending it one year simply doesn’t do that. 

More appropriately would be, as I had indicated earlier, to make 

it an indefinite period of time reviewed annually by the 

ministers. So in some cases it might be only one year if there 

shows no potential for further growth. It may be two years, it 

may be three, but it may be five in some extenuating 

circumstances where there is growth. And then perhaps, Mr. 

Speaker, no growth for a period of a year, but you can see that 

there is new businesses and new activity in the community 

developing. So we may have to go beyond the three years in 

order to do the right thing for both those communities and the 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the attempt to lengthen the period isn’t 

necessarily negative. It seems like sort of crass political move to 

make it beyond the next election. If that was the intent — and it 

may not have been the intent — but if it was I think it’s not well 

thought through and, Mr. Speaker, I do believe an indefinite 

period of time that the minister reviews on an annual basis 

would be more appropriate. 

 

We don’t have hundreds of schools of opportunity in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. It’s not like it’s a burden, an overburden 

of work on the ministry or on the minister. So, Mr. Speaker, we 

firmly believe the idea of giving communities the opportunity 

and working with both the school boards, the communities, the 

families, and the children is very important. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we need to have a plan that in fact helps 

communities and gives them the opportunity to show that 

potential to help. A new business doesn’t come in and reach its 

full potential overnight. A community can’t necessarily attract a 

new business and have it up and operating and the influx of 

potential new workforce in just a short period of time. 

Sometimes it takes two or three years or longer to develop and 

build its potential and grow. And if that’s occurring, we need to 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

give that community and that school the opportunity to truly 

feel that growth and to truly see the changes that occur within 

the population of the community and the number of children in 

the school system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the concept of lengthening it, we don’t 

disagree with. But we do believe that there should have been 

more thought taken in putting in place a program that allows 

greater flexibility, that would allow the community to make 

their case to the minister on an annual basis, for the school 

boards to review it and pass that information on to the minister. 

And of course ultimately the decision would be the minister’s. 

 

It’s not a burden that I think is overburdensome, Mr. Speaker, 

because it isn’t like there are hundreds of schools out there that 

would have to be reviewed annually. There’s a few. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think we should give the communities and the people 

of those communities, but most importantly the children, we 

should give the children the opportunity to keep their school. If 

in fact there’s hope and there is growth occurring, Mr. Speaker, 

we should give those children every opportunity to keep their 

school. And, Mr. Speaker, those children are the ones that have 

to sit on the buses for hours. And I’m sure many members in 

this House understand that because many of us at one time or 

another have been on school buses for long periods of time. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s those communities that are showing the 

growth, that are trying to bring in new entrepreneurial 

development in their community and their area. It doesn’t 

happen in a year. It doesn’t happen in a fixed term necessarily. 

So I think we have to be flexible. And I think we need to 

develop public policy that’s flexible to meet the needs of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. And I believe, as do 

my colleagues, that a fixed term doesn’t necessarily allow for 

the flexibility for the needs of the community, the needs of the 

school divisions, the needs of the children most importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, and the children’s parents who have to deal with 

these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a situation where, although 

a minor amendment, although a minor amendment — I think 

one that has some merit — it doesn’t go far enough to provide 

the assurances to communities that it should. Mr. Speaker, we 

would ask the minister to consider our position on this, to look 

at it from the point of view of community development. 

 

The fact that we’re not saying that you couldn’t, if we’re not 

seeing the type of enhancement in the community that would 

ensure that a school should be kept open, but we’re just saying, 

make it indefinite; put a review process on an annual basis in 

place so that in fact the Ministry of Education can work with 

communities, can work with families and schools about what 

the future should be. And as I indicated earlier, when we’re 

developing public policy we need to be flexible, but we also 

need to be willing to meet the needs of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan which we’re serving. 

 

And I think when this amendment was put forward, the original 

legislation had a defined time frame of two years and I think the 

logical thing was to just increase it by a year. But I think if we 

take a step back and you look at the public policy initiative that 

was implemented with the concept of schools of opportunity, an 

indefinite term that is reviewed on an annual basis by the 

Ministry of Education would in fact better meet the needs of the 

Ministry of Education, better meet the needs of the community, 

the school boards, the families, and most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, the children which the school serves. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a relatively simple concept to change it 

from a defined term to an indefinite period reviewed annually 

by the minister. But I do think that is better public policy. And 

it’s not saying what was put forward is wrong; it’s just saying 

that maybe it wasn’t thought through in looking at all the 

possibilities. And in the construction of public policy, that’s 

why we have debate here. That’s why we work co-operatively 

on most pieces of legislation, and how we actually bring 

forward good public policy. And in the development of public 

policy, we as the opposition have a responsibility to talk to the 

issue and look at it and examine it, as do the members of 

government. 

 

In looking at this particular piece, I think the public policy is 

both better served — as are the communities, families, and 

schools — by looking at this on an indefinite term with an 

annual review by the ministry. Because I’m sure all members of 

this House on both sides want to do what’s best for the kids, 

and they want to do what’s best for the communities. And in 

doing so we often put forwards on initial passes positions and 

legislation that, once you get a chance to take a sober second 

look at it, take a step back and look at it from a different 

perspective, there may have been better ways to tackle the 

problem. And in this particular case, we believe a better way to 

tackle the problem is in fact to make the term indefinite and put 

an annual review in by the ministry, by the minister, in order to 

meet the needs of those communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked a little bit earlier about, you know, 

economic development in communities. From start to finish, 

there is no defined time frame that you can say that an 

entrepreneur comes to a community wishing to open a new 

business that may employ a number of people, which may bring 

new children to the community. That doesn’t happen in a 

defined period of three months or six months or a year. It may 

take, in fact, three or four years for that business to reach its full 

potential. Even though the business plan may show in year 1 

that it’s going to employ 50 employees, it may take three or 

four or five years of development before it reaches that full, full 

capacity. 

 

And at that full capacity, Mr. Speaker, there may be sufficient 

new children in the area to keep the school open. But halfway 

through that building up of the business, there may not be. But 

just keeping that school open an additional year or two may 

allow and may make good sense to keep a school in that 

community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want us to pass up those 

opportunities. I think we have to be flexible. We have to be 

open-minded and we need to look at what’s in the best interests 

of both — that business in attracting people to work in his 

business, but also the community itself, the school and those 

who are employed in the school, Mr. Speaker, but most 

importantly the children that go to that school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those children who may have started their 

education in the school, it means a great deal to children to be 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

able to continue to go to the school which they’re accustomed 

to, they’re used to. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should not take that 

away from them without looking very carefully at what the 

viability of that school is over a longer period of time than just 

maybe two years. 

 

Now I’m not saying, in some cases, the decision might be 

clearly made within a year. It may not even take the two years. 

But what we’re saying is, make it an indefinite period of time 

and have it reviewed annually by the minister. And that review 

could take place by ministry officials in conjunction with school 

board officials and in conjunction with the community. I’m sure 

that we can come up with collectively an appropriate way to do 

that review on an annual basis, that everybody feels at least that 

they have had input into. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I attended some of my schooling in very small 

schools in smaller communities, and those are very important 

years in my development, very important years to me. And I’d 

like those children in communities to have the same 

opportunities that I had, and I’m sure that many of you had as 

well and many of my colleagues on both sides of the House. 

Many of us who stand in this Chamber have attended some of 

these schools, smaller schools in smaller communities. And 

they’re important to those communities, but most importantly, 

they’re important to those children. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to do what we can to put in place 

good public policy to ensure that if, if growth is occurring or the 

potential for growth exists, we give it an opportunity to flourish 

before we make a final determination on the viability of a 

school in a community or in the surrounding area, Mr. Speaker. 

In some cases we might have two or three schools within 25 

miles of each other. Maybe some collective changes with 

growth in the area allows all of the schools to remain open, and 

makes it viable for all the schools to remain open in a 

meaningful, cost-affordable way. 

 

But all we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is by making it an indefinite 

term, that we in fact — and reviewed annually by the minister 

— that we’re developing better public policy than having a 

definite end date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that members opposite have 

probably not spent a lot of time thinking about the concept of an 

indefinite period of time and reviewed annually by the ministry. 

I’d like them to take the opportunity to review that, in light of 

concerns raised by the opposition. 

 

In our role in this legislature we’re to talk about alternatives, 

we’re to help implement good public policy, and we’re to work 

collectively to meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’d like the government to re-examine 

their position on this issue, to look at it from a prospective of 

what are the needs of communities, the needs of the 

government, the needs of families, the needs of school boards, 

but most importantly, what are the needs of the children. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing more important in our society 

than those who are going to ensure that those of us who are in 

the Assembly are looked after as we get older. Our children are 

our future. We want to give those children every opportunity to 

have a good quality education, as close to home as possible, Mr. 

Speaker, because spending hours on a school bus, although 

many of us have had that opportunity, doesn’t necessarily 

contribute to a good quality education. 

 

So in developing our public policy and developing our position 

on schools of opportunities, let’s be flexible enough to ensure 

that when we put this public policy in place that it does what we 

really desire to do. And that is to, in communities with the 

shrinking school population where the school may no longer be 

viable, but there is the potential for growth and there are things 

occurring that may indicate growth, that we examine what that 

potential growth is to see if that school should remain open. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, leaving the term indefinite, reviewed 

annually by the ministry, creates no overburden, doesn’t create 

an unreasonable burden on either the community or the 

ministry, and in fact enhances public policy, takes a better 

position for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, takes a 

better position for the communities, and takes a better position 

most definitely for the children of our province. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we’re discussing the 

development of public policy, a lot is talked about consultation, 

and is that consultation meaningful. And, Mr. Speaker, as we 

look at this particular change which on the surface may seem to 

be insignificant, was the consultation done with communities. 

 

I’m sure they’re grateful for the additional year. I would be if I 

was one of those schools, one of those communities that was 

impacted by a potential closure. I’d be extremely grateful for 

the additional year. But good public policy would state or 

would indicate for all of us that we should really put in place a 

system that allows us to evaluate in a more timely manner, with 

examining the potential of the community, and should not 

necessarily be time constrained as it is today. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, having said that, previously it was two years. This is 

better with going to three years, but more appropriately it would 

be an indefinite period examined each year by the ministry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the members opposite would 

probably agree with this. I think that when the legislation was 

initially put in place, the time frame was picked, and they’ve 

now determined the time frame doesn’t necessarily meet the 

needs. But I’m not sure three years any more meets the needs 

than two years does. It is best to look at this from a more 

broadly, a broader public policy initiative and put in place a 

system that allows some flexibility, but allows ministerial 

oversight so that a minister can, on an annual basis, make a 

decision. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I spent some time looking at this issue. I 

think that it’s an important issue for the people of 

Saskatchewan. I think it’s a very important issue to many 

communities. It’s an extremely important issue to families. 

Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, this is about children. This is 

about children getting a quality education in their home 

community or as close to their home as possible. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we all have a responsibility to the children of 

Saskatchewan. We have a responsibility to develop good public 

policy, to implement good public policy, and most importantly, 

to give every child in Saskatchewan the opportunity to have the 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

best quality education they can at a school as close to their 

home as possible. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with that I have outlined very clearly my 

concerns and our need for a re-examination of this issue more 

than once, hoping the members opposite would pay some 

attention to the issue because this is a very important issue of 

public policy — important as I indicated to a variety of 

stakeholders, but most importantly, the children. And with that, 

Mr. Speaker, I would move that we now adjourn debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to first of all take this opportunity to add the following 

points to Bill 43, The Trespass to Property Act, and I also 

wanted to thank the Assembly for certainly indulging with their 

time in hearing some of the concerns that I have in relation to 

this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important to point out that the 

great Roman leader, Caesar, was warned before he was of 

course done away with, beware the ides of March. As you all 

know from history, that’s a famous quote that everybody is 

aware of. And what I would tell folks is we often hear the 

warning. And we also hear the person that was warned. But we 

didn’t hear about the person that did the warning, Mr. Speaker. 

And what I would point out to the Sask Party opposite and to 

the people of Saskatchewan is beware the ides of March — this 

March Bill, Mr. Speaker — when we talk about Bill 43, The 

Trespass to Property Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this story and this Bill was spoken about on CBC 

radio. And I looked through the transcripts and I certainly 

followed the story with great interest. And there’s a couple of 

comments that . . . People are allowed to comment on the story 

following the airing of that particular story. And I don’t know 

the gentleman that made the conversation or made the comment 

on the CBC story, but I’ll quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I expect whomever is in opposition to closely examine all 

proposed legislation and offer appropriate criticism, so 

that the government’s bills are sound and do the job they 

were drafted to do. I expected it of the Saskatchewan Party 

and now that they are the majority I expect it of the NDP. 

Mr. Speaker, The Trespass to Property Act is exactly what 

we’re examining now, and as an NDP opposition we are going 

to clearly examine what the intent and what the role is, and 

what the purpose of this particular Bill is about. And as I 

mentioned at the outset of my comments, be very careful, 

beware of the ides of March, and beware of this particular 

March Bill because I think there’re some serious ramifications 

and some serious issues that are attached to this particular Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people ought to pay very, very close 

attention to what this Bill is trying to do, and what this Bill is 

about. Now the minister, in trying to downplay the whole 

notion of this particular Act, indicates that it’s to stop ATVs 

[all-terrain vehicle] and snowmobiles and other people that may 

be using mechanized vehicles to trespass on farmers’ property. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, nobody wants to see trespassers in the 

fashion that we often see on TV or hear in the news of 

degrading land, being reckless, and being disrespectful to the 

landowner and so on and so forth. Nobody wants to see that 

aspect of Saskatchewan occur. And while the minister could say 

that’s our intended target, we in the opposition and we in the 

NDP say, be very careful, Mr. Minister, because what you’re 

asking for is not what you’re going to get. 

 

Often we see, Mr. Speaker, that this particular party is so inept 

at what they’re trying to do, they try and move things forward, 

and they throw a whole bunch of other things in the back of 

some of these Bills. And what people don’t realize is the net 

effect, like who are you going to affect, are you going to meet 

the intended objective, and what is the Saskatchewan Party’s 

hidden agenda. What is their hidden agenda, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I propose today in the Assembly that The Trespass to 

Property Act is going to create some significant problems for 

Saskatchewan as we know it now, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have a 

law degree; I’ve taken a few classes in post-secondary, but 

that’s the extent of my post-secondary experience. But what I 

do know from the perspective of being a northerner and being a 

Saskatchewan person, is that land in Saskatchewan is always 

something we prize. Control of our land is so very important. 

There’s so many people, including industry, and of course, 

including some of the folks that use the land for a number of 

purposes, whether it’s recreational purposes, hunting, etc. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, The Trespass to Property Act, it does create 

a new provincial offence of trespass, but you got to be very 

careful what you’re asking for here. Because often what 

happens with the Saskatchewan Party is they don’t know what 

they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have a clue what they’re 

doing. 

 

And when you have simple Acts like the trespass Act, you say 

well, what does that do. Well the minister says, and I quote 

from the article that he spoke of. He indicated that it’s intended 

to stop ATV users and people that are trespassing on properties 

from desecrating land or degrading property. 

 

And I think one of the things that he also pointed out, and I 

think it’s important that I quote that, is that he mentioned the 

fact that it will not stop his mother for berry picking. And I 

think certainly from that perspective, I think he intended to 

alleviate some of the concerns that maybe even his mother 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

expressed in terms of accessing land for berry picking. 

 

But I would say as an NDP opposition at this day, that you got 

to be careful because what you’re asking for here is a lot more 

than what the Act is proposing to do, Mr. Speaker. And those 

guys opposite, those guys opposite don’t realize what they’re 

doing. They intend, as we think, they intend to say okay, if 

somebody puts do not trespass sign on a building, or on some 

property, then guess what? The unions can’t go there and 

protest. Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe that was their intent. 

 

The second part of the trespass Act, from our perspective, is 

that, okay, we don’t want ATVs and snowmobilers wrecking 

property and disrespecting the landowner and the farmer that 

occupy their land. And yes, we believe that’s part of the 

problem as well. But the problem we have, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there are so many laws that are impacted by this simple Bill. 

 

And that’s why I say to the government and to the people of 

Saskatchewan — beware of this Bill. Because there are some 

serious ramifications on land access that we believe, as an 

opposition, is going to create a significant amount of problem to 

a number of parties, including the party that they’re trying to 

help — and that of course are the agricultural producers and the 

farmers of this great province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will point out that if you look at discussions of the Bill, who 

did they speak to, Mr. Speaker? Who did they consult with? 

And the whole notion of the trespass Act, what is their intended 

objective? 

 

Now the minister says it’s to stop ATVers and snowmobile 

from being disrespectful to landowners. Well don’t we have an 

organization called Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and 

don’t we have a traffic Act that really discourages folks from 

operating ATVs and snowmobiles illegally? Don’t we have a 

snowmobile association that tries to organize snowmobilers in a 

respectful fashion to make sure that they’re not out all over the 

place destroying land and destroying property? Don’t we have 

all these rules and regulations, zoning and municipal by-laws, 

and the list goes on as to how we put rules and processes and 

procedures in for those that operate ATVs, those that operate 

snowmobiles in the manner that the minister described? Aren’t 

those already covered in that particular aspect of governance of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

And I would suggest that, Mr. Speaker, they are. So what is this 

Bill about? What is this Bill intended to do? And as in 

opposition, we have a lot of theories, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 

Bill designed to stop people from accessing land on a number of 

fronts and that, Mr. Speaker, is what I think the hidden agenda 

of the Saskatchewan Party is all about. 

 

And I pointed out earlier again as you look at what the Bill’s 

intended to do: do not trespass. If you trespass, you get a fine. 

So we turn around and we say, okay, did you speak to the 

Trappers Association in northern Saskatchewan about what we 

think is . . . what they believe — the trappers — when they have 

a trappers’ area that they think that’s their access to that 

particular land. If somebody comes and trespasses there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what’s the net effect? What is the reaction? 

 

Because quite frankly in the North, they have a lot of people 

that are landowners as well as the South. Now you look at the 

Outfitters Association. So if you’re an outfitter in southern 

Saskatchewan, and you’ve got an assigned operating area and 

you want to go and harvest the animals that you have legally a 

right to do so within a defined area of the region, to the 

operating area, now they go on to farm land that is posted. Are 

the outfitters now going to be charged for trespass? Because 

technically, Mr. Speaker, they could actually do that with this 

Bill. Now how are they going to overlap the outfitting 

association’s needs and the rights of the farmer under the 

trespass Act, Mr. Speaker? And I don’t think they’ve figured 

that out. I don’t believe they’ve figured that out. 

 

Have they talked to the First Nations people — who in their 

minds and their view and in their position, and they go back in 

history to the treaties — have they talked to the First Nations 

people and saying, look, this trespass Act doesn’t allow you to 

go hunting over here anymore. If that farmer posts his land, 

then you can’t go hunt over there because you could be charged 

for trespassing. Is that the case here, Mr. Speaker? I believe it 

is. And these guys aren’t telling the whole truth when it comes 

to the issue of what the intended target is in relation to The 

Trespass to Property Act. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now what if the First Nations say, well this area is our 

traditional territory, and our traditional territory has rights of 

ownership and of access. Now what’s going to happen to these 

guys when the court case comes up and they get charged for 

trespassing, and the landowner says, well I don’t want those 

guys hunting on my property. And another person says, well 

hold it, that’s our traditional territory so we have a right to go 

and hunt there. So what’s going to happen to that clash of 

ideals? Who will be charged there, Mr. Speaker? Who will be 

going to court if that occurs, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Métis Nation as well, under this whole notion of their role 

of the right to harvest and their right to hunt and their right to 

gather, like do they have a role to play in this whole trespass 

Act that these guys are moving forward? And one of the things 

that’s important, I say to the First Nations and the Métis Nation 

themselves, is that they have always traditionally hunted in 

certain areas. They’ve always been very supportive and 

co-operative when it comes to working with the non-Aboriginal 

community on management of lands, on management of 

wildlife, and we have shared the land, Mr. Speaker. We have 

shared the land without fear of being charged. This Act now 

makes it very possible to be charged, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, I find it kind of contradictory by the Saskatchewan 

Party when you look at some of the folks out there that hunt. 

Whether you’re First Nations, Métis, or non-Aboriginal, a lot of 

people in our community, like in our province, like to hunt. And 

they love to hunt, whether it’s duck, whether it’s elk, moose, 

deer. There’s a lot of excellent hunters in Saskatchewan and 

they love to hunt. And Saskatchewan has that reputation as a 

province that loves hunting and manages their wildlife quite 

well. 

 

And what happened now last month, or last several weeks, the 

Saskatchewan Party government announced Sunday hunting’s 

opening. So one week they give us Sunday hunting, the 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

following week introduce the trespass Act. 

 

So my point is, you guys should make up your mind what 

you’re going to do. Are you going to encourage hunting? Are 

you going to encourage participation of all groups in the 

management of wildlife? Are you going to foster a co-operative 

relationship between all the land users? Well this trespass Act 

doesn’t do it, Mr. Speaker. There are some serious problems 

that many of us in this Assembly will start to see as a result of 

this Act, will start to see as a result of this Act, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’m right now today warning the people of Saskatchewan, 

beware of this Bill, because there are some serious 

ramifications that that party has not even thought for one 

second what they could be. 

 

Why? Because they are . . . In that, they haven’t consulted and 

they simply do not know what they are doing, Mr. Speaker. 

And that, I think, is a major problem for this province and the 

growth of our province, because we have to build together. And 

when you start to isolate people and alienate people through 

ideological Bills like this, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to create 

and foster a lot of hard feelings between a number of groups. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I asked the question of whether this Act will 

have any effect on the landowners, encouraging more posting. 

Are we going to be seeing more posting of land as a result of 

this Act? Are we going to see more posting of land as a result of 

this Act? I suspect we are. I suspect we are. 

 

And the other notion, Mr. Speaker, is that as you look at 

outfitters, one of the concerns that the outfitters had, the 

Outfitters Association are saying, well all the area, all of 

Saskatchewan, you should not be able to hunt in the province 

unless you go through a registered outfitter. Now what happens 

if the landowners become outfitters? What’s going to happen to 

the existing outfitters, Mr. Speaker? All of a sudden, this Act 

begins to create some trouble for them. Will we see outfitters 

being charged for trespassing? Will we see the average person 

being charged for trespassing if they’re out hunting? And will 

we see the average person picking berries charged with 

trespassing because the landowner doesn’t want that particular 

individual on their land? 

 

So as you look at the notion of traditional territory, look at the 

notion of the relationships built over the years. Look at the 

notion of how the non-Aboriginal people and Aboriginal people 

have coexisted, of how we have the right to harvest a provincial 

animal no matter what land we went on as long as you were 

respectful of that process. Mr. Speaker, that was working 

towards a co-operative model — a co-operative model — and 

that’s what we stand for and that’s what we represent. 

 

Over there they’re saying, no that’s all gone out. Here you have 

a trespass Act that would have serious ramifications. Now what 

I tell First Nations and Métis people is, go ahead, make your 

land claim, go ahead and declare the traditional territory. 

Because all of a sudden, if the Supreme Court of Canada 

recognizes your provincial or your traditional territory, or the 

territory where you’ve hunted and fished for centuries, then 

does that trespass Act apply? 

 

So let’s take the industry’s perspective now. Now industry 

comes into Saskatchewan and says, oh, I want to be able to 

develop the resource 20 miles over here. But I can’t now 

because your trespass Act is quite clear. Now they’ve got to 

turn around and say, oh, oh, we got a problem over here. This 

company wants to go and cross his land and this guy won’t let 

them. Now what happens if a traditional territory claim comes 

along and says, oh no, no, that’s our traditional territory. We’re 

not allowing you to cross. We’re not allowing you to trespass. 

What happens there, Mr. Speaker? Now what happens if a 

group of people decides to go hunting ducks or deer, and 

they’re walking along and they’re hunting and all of a sudden 

they get charged simply because somebody doesn’t want them 

on their land? 

 

Now is that the result we want for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

The answer is no. I don’t think those guys got themselves 

figured out in terms of what they do. The simple thing is you 

just start coordinating amongst yourselves. You have one 

minister promoting Sunday hunting and you have another 

promoting the trespass Act. Like, make up your mind. Are you 

going to work towards a common solution? Or are you going to 

make a bunch of individuals out of us at the end of the day 

that’ll weaken our province and not build a future together? 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what’s . . . the trespass Act. 

 

Another comment, another comment that’s really important, 

Mr. Speaker, another comment that I think is relevant here, 

when you talk about the trespass Act, we think, we think that 

people should have a right to peacefully demonstrate. This is 

Canada. This is not Homeland Security office out of the States 

telling people you shouldn’t or you can’t do this. This is 

Canada. We’re different from the States. So if people want to 

protest — guess what? — let them protest. If it’s a peaceful 

protest — guess what? — let them protest. Because that’s what 

makes Canada special; it makes Canada unique. 

 

Now these guys want to Americanize our land rights. They 

want to Americanize how we do demonstrations, and they want 

to do all these other things, Mr. Speaker. Again I go back. They 

don’t have a clue what they’re opening here. They’re opening a 

can of worms that they will not be able to control. And after 

they make a big mess of things, they’ll be forced out of office 

and we’ve got to come and clean up the mess again. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t have an appetite to clean up another mess; 

especially when it comes to land rights, hunting rights, and 

Aboriginal rights. And all these values will clash under this Act, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think you, as well as all the people in 

Saskatchewan, need to be warned. We need to warn the people 

of Saskatchewan, you need to pay close attention to what is 

going on with this trespass Act. 

 

As well I’ll point out, when you look at some of the comments, 

some of the comments made . . . And I’ll go to another 

comment as a result of the CBC story that I spoke of earlier. 

And the story said, and I quote: 

 

Well spoken sir. The need to make sure to peaceful 

[demonstration] protest is essential in a free and fair 

democracy. It would be really stupid to not allow protests 

on public land/highway. I remember my dad peacefully 

taking part in a highway blockade with his combine about 

ten years ago and other people’s . . . protests/picket line 

must not be broken over this. I am in trust that the wording 

of this Bill will be sufficient to prevent this from 



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

happening. 

 

That was another listener to that particular story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And can we trust that farmers in rural Saskatchewan that want 

to protest when they come to the Assembly and they block 

traffic, will they be charged under this Act? Well according to 

the Act the answer is yes. And will that government and will 

that minister charge those people that bring combines to the 

front of the Assembly or farm trucks and they post a sign, do 

not trespass, will they be charged under this Act? Well 

according to the Act, Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes. They can 

charge those individuals. 

 

So we need to understand for every action these guys have 

there’s a reaction out there, and it’s very negative because they 

haven’t thought these things through, Mr. Speaker. So I go back 

to the list. Have you consulted with the Trappers Association? 

Have you consulted with the Outfitters Association? Have you 

talked to the First Nations? Have you talked to the Métis 

nation? Have you talked to the hunters who see a Sunday open 

sign for hunting, but all of a sudden on this side you also see a 

trespass Act coming into effect? Mr. Speaker, have you looked 

at the effect of more posting of land? Have you talked to the 

Wildlife Federation? Have you talked to the hunters that enjoy 

hunting these provincially owned animals if you will, whether 

it’s deer, moose, or elk or ducks? If they’re on private property, 

whose animal is that? Whose animal is that? Have they thought 

that out? 

 

And the answer is, Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. They have 

not thought it out. And as a result of having an inept 

government that proposes because their philosophy believes it, 

that we need to protect private land more, what the net effect is, 

you’re going to divide and you’re going to segregate 

Saskatchewan and it’s going to hurt more people — including 

the ones you pretend to help — than ever, ever before, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I’m telling folks out where I am, beware of this March Bill. 

Because whether the minister wants to downplay the 

seriousness of this matter, it is a serious matter. So whether 

you’re hunting animals or whether you’re exploring for oil and 

gas or whether you’re simply picking berries, this Act will 

subject you to a trespass action if the owner, the farmer, or the 

landowner decides that’s what he wants to do. 

 

And before, Mr. Speaker, there were so many of the agricultural 

community when I served as the minister of SERM 

[Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management] that I 

know donated their land and they donated a lot of money. They 

wanted to make sure they kept their land in pristine condition. 

They are connected to the land, they respect the land, and they 

contribute to the quality of land in Saskatchewan. So they come 

along and many of them didn’t post their land. Many of them 

didn’t post their land. All they asked was be respectful of the 

property and the land. And as a result of what they’re trying to 

do they’re trying to make sure . . . Well what we’ll do with this 

Bill is we’ll get farmers happy with us because we can charge 

people for trespassing their land. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s going to happen is, the net effect is 

you’re going to get a lot more people engaged. You’re going to 

have the repercussions if there’s a protest in the city by the 

agricultural community — which we have seen before — and 

what’s going to happen then? What’s going to happen then? 

And what happens now to the traditional territories or the 

traplines that the northern people have or the forestry 

agreements that are out there? Are all that considered private 

property? Mr. Speaker, is that considered private property? 

 

So my notion of bringing this Bill through, quite clearly, in my 

opinion, is they have not thought the Bill out, Mr. Speaker. 

They have not consulted, which is very dangerous. And what 

they don’t realize is the net effect of some of their philosophical 

blinders that they have on. You’re going to create a province 

that is less tolerant and less co-operative, Mr. Speaker. And the 

big issue that’ll drive Saskatchewan’s people apart is land. And 

the big weapon that’ll be used to protect land is simple things 

like a trespass Act that they don’t realize will certainly foster a 

lot of misunderstanding between groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you look at a number of other issues that I spoke 

about — the supporters of the RAN program, the representative 

area network; the people that want to have ecological sites that 

are protected; you know, people that are active with the hunting 

aspect of Saskatchewan; the hotels, the gas bars, the grocery 

stores that see a bump in business when you have American 

hunters come out here — and you look at the protests that we 

have in Saskatchewan over a number of things, I don’t think 

this Bill is going to do it. I think it’s going to create such a 

significant backlash and it’s going to alienate and it’s going to 

isolate people to a degree we have never seen before. All 

because, all because these guys are saying, well we want to stop 

ATVs and Ski-Doos from going on land. 

 

Well my goodness, you’ve got something called the highway 

traffic Act. My goodness, you’ve got something like SGI. You 

got the snowmobile association, as I mentioned earlier. All 

these entities and all these groups are intended to make the use 

of ATVs and Ski-Doos and other all-terrain vehicles licensed, 

properly used, and of course, organized in terms of how they’re 

able to use these vehicles. And yet they come along and they 

say, well we need this Act to do this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t buy it one bit. We don’t buy it one 

bit. They are so desperate to hang on to the votes they have 

right now, they’ll do anything and promise everything. And 

what they don’t realize, when you try and promise to be 

everything to everybody, you end up being nothing to all. And 

that’s exactly what’s going to happen as a result of this Bill. 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I for one will not be supporting 

this Bill because there are so many problems with this Bill that 

the minister has not thought it out. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And we haven’t heard one bit from the minister about how he’s 

going to protect all the interests attached to hunting, attached to 

access the land, attached to the development of some of the 

resources underneath that land, attachment to the hunter group, 

attachment to First Nations and Métis rights to hunt and gather, 

attachment to the non-Aboriginal community that like to go out 

and picnic and pick berries, and perhaps do a little bit of 

hunting while they’re out their with their sons and their 

grandsons or granddaughters — all those options now come 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

into question. 

 

Because if I’m a landowner and I have an opportunity to say, no 

I don’t want people on my land, this Act allows me to do that. 

This Act allows me to do that. And guess what? If you don’t 

want to get off my land, then I’m going to charge you with 

trespassing. I’m going to phone a peace office and say, I want 

this guy off my land. And guess what? You’ll get fined, and 

that peace officer will remove you from that land. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what these guys are doing is they’re 

Americanizing our land issues. They’re Americanizing how we 

deal with the shared resource of wildlife and mineral resources 

and the shared pleasure of this land. They’re trying to 

Americanize that and segregate — and segregate — the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And they’re sitting here saying, oh no, no, no, we’re not trying 

to do that. Well, Mr. Speaker, the intended consequence is you 

are doing that. You are doing that. You’re doing exactly that. 

 

You talk to an outfitting association member? No. Have you 

talked to a Wildlife Federation member? No. Have you talked 

to any particular Aboriginal groups? No. And now they say this 

Bill is going to be great. Hey, well guess what? You can go pick 

berries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t buy it for one, one bit. These are the 

questions I have for the people out there that really know how 

to look after these things and really listen to what they’re saying 

— these guys are not doing that of course — but listen to these 

questions that we have as an opposition. What circumstances 

make this Act necessary? What circumstances make this new 

Act necessary? 

 

Like I said, if they want to stop ATVs, well they have laws for 

that. We have licensing for that. We have associations that work 

with the ATV industry. 

 

Who will benefit from the passage of this Act? Nobody, Mr. 

Speaker. Nobody will benefit from the passage of this Act 

because it’s going to affect unions, it’s going to affect people 

going on land, it’s going to affect peaceful protest by the farm 

community when they drive their combine down on Albert 

Street here. Nobody will be protected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Are there specific activities or problems that this Act is 

intended to address? And if so, what might they be? 

 

Here’s another question for them, Mr. Speaker: are there any 

specific examples of situations where this Act would be seen to 

be particularly useful? Will it be particularly useful? The 

answer is no. You will create a new Saskatchewan that is less 

tolerant and more segregated and certainly not sharing in the 

common vision that Saskatchewan has always been proud of, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Who was consulted before this Act was drafted? I can answer 

that question. Not one person, Mr. Speaker. Not one. And that 

goes back to my issue about leadership, is you don’t have to 

listen to all the advice you get. You don’t have to listen to all 

the advice you get. But a smart leader would listen to it. You 

don’t have to use it all, but you listen. You listen to the people. 

A good leader, 80 per cent of the time is listening and 20 per 

cent of the time is adding to the solution. 

 

These guys don’t listen. They don’t add a solution. They are 

just driven by their political velocity. That is very, very 

dangerous — especially when you see Acts like this come along 

and they try and make it look as innocuous as they can. And, 

Mr. Speaker, as an opposition, we don’t buy that one bit. 

There’s no trust. There’s no confidence on this side on the 

Saskatchewan Party, and we’ll never have that trust or 

confidence in them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new Act, it definitely requires further review. 

And we’re going to do that to determine whether its passage 

may have unintended consequences. That’s a question that 

really attracted my attention. 

 

Now what happened to the whole notion of duty to consult, 

where the First Nations and the Métis people have what they 

view as the important thing, the duty to consult? And what the 

Saskatchewan Party has is way beyond what they interpret. So 

there’s two interpretations behind duty to consult. 

 

This trespass Act has a lot of ramifications on First Nations and 

Métis people that might want to go hunt in a certain area and 

they’ve always hunted in that area before. Is that not considered 

traditional territory? And should they have been consulted on 

this? Well the Sask Party would say, well we had a public 

meeting about five months ago on this duty to consult. Well we 

had it over here. Oh, you guys weren’t there? Yes well, okay, 

well we’re done with duty to consult. We had it already. 

 

And most First Nations and Métis people would say . . . Well 

you know what? There’s a lot of phrases they’d use, but for the 

sake of this particular hallowed hall of democracy, I’m not 

going to use those phrases. But their interpretation of duty to 

consult and accommodate is a heck of a lot different from what 

the Sask Party has been touting as what the answer would be 

under duty to consult. 

 

There are some radical differences. There’s this huge divide 

between what they interpret and what they interpret as duty to 

consult. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to wrap our heads around 

that particular aspect because it’s going to have a lot of 

ramifications. 

 

Now I had a lot of experience with different organizations in 

Saskatchewan, whether it’s the Wildlife Federation or whether 

people that wish to support and protect land through the RAN 

program, the representative area network. And I’m telling you 

I’ve seen some amazingly beautiful people that want to do one 

simple thing, is build Saskatchewan together — non-Aboriginal 

people and Aboriginal people. They want to build together. 

 

So what does this do? What does this do? It divides them. It 

divides them. And you’re not trying to protect agricultural land. 

That’s not what you’re intending to do here. Your intention is 

so ideologically driven that it’s blinding you of the 

consequences of this Bill. You’re talking about private property 

rights. Well let me talk a bit more about what I think is going to 

happen. 

 

What’s going to happen is these people that are not allowed to 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

hunt in certain areas of land because they’re posted, they’ll be 

charged. Farmers driving down Albert Street to protest a lack of 

farm action, they’ll be charged. Mom and dad and their sons 

going on hunting on posted land, they could be charged under 

this Bill. Somebody going out that they hunted for years on 

certain land, they could be charged under this Bill. People that 

want to go berry picking or even picnicking on certain areas, 

they can be charged under this Bill. People that want to go hunt 

on Sundays and they’re not given permission, they can be 

charged under this Bill. An outfitter, that all of a sudden I post 

my land saying, you’re not allowed to outfit here any more, 

they can be charged. 

 

So you look at the trespass Act and I can’t figure it out what the 

intended purpose of this Bill is. What is the intended purpose of 

this Bill? I’m trying to find that out, Mr. Speaker, and so far 

I’ve had no answers. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s say I turn our 

attention now to industry, whether it’s uranium development, 

whether it’s forestry development, or whether it’s oil and gas. 

Now does this create more problems for them? Does this create 

more problems for them? I would suggest that it will. I would 

suggest that it will. What happens now, some Indian band or 

some municipality or some organization or some landowner 

says, well this is my territory and you’re not coming on my 

territory unless you have my permission. And if you don’t have 

my permission and you come on, I’m going to charge you under 

The Trespass to Property Act. I’m going to charge you. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t thought that out. They haven’t 

thought that out. So in their hurry to try and appease and trying 

to attract more political support for them, they are creating 

some dangerous precedents here as a result of this Bill. And the 

Minister of Justice ought to know that. Because after all, he is 

the Attorney General for Saskatchewan. He knows that for 

every action that they undertake, as innocuous as it may seem, 

there are some serious legal ramifications attached to some of 

this action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my point is, my point is, has he thought that through? And 

the answer simply is no. Because any person who has any kind 

of legal background, of sufficient legal background will know 

that you start opening up access and trespass laws and so on and 

so forth, you are creating some significant problems in a lot of 

other areas. It’s not just one little tidy, neat, little Act. There are 

a number of Acts that’ll be impacted. And for every action 

under this Act, there will be reaction in a number of other areas. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we’re worried about as an 

opposition. 

 

And I say to people out there listening to this particular debate, 

and people that are in the know, and students that may be 

watching the debate under The Trespass to Property Act, you 

got to really study this hard and heavy. And I would encourage 

them to participate and research and offer that help and that 

research to those guys opposite because what you have is a 

bunch of rookies trying to figure out how to govern. 

 

And as a result of them not knowing how to govern, they make 

silly mistakes like this, that make Saskatchewan weaker by 

using land as a wedge between a number of groups — whether 

it’s the Wildlife Federation, whether it’s oil and gas industry, 

whether it’s the Aboriginal people, whether it’s the hunter. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not the Saskatchewan that I want for my 

grandchildren and my children, and I don’t believe anybody 

wants that kind of Saskatchewan. 

 

If you love the American model so much of land ownership, I 

will tell the Saskatchewan Party, move there. Pick up your 

belongings and move to the States because in Saskatchewan, 

we’re a different province. We’re a different province. We 

know that the agricultural community built this province; we 

know that. We know that the oil and gas industry and the 

uranium industry and the forest industry are going to continue 

building this province; we know that. We know, and we want to 

include Aboriginal people. We want to include non-Aboriginal 

people. We want to include the producers. We want to include 

the students, the cities. We want to build together. And this 

trespass Act, Mr. Speaker, is going to create some significant 

problem. It’s going to segregate and it’s going to hurt a lot of 

people. 

 

So the question I have for the members opposite, if some guy 

goes on the land on private property anywhere in the South, and 

trespasses, they’ll be charged. And according to the Act, the 

answer would be, yes. Some farmer comes along on his 

combine and blocks traffic here on the main road, under the Act 

they’ll be charged. If some guy wants to go hunting with his son 

that he’s gone to traditionally for years to hunt, they could be 

charged under the Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Act doesn’t help anybody. It doesn’t help 

anybody. Because that’s the biggest question that I have, is who 

is the Act supposed to help? It doesn’t help anyone that I can 

see, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the most important things 

that I want to get up today, as an opposition member, and tell 

the people of Saskatchewan. The passage of Bill 43 is going to 

create more problem than ever for Saskatchewan.  

 

And that’s why as an opposition, I hope my colleagues join me 

and vote against this Bill. I hope they join me, and we vote 

against this Bill because unless you start understanding the 

ramifications of what you do to some of your Bills as a rookie 

government, you’re not going to fully understand the people of 

Saskatchewan. And therefore, you’ll not get the respect of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s why, that’s why, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of people out 

there losing faith fast in the Saskatchewan Party. Not because 

the money that they have spent, that we left them — they spent 

that already — that’s gone. The rainy day fund is gone. And the 

rainy day is yet to come. But they put Acts like this that they 

don’t think through. And in a hurry to try to get things done, 

they put Acts like this without giving proper thought. 

 

And yes, the NDP are those cagey old veterans that people say, 

well maybe we’ll change them for awhile — see how these 

young guys are, or these younger, this new party acts. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve seen that act before, and Saskatchewan is still 

paying — is still paying — for that act, Mr. Speaker, of the late 

’80s. 

 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, be very careful 

because what you got is, you got folks in the Saskatchewan 

Party that don’t have a clue what they’re doing. They’ll say 

anything before the election and do nothing after the election. 

After they spend their money and put us back in deficit and 

back in debt, then all of a sudden they’ll be gone. They’ll get 

jobs somewhere and they’ll be gone. And what do we inherit? 

Not only get more and more problems, but you’re going to 

inherit much more of a less tolerant Saskatchewan if we let 

these guys get away with some of these Acts that they’re trying 

to bring forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish I had the opportunity to speak from the 

highest hill in Saskatchewan, and as loud as I can, to tell the 

people of Saskatchewan, watch out for these Acts. Watch out 

for this action; watch out for these guys because they don’t have 

a clue what they’re doing when it comes to Acts like Bill 43. 

The trespass Act is going to create some significant problems.  

 

And they laugh across the street, and they laugh across the way. 

They think it’s funny. 

 

Now what happens now if a First Nations person comes along 

and says, a leader says, well this is my traditional territory, right 

around here. And so that’s our property, that’s our territory. We 

don’t want no trespassing. What happens then? What happens 

then? They’re going to be told no, it’s not your territory. And 

yet they talk about traditional territory. 

 

Again I will say loud and clear, their interpretation of the duty 

to consult and accommodate is far different from what the First 

Nations and Métis people believe is the duty to consult and 

accommodate. And, Mr. Speaker, accommodating the duty to 

consult and accommodating doesn’t mean having one or two 

meetings and telling us what you’re doing. You should give 

them prior knowledge of what’s going on. They should know of 

every company that has any interest in that land, Mr. Speaker. 

They should know that. 

 

And they should also make sure that Acts like this don’t further 

erode their treaty rights, or their Métis rights, or even the 

traditional rights of non-Aboriginal people to hunt, to gather, to 

access land, and to enjoy the land that Saskatchewan has. 

What’s happening is once again we’re seeing the privatization 

agenda, whether it’s in the Crowns, or whether it’s health care, 

and now in the land issue. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And my goodness, Mr. Speaker, this province was built on a 

co-operative spirit. It was built by people working together — 

First Nations, Métis, the German community, the Icelandic 

community, and the list goes on as to how many groups and 

how many organizations built this province. And we built it 

based on co-operation, not on Acts that divide us and segregate 

us. 

 

And I say to the people today in Saskatchewan, and especially 

some of the students that may be watching this, is please help 

these guys out because they need help. What they don’t realize 

is when they put simple Acts like this through, there are some 

significant consequences. So figure it out, and if you can’t 

figure it out, all you got to do is ask for help. 

Mr. Speaker, I would say to the agricultural community — 

before they get too wound up in their laughter over there — that 

the agricultural community has a profound amount of respect 

from this particular party and this government and this 

individual and the Aboriginal community. We do. We know the 

backs, the back of Saskatchewan, the farm, is based on the 

producer, the farmer, the people that really make a difference. 

And we respect them. We respect them and we see that they do 

a lot of hard work and they built this province and we respect 

that as well. We built it side by side. 

 

And the important thing is this is going to affect them too. This 

is going to hurt them. At first they may say, well yes, maybe 

better control of my land would be a net effect. But what 

happens if I go down to Regina with my combine — I’ll say it 

again — would I get charged there? What happens if my son 

who works for a union goes to protest in front of one of the 

shops in my community because he’s not getting fair wages? 

Well guess what, your son gets charged too. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of ramifications here, a lot of 

ramifications. And these guys have not figured it out. They 

have not figured it out. The Saskatchewan Party are so inept, 

and they’ve been out of government so long that they don’t 

even know what to do when they become government. And 

that’s scary, Mr. Speaker, that’s very scary. And the problem is 

if you’ve been so programmed and so ingrained in opposition, 

that when you win government you still don’t know you’ve 

won, then you’ve got to stop making Acts like this come 

forward until you can figure out how to be government. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen no evidence of that. None 

whatsoever. They don’t have a clue what they’re doing. And 

comes everything from Bills like this to some of their 

ideological positions on things like health care and the Crowns. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that I for one 

don’t take the position of the Minister of Justice that it doesn’t 

hurt anybody; it’s focused on the ATVers and the snowmobilers 

that disrespect property. I don’t buy that for one bit. That’s not 

what this is about. This is not about that whatsoever. And when 

he continues to insult the people of Saskatchewan’s intelligence 

by saying, oh no, it doesn’t do that. Then the people of 

Saskatchewan say, no way, we don’t believe you, as the 

opposition doesn’t believe you. 

 

And we’re going to continue holding them to account. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re going to continue opening up, opening up the 

sores left behind by some of the Acts that that party is trying to 

push forward. Sores that will begin to fester and divide our 

great province and our great community called Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll close with this comment, and I’ll offer an 

incident comment myself. Anything we do as a government, or 

we did as a government is all about economic and social justice. 

If it doesn’t help with the good, the greater good of 

Saskatchewan, then we ought not to do it. We got to remember 

that, the total vision for the entire province. And when you start 

picking winners and losers as the trespass Act does, it becomes 

a major problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for every person . . . [inaudible] . . . under the 

trespass Act, charged under the trespass Act, Bill 43, I say to 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

them — whether it’s a farmer processing with his combine or 

whether it’s a son hunting with his father or whether it’s 

somebody berry picking — that if you’re charged under the 

trespass Act, then you thank the Saskatchewan Party. You thank 

the Saskatchewan Party for that charge. Because what happens 

is, they already have people that could be charged under the 

automobile Act, under SGI, under the highway traffic Act. They 

could be charged for operating illegally ATVs and also 

snowmobiles. And the respectful snowmobiler out there, 

snowmobiling around, guess what? You could be charged. 

 

But for every charge — and they better be consistent because 

that’s what they’re supposed to do as government — they can 

thank the Saskatchewan Party for this new Act and those new 

charges because in their inept position as government, they 

haven’t consulted and they haven’t thought out these Bills long 

and hard enough. And the net effect is, you have a weak 

government that’s going to push through certain philosophical 

Bills. And that’s going to end up hurting all of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me be clear. This Bill has some dire 

consequences. And this Bill is going to create some significant 

problems, legal problems. This Bill is going to hurt everything, 

everybody from industry to First Nations to the agricultural 

community.  

 

And this government is hell-bent on getting it through. Why? 

Because they want to Americanize our land system in 

Saskatchewan. And I say to them, if you love America so much, 

see you later. We got a province that, if you move out there, 

we’ll do the work. And we’ll take over again, and we’ll show 

you how it’s done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at the end of the day, whether it’s Iran supporters, the 

trappers, the oil industry, the forestry people, the people that 

enjoy the recreational value of the land, they’re all going to be 

impacted and affected.  

 

And mark my words, Mr. Speaker, mark my words. This is 

going to be a very uncomfortable Bill at the end of the day for 

that party because they’re going to see the consequences were 

not intended by them. They’re going to see in spades some of 

the consequences that some of us think were not intended, but I 

believe were intended fully by the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t support this Bill. I will not be 

supporting this Bill in any way, shape, or form. And I move that 

we adjourn the motion on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Trespass to 

Property Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to add some comments about this particular piece of 

legislation. And I’m going to be relatively brief but I have a 

couple of things that I want to say. 

 

Basically this is a very short Bill. It has just a few provisions in 

it, and some of them are minor amendments that correct some 

problems around pensions. But there’s one particular clause that 

relates to the whole double-dipping issue for people who are on 

defined benefit programs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to speak to that one specifically 

and say this: this particular piece of legislation was brought 

forward to our government on many occasions to bring forward 

this exact provision. We had a legislative instruments 

committee that was comprised of ministers and members on the 

government side. We had a very thorough discussion of this 

particular issue, and it was our considered opinion after much 

discussion that this kind of provision was not acceptable to the 

public of Saskatchewan, and so we did not bring this forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very surprised that this came forward from 

the government when it had been rejected so many times 

before. And, Mr. Speaker, my only conclusion is that the 

government does not now have a committee of private members 

and ministers who back Bills before they come to the 

legislature, and that therefore this one has shown up on the floor 

of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that not having proper processes 

within government caucus should be a reason to bring forward 

Bills that are not acceptable to the public. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to adjourn debate on this particular matter. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 9. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 68 — The Arts 

Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today and speak to Bill 68, The Arts Professions Act, Mr. 

Speaker. When we think of the things that we love in this 

province, there are many things we really do love about this 

province — many different people, many different experiences. 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

Among the things that we as Saskatchewan people love the 

most are our artists and the arts, the many contributions that the 

arts community, the art sector provides to our province. 

 

Whatever the situation that we find ourselves in as individuals 

in this province — whether it’s the times of joy or the times of 

sadness, the times of reflection, and perhaps the times of 

thinking to the future — I know for each of us here we can 

think of experiences we’ve had with the arts community that 

really encapsulates what our emotions are and our thoughts at 

that time. Whether it’s theatre, whether it is graphic arts, 

whether it is any type of the arts sector, Mr. Speaker — music 

as well of course — we know that artists play a very crucial and 

important role in the life of Saskatchewan. And that’s 

something that I’m sure members on both sides can most 

certainly agree with. 

 

The Bill 68, The Arts Professions Act, much of the discussion 

around this Bill has been on the floor of this legislature and in 

the broader Saskatchewan community for some time. Many of 

the topics that are discussed are not new ones, Mr. Speaker. The 

status of the artist Act which we saw under the previous 

administration and legislation that was brought forward, dealt 

with many of these same matters, Mr. Speaker. And this was 

part of a larger, federal initiative that we saw where this type of 

legislation was being presented in various jurisdictions around 

the country with the hope of elevating and providing more 

stability to the arts sector. 

 

You know, in my intro comments when I talked about how 

important the arts community is to the province because of their 

importance, because of the important role that they’ve had in 

society, they deserve to be treated with the same respect and 

have the same stability and predictability in their business 

affairs as other sectors in the provincial economy. 

 

And the initial legislation that was presented under the previous 

NDP government, the status of the artist Act dealt with many of 

these issues that would bring a greater deal of stability and 

predictability to the business affairs for artists in the province. 

 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, when that legislation was being looked at 

in the previous term, the legislation was not completed; it was 

not passed into law. And there were a number of components, 

Mr. Speaker, to the legislation. But the sticking point that was 

the issue that really brought the legislation to a halt through the 

actions of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, was the 

component of collective bargaining. 

 

And it was the members opposite who had such . . . who were 

so uncomfortable with the aspect of collective bargaining that 

they chose not to allow the previous legislation to go forward, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can see from a Leader-Post article of November 21, 2008, 

and the title says “New act defines professional artists.” Mr. 

Speaker, the individuals that commented in this article — some 

from the arts community — are commenting that there are 

aspects of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, where progress is being 

realized and that are positive steps for the arts community. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the comments do suggest that it’s not 

going far enough because of the absence of the collective 

bargaining portion. And we know it is the members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, who do have such discomfort with that 

component. We can read from the article, there’s a quote, and 

this is speaking to the previous Bill that was looked at by this 

legislature before I was a member, Mr. Speaker. The quote is: 

 

However, that bill stalled in committee as the 

then-opposition Saskatchewan Party raised concerns with 

the collective bargaining portion of the legislation. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know why the legislation was not realized 

and completed in the earlier instance when it was debated in 

this legislature. 

 

So this Bill, Mr. Speaker, has a different name which is one 

indication that things have gone in a different direction. It’s 

called The Arts Professions Act which is unique in vis-á-vis 

other Canadian provinces where this type of legislation has 

come into effect. A Bill can be noted for the aspects that are 

included in a Bill. We can look at the various provisions that are 

in the Bill. 

 

As equally interesting in many instances, Mr. Speaker, are the 

things that are left out of the Bill and how telling that is. And in 

this case, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is silent on the collective or 

sector bargaining for artists, something that the arts community 

is very clear that it continues to support and would like to 

pursue. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s fine to have legislation that’s brought 

forward and accomplish some of the things that needs to be 

accomplished. But it only makes sense to, when you bring in 

legislation, to make sure that it fully captures everything that 

needs to be discussed; that it fully addresses all of the issues. 

 

When we look at the contributions that artists make to our 

province, it’s only fair that they have the predictability and 

stability in their lives. There are many artists who have been 

active in one area of the arts sector for many, many years. But 

because of the nature of that sector and the laws that are in 

place that govern the affairs of artists with those that are 

contracting their services, they might find themselves now, Mr. 

Speaker, getting closer to retirement and they don’t have the 

benefits and the stability that other professions and other 

individuals would have in this province. 

 

And that’s a concern, because we as the official opposition, and 

I know members opposite would agree with this as well, we 

want the best for every Saskatchewan resident in the province 

and for all the professions that are active in our province and 

make Saskatchewan such a great place to live. 

 

So that’s why it’s troubling, Mr. Speaker, that what we see with 

Bill 68, The Arts Professions Act, what we see here is a Bill that 

captures some of the items that need to be addressed for the arts 

community, but it fails in so many others. And as I mentioned 

before, we can look at the aspects of a Bill that are presented in 

the text and we can read what it wants to do, but as equally 

telling, Mr. Speaker, when looking at a piece of legislation, 

equally telling are the aspects that are left out. And in this 

situation, there’s no better example than Bill 68, The Arts 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

Professions Act, that clearly is responding to some of the needs 

in the community, is responding to some of the aspects, some of 

the changes that the arts community would like to bring to 

increase stability and predictability to their business affairs. But 

it doesn’t go far enough, Mr. Speaker. It’s only doing half of 

what actually needs to be done and accomplished at the end of 

the day. 

 

It is puzzling, Mr. Speaker, why the current government would 

choose to change the name of the Bill. I think that is an 

indication where they realized, I mean, that they were 

accomplishing some of the things that the previous legislation 

would, but they knew they had to put their own brand on it. 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, it’s a brand that stands for and reminds 

people of a half measure. It reminds people that only half of the 

things are being accomplished in this Bill that actually need to 

occur for the arts community. 

 

Also the timing of this, Mr. Speaker, coming into effect in 2010 

also raises some concerns. And it is sad and disappointing that 

for me and for many members in Saskatchewan, certainly the 

arts community, that the good opportunity that occurred for the 

status of the artist Act, that that good opportunity was not 

seized. And instead, we are left in a position now where we find 

ourselves in the legislature here debating Bill 68, but debating a 

measure that doesn’t go the distance, debating a measure that 

does not meet all of the needs of the arts community. 

 

When we look at some of the responses to the arts community, 

they’ll admit, as will I, that there are aspects in Bill 68 that are 

important. There are components that are a continuation of the 

discussion that took place earlier and elements that the arts 

community calls for. 

 

But we also know that the arts community wants more. We 

know that their right for collective bargaining or sector 

bargaining is important to them because it’s part of the larger 

piece and the larger puzzle, that will bring the stability and the 

predictability to the lives of the arts community. 

 

We know we value the artists in our province and all members 

would agree to that, Mr. Speaker. We know there’s been earlier 

legislation discussed in this House that was not passed, earlier 

legislation that met the needs of the arts community. We know, 

Mr. Speaker, that it was the members opposite who had 

problems with the legislation and chose to have this legislation 

stall in committee. We know that there is a new Bill in front of 

us, Bill 68, and we know that it addresses some of the issues 

that need to be addressed in the arts community. But sadly, Mr. 

Speaker, we also know that this Bill is leaving out a lot of 

important aspects that would bring the stability and the proper 

and appropriate benefits to the art sector. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there have been some members from 

my side who have commented on the sad situation we find 

ourselves in with Bill 68. And I know there will be other 

members from my side who will want to comment on this and 

further explore some of the ways that Bill 68 meets their 

requirements, but more importantly, many of the ways that Bill 

68 does not meet the needs of the arts community because of 

the measures that it leaves out. 

 

So given that there are more members who would like to 

discuss this, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 

at this time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 68. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 73 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to get my 

remarks for the record. Mr. Speaker, the university amendment 

Act, Bill No. 73 comes about because of a request made by the 

university that noted . . . in terms of some of the legislation in 

selecting a chancellor, Mr. Speaker. Also in there was the 

two-term limit set in existing legislation that they wanted 

removed and the way of appointment, the voting for the 

chancellor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting Bill. Interesting from the 

standpoint that in fact here was something . . . the questions that 

we often ask about the Bills, ask of the Sask Party, that it is 

amazing — that it is amazing — every once in awhile that they 

get it, Mr. Speaker. The light bulb comes on and here it is 

where the question we asked, where did this come from? Why 

are we doing this? And here is the clear answer: the University 

of Saskatchewan requested it and they are doing it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we value the universities that we have, the 

post-secondary institutions. We see that the universities play an 

important role in our society. And, Mr. Speaker, the campus of 

today is not just an academic institution, Mr. Speaker, as the 

member from The Battlefords said. He said, campuses today 

have research facilities, Mr. Speaker. They are a place of 

developmental opportunities, disease control. Mr. Speaker, the 

scientific community is benefiting people all over the place, and 

we are all proud of the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but what this Bill did is it allowed for debate, Mr. 

Speaker. It allowed for debate because it was clear we knew 

where this Bill was coming from, and our members could pose 

questions, Mr. Speaker. The member from Nutana raised 

concerns because she had voted in past elections on a 

chancellor, and she felt that this was important. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we will probably not have problems supporting this 

Bill as it stands here. And that is good for the Assembly and it 

is good here. 

 

But I just want to make those points, Mr. Speaker, that here it is 

quite clear what is driving this Act. It sets out the conditions 

and, quite clearly, the amendments that are required. And then 

we have time to debate because we understand where these are 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

coming from, unlike the other Bills that we saw earlier today or 

the track record here that we have seen. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I would adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 73. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 71 — The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my pleasure 

to speak to Bill No. 71, which is The Innovation Saskatchewan 

Act. And frankly I have a fair amount that I wish to speak to on 

this. We have a situation where the government introduced an 

Act called the innovation Act, and they would have the people 

of Saskatchewan believe that somehow they’ve invented 

innovation. And the truth of the matter is innovation is what 

Saskatchewan has been about since long before any of us in this 

Chamber were born. 

 

We have a history full of innovation, as I’ve mentioned. We 

have done things like created the synchrotron here in 

Saskatchewan. It’s the only synchrotron in Canada. And that 

happened in the last decade, when it came into being. But as I 

say, it’s the only one in Canada. 

 

We have the petroleum technology research institute right here 

in Regina, attached to the U of R, University of Regina. That’s 

a very innovative notion, and it helped the oil industry to 

develop new and innovative ways of bringing ever more oil out 

of the oil reserves that are in the ground, all of which is worth 

literally hundreds of millions of dollars to the Saskatchewan 

treasury. So we have a situation where research in areas like oil 

recovery tends to pay many times what the initial investment is. 

 

We have the International Test Centre for Carbon Dioxide 

Capture, again at the University of Regina, a leading-edge 

development innovation. We have the Innovation and Science 

Fund to leverage funding from the federal government and 

other national bodies, in other words to work together with the 

more senior level of government and others as on special 

projects as it may happen, as it may be required, as may 

enhance Saskatchewan’s economic future if I can describe it 

that way, or environmental future or however. 

 

We have the Saskatchewan Research Council which has just a 

tremendously positive history. The good people at the Research 

Council are constantly engaged in projects. Some of them seem 

to be standard projects that are ongoing for a lengthy period of 

time, and others tend to be short-term in nature. But whatever 

they’re charged with, they inevitably seem to be up to the task 

and they just do terrific work on behalf of, or not on behalf of 

so much as to the benefit of all of the people of Saskatchewan 

and even well beyond that. 

 

We have fostered commercialization of new technologies in 

enhanced oil recovery. We’ve done all sorts of things in 

Saskatchewan in very innovative ways. We set up the first fibre 

optics network in the world through SaskTel; that was an 

innovation that was born right here in Saskatchewan. So I want 

right off the hop to make it very clear that this innovation Act 

isn’t inventing innovation. There has been much innovation 

over the years. 

 

What troubles me too about this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

quite frankly, is I see this as being a say one thing and do 

exactly the opposite Bill from the Sask Party government. Say 

one thing and do the opposite. I’m fairly confident that the 

overwhelming majority of people in Saskatchewan would 

believe that the government, the current government members 

say and have said repeatedly that they should not be picking 

winners and losers. They should not be investing taxpayers’ 

money in winning or losing propositions, and yet that’s exactly 

what this particular Bill is set up to do, is to fund winners and 

losers. And I will come to that particular theme; I’ll return back 

to that in a minute. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to the minister responsible for the 

innovation Act and some of the words that he used when he was 

introducing this Act, December 2, 2008. So this is in Hansard. 

I’m not inventing words and I know that, I do believe that the 

minister firmly believed the words, but they raise flags for this 

member. What I wanted to refer to is in the very third paragraph 

where . . . I’ll use the full paragraph. “This ecosystem is based 

on foresight, flexibility, creativity, [again we have creativity, 

Mr. Speaker] and the freedom to act on these qualities.” 

 

And that’s what strikes some consternation, raises questions in 

my heart. 

 

. . . the freedom to act on these qualities. Innovation 

Saskatchewan will be a new, special operating agency. 

 

And “a new, special operating agency,” Mr. Speaker, just leaves 

all sorts of questions. Is Innovation Saskatchewan going to 

operate under rules that we understand other Crowns or 

agencies of government operate under? Or is it going to be so 

special that what we wind up with is one line on the budget 

item, one simple line without explanation as to where the 

money has gone without adequate explanation of where money 

might be going? And that causes some concern. 

 

Later in the paragraph, I’ll go on with the quote. The minister 

says, “Our growth and competitiveness is already considerable, 

but it must be encouraged and sustained.” 

 

I’ve no disagreement with that statement, Mr. Speaker. What I 

have disagreement with is that it clearly is talking about picking 

winners and losers. You either fund all, or you’re picking 

winners and losers. That’s just a simple definition of how you 

would enhance Saskatchewan’s ability to be competitive in an 

international trade. You either fund all, in which case you’re not 

picking winners and losers, or you select winners and losers by 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

definition. And it can be no other way. There’s just no 

possibility of it being any other way. 

 

So what we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, is in effect . . . I’m going to go 

back a little bit, and in the 1970s the Conservatives of the day 

made much political hay out of SEDCO, Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation. And the charges were that 

the government of the day, the Blakeney New Democrats, were 

lending money indiscriminately. And in fact there were some 

losses. 

 

And what SEDCO was set up for . . . I’m not going to get into 

too long a harangue about what SEDCO was, but in broad 

strokes what SEDCO was set up to do was to be a lender for 

start-up companies, start-up companies that would have 

difficulty or find it impossible to raise the funds necessary from 

a lending institution, a credit union or a bank. And in those days 

there were plenty of it. The ’70s were a heyday of economic 

development. So that was set up to help start-up companies. 

And absolutely there were losers. And absolutely there were 

winners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there were tens of thousands of jobs created in 

Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan people because of SEDCO and 

its existence. And again I’m not going to make this all about 

SEDCO, but I want to point out that the right wing 

Conservatives of the day said that SEDCO was wrong, and that 

government should not be involved in picking winners and 

losers. They said that then. And they eliminated SEDCO when 

they formed government, when they formed government in 

1982. So far that seems fairly consistent. So far that seems like 

that’s at least saying one thing and following through. 

 

But the problem with it, Mr. Speaker, was that the wheels fell 

off it very quickly. The wheels fell off it very quickly, and the 

Devine government of the day started picking its own winners 

and losers. It started its own list without the benefit of SEDCO 

or a professional group to help make recommendations. They 

just went out, you know, you almost think, Mr. Speaker, that 

they went out with just a shopping list. And I say that because 

amongst other things, they had a big investment in something 

that was called Supercart — Supercart. It was a three-wheel 

cart, and they actually built, I believe they built three prototypes 

of the Supercart, but they just couldn’t find anybody to make it 

work. 

 

The list goes on of things that the Devine right wing 

government invested in. They invested in $7.4 million that they 

lost actually in Westank-Willock. They lost $10 million in 

Flexicoil. They lost $15 million in Federated Co-op, 16.8 

million in Intercontinental Packers, 17.2 million in an impact 

packaging scheme. And I haven’t mentioned the $1.5 million 

that they lost in Joytec, a golf simulator that my colleague, the 

member for Regina Rosemont, pointed out the other day that it 

didn’t improve this member’s golf game one bit. I want to just 

for the record say, it takes an awful lot more than a golf 

simulator, it would take probably hundreds of lessons to 

improve my game to anything remotely acceptable. 

 

But the fact is, Joytec, one and a half million taxpayers’ dollars 

later and it was gone. And that was done under the 

Conservative government through the ’80s, the forerunner to 

the Sask Party. I haven’t talked about High R Doors and the 

loss there in The Battlefords. There’s many, many things that I 

haven’t talked about, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to innovation 

and the innovation Act, which is an Act that allows the 

government to pick winners and losers. 

 

But there was another loser that was another thing that 

happened in the ’80s and that was the STC [Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company], Eagle Bus of Texas scandal and 11 

buses picked — and the rest is sort of history on that front. But 

GigaText — remember that, Mr. Speaker? — the English to 

French translation scheme that was cooked up, largely I think 

history will prove, largely cooked up by one Eric Berntson or at 

least he took a lead role in it. And my purpose here isn’t 

particularly to beat up on Mr. Berntson, it’s just simply he took 

the lead role from the government perspective. 

 

But I can remember when it was announced in this very 

Chamber — because I was here then in opposition. — and I can 

remember we burst out laughing. We actually just burst out 

with uncontrollable laughter at the ludicrousness of this 

translation, this capability. I know that now, now it’s possible, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s no question about that. Now it actually 

can happen. But not in 1988 and not with obsolete computer 

equipment that GigaText had. And there’s a whole story there 

as to how it came about it. 

 

But we went from giggling about it here, uncontrollable 

laughter in the Chamber when it was announced, to I remember 

getting outside the Chamber doors and then saying, well can it? 

Can it work? Can it happen? Is it possible? Because we had to 

do a little bit of due diligence in opposition at the time. And so 

we all called up all the computer gurus that we knew and many 

that we didn’t know, and the answer universally came back that, 

you know, in the future this is going to be possible, but the 

technology does not exist at this time. In the future it’s going to 

come — that’s what we were told — but the technology does 

not exist at this time. 

 

And so then the rest — we did our job and went after GigaText 

at length and were proved to be right. I mean it was five and a 

half million dollars just absolute dead loss that should not have 

happened. And it was because the government of the day picked 

a winner that turned out to be, for taxpayers, a colossal loser. 

 

But just as a side note, I remember the first time the GigaText 

people brought the media in — and I’m sure this is a matter in 

the archives — but the first time they brought the media in to 

show them they were going to do some simple English to 

French translation. They couldn’t boot up a computer. They 

couldn’t get it to go. And the story said, all they got was a poof 

of smoke, but no translation. And that was the showcase for 

GigaText. And that should have sent some alarm bells to the 

government of the day, but they kept chunking in — I’ve been 

doing a little research on it — they kept chunking in $50,000 a 

month just to keep that facade alive. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the sort of thing that causes us 

all kinds of questions around Bill No. 71, the innovation Act, 

because what this Bill sets up is for minister and six appointed 

boards appointed by the minister to run Innovation Place, run 

the innovation fund. 

 

I can tell it is time to refer to some of the specific things in the 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

Act, because as I was going through the Act there were some 

things that really caused me some questions, Mr. Speaker. And 

I have the Act before me right now and I have it marked up. 

 

Section 11 is the chief executive officer and other staff and 

11(1) starts off with a word that really troubles me: 

 

Notwithstanding The Public Service Act, 1998, the agency 

shall employ a chief executive officer. 

 

So that means you don’t have to go through the normal hiring 

process. You don’t have to go through the Public Service 

Commission. That’s what that clause 11(1) says. 

 

(2) The agency shall determine the chief executive 

officer’s conditions of employment and remuneration. 

 

So we have the hon. minister, the member for Thunder Creek 

and his hand-picked group of people that are going to set the 

salary unilaterally of the chief . . . or they can set the salary of 

the chief executive officer of their own new, special creation. 

 

(3) The agency shall pay to the chief executive officer the 

remuneration determined pursuant to subsection (2). 

 

That’s straightforward. It just says whatever rate of pay you say 

you’re going to pay, whatever the benefits are, you’re going to 

pay them. That’s pretty straightforward. It doesn’t make it any 

less troublesome for me but it’s pretty straightforward. 

 

I go to 11(5) where it says: 

 

Subject to any policies established by the board, the chief 

executive officer may: 

 

(a) [again] notwithstanding The Public Service Act, 1998, 

hire, on behalf of the agency, any employees that the chief 

executive officer considers necessary for the conduct of 

the agency’s operations; and 

 

(b) determine the employees’: 

 

(i) duties and powers; 

 

(ii) conditions of employment; and 

 

(iii) remuneration. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the special creation is becoming pretty 

apparent. The specialness of this innovation operation is 

becoming more apparent the more we just look at the Bill. For a 

government that got elected largely on the issue of transparency 

and public accountability, this Bill flies in the face of that, Mr. 

Speaker. This Bill leaves me to believe it’s from a say one 

thing, do another thing government. That’s what I read from 

this Bill. That’s what I see from this Bill. 

 

And I see, Mr. Speaker, history simply repeating itself. The 

cycle goes around and round and round. I believe that this 

iteration of a right wing government has the same beliefs that 

the previous iteration in the ’80s had — the same beliefs — and 

with a few twists are going to deliver us essentially the same 

thing. And that causes me some consternation. 

[16:45] 

 

I don’t mind a philosophical dispute. I don’t mind that New 

Democrats believe that it is an obligation of government to help 

start up companies to create jobs and to create wealth here in 

Saskatchewan. I don’t shrink from that and never have, not for a 

minute, Mr. Speaker; that’s broadly what New Democrats 

believe. We have an obligation to help our population, give 

them a hand up, not a hand out — a hand up. We believe in 

creation of wealth and helping Saskatchewan grow. And we did 

it and we’ve done it through history. We have done it 

repeatedly. 

 

What we see from . . . Here’s where I have difficulty, is right 

wing governments say that government can’t work. 

Governments should get out of the way of business. And then 

they get elected and what’s the first thing they do? Oh here, let 

me pick a winner, let me pick a loser. My friends are going to 

be winners. If you’re not a friend of mine, you’re going to be a 

loser. It’s by definition. You either have a process that’s logical 

and easy to follow or — or — or you’re picking winners and 

losers. It’s one way or the other. 

 

I think I’ve struck a chord, Mr. Speaker. I hear much yelping 

from across the floor. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

have no quarrel with an ideological difference. I have a quarrel 

when a party or a government or an opposition says one thing 

and does another. That offends. That offends. And that’s what I 

see happening in this Act . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I hear, I hear the member for Moose Jaw North 

saying that I don’t know what I’m talking about. I know that 

when I was raising the potential loss of 90 jobs at SaskWater 

headquartered in Moose Jaw that that member was laughing. I 

know that earlier this day. 

 

So I may not have all of the answers; in fact that’s the job of 

opposition is to ask the questions. Our job is to point out what 

we see as the weaknesses in every piece of legislation. That’s 

our job. We’re tasked to do that. And it’s the government’s job 

to react, and we’re hoping that they would listen to some of the 

ideas we have. We’re hoping that they will respond and that we 

can somehow legitimize the government, somehow make it a 

better government. 

 

When we’ve got legitimate concerns, we have not just the right, 

we have the obligation to raise them on behalf of not only our 

constituents, but all of the people of Saskatchewan. And it is 

my, always been my pleasure in opposition to do so. In many 

ways I wish that we didn’t need to have an opposition. I wish 

we could be just one big collegial gang and slap each other on 

the back and cash our paycheques, but that doesn’t seem to be 

the universe. And it’s not the world that I’ve seen any in my 

lifetime, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think I’m about to see it. 

 

So Bill 71, The Innovation Saskatchewan Act, I’m going to go 

to clause 12 which is the superannuation and other plans. 

Superannuation, in other words, pension and benefits. Twelve 

says: 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 11, 2009 

The agency may establish and support any or all of the 

following for the benefit of the chief executive officer and 

other employees and the dependants of the chief executive 

officer and other employees: 

 

(a) a superannuation plan; 

 

(b) a group insurance plan; and 

 

(c) any other pension, superannuation or employee 

benefit program. 

 

That’s a pretty good gig, pretty good gig, notwithstanding The 

Public Service Act. It’s not a bad gig that they can establish all 

of that. 

 

Go down to clause 16 which is the capacity to contract, Mr. 

Speaker, and (2) says, “The agency may, on behalf of the 

Crown, contract in its corporate name [presumably Innovation 

Saskatchewan may contract in its corporate name] without 

specific reference to the Crown.” 

 

So they can contract with a certain amount of stealth if they 

wish, Mr. Speaker, or I wonder it that’s possible. 

 

As a rather humorous aside or at least I took it that way, section 

17, is a common seal and the entire section says, “The agency is 

to have a common seal.” And I’m wondering if that’s to match 

the dome of silence that we get on all other matters of 

accountability from the government members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Part IV deals with financial matters. And much of that is 

straightforward, but I have some questions around the annual 

report which is in clause 22, Mr. Speaker. Clause 22 (1)(b) says, 

“a financial statement showing the business of the agency for 

the proceeding fiscal year, in any form that may be required by 

Treasury Board.” And that’s the way it’ll be. 

 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Treasury Board is an 

operation of the Legislative Assembly, but it is an operation that 

is 100 per cent government without opposition and probably 

should be. But here we have the government saying the 

Treasury Board, an arm of executive government, will dictate 

the form that the annual report will come in. 

 

This administration is long on promises and short on delivery. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, it strikes me as kind of like the federal 

Conservative money, their infrastructure money, you know, that 

they’re so proud to announce and then re-announce and then 

announce again — like it’s a brand new thing — and then 

re-announce and re-announce again. And it just goes on and on 

and on, but the money never seems to flow, and that seems to 

be the way the promises are here. 

 

Accountability is one of the key aspects of this Bill or one of 

the key things that’s necessary in this Bill, but I don’t see it. 

Accountability, and I want to say for the record, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that government members got elected believing their own 

rhetoric about accountability. I think they genuinely wanted to 

be accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. But somewhere 

in the process of governance in the first 15 months that’s proven 

to be a little difficult at times. And so what maybe was intended 

a year and a half ago, sometimes there’s some difficulty in 

delivering it. And I think that in far too many cases on 

accountability, the government has stumbled and indeed has 

even fallen. 

 

And so this Bill, this innovation Act, An Act respecting 

Innovation Saskatchewan, Bill No. 71, kind of scares me 

because it talks of a special agency. And it talks throughout its 

. . . The Bill itself, it speaks, Mr. Speaker, about a special 

relationship. If the normal relationships were more accountable, 

you know, we might not have this same fear. 

 

But when you introduce the notion somehow of a super agency 

or a special agency with special rights that in its own Act says 

things like, notwithstanding The Public Service Act, small 

wonder that the opposition would have some questions around 

this. Small wonder. You couple that with the say one thing, do 

another attitude that says we will not pick winners and losers — 

and that’s public record. I think people absolutely understand 

that, Mr. Speaker — but say one thing, do another. Because this 

Bill is clearly, as I pointed out, it’s clearly about selecting 

winners and losers. 

 

Again the very minister itself says, comments about the 

freedom to act. In his remarks as he introduced the Bill, 

December 2, 2008, when he was introducing the Bill, they 

wanted the freedom to act. They want to set up . . . It looks like 

to me that they want to set up a innovation entity that the 

minister and his small, hand-picked board can control. And they 

can pick the winners and losers with minimum, minimum 

scrutiny from the public, without the ready ability of the 

opposition to go line by line and scrutinize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I sure hope I’m wrong. I really hope I’m wrong. 

But the history of this Saskatchewan Party government is not 

conducive to me believing I’m wrong. I hope I’m wrong, but I 

don’t think I am. I don’t think I am. All of their history, all of 

their history, their short history, says that I am absolutely right. 

 

This is a government that was born, this is a party, for Heaven’s 

sakes, born in the secrecy in the dark of night; born in the secret 

deal. They’ve made themselves palatable by . . . They won an 

election . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Not so palatable on this 

side. But legitimized themselves by winning an election. And I 

give them that. 

 

But the harsh truth is, it was a party formed by a small handful 

of MLAs, disgruntled MLAs — mostly Conservatives and a 

few Liberals thrown into the mix — that got together and 

formed the Sask Party. And away they go. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Some order in the House. I 

recognize the member from . . . Order. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Small wonder that 

there’s a shortage of trust on this side. And as I’ve pointed out, 

it’s a group of people that have said government should get out 

of the way of business. Just get out of the way and let business 

do its job. That’s what they say. And yet Innovation 

Saskatchewan says exactly the opposite thing. It says, we’re 

going to . . . We, the Sask Party, are going to pick the winners 

and are going to pick the losers. Their friends can be the 

winners and hang the rest. 



March 11, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

What a shame, Mr. Speaker. It is small wonder that we’ve got 

all kinds of questions around this Bill, all kinds of questions 

because of the say one thing, do another thing government. And 

it’s just unacceptable — the terms of setting up the board, the 

terms of paying its chief executive officer, the ignoring the 

Public Service Commission, the notwithstanding clauses in its 

very Act to set up this Innovation Saskatchewan thing. It is 

small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that we have concerns on this side 

of the House. 

 

We got lots of questions. I mean not just restricted to this Bill, 

but we got more than enough questions to go around on this 

Bill. We don’t believe it is a right-spirited Bill. We wish the 

government would have had the courage to say, we want to pick 

the winners and losers. I wish they’d have had the courage to 

say, we want to pick the winners and losers. But no, they’re 

going to do it by stealth and without accountability, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s a shame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 10 a.m. 

tomorrow morning. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2209 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2209 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2209 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2209 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2209 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2209 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2209 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2210 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2210 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2210 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Regina Educator Named Outstanding Principal 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2210 

 Youth for Christ Banquet 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2210 

 Regional Health Authority Volunteer and Spiritual Services 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2211 

 Agricultural Safety Week 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2211 

 Recognition of First Responders 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2211 

 Red Cross Month 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2212 

 Scott Blues win City Basketball Championship 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2212 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Infrastructure Funding 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2212 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2212 

 Effect of Economic Situation on Pension Plans 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2213 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2213 

 SaskWater Services 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2214 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2214 

 Proposed Enhanced Driver’s Licence 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2216 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2216 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Additional Funding for Water Infrastructure Program 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2217 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 

 Additional Funding for Municipalities 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2218 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2218 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2219 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 69 — The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Amendment Act, 2008 

 Loi de 2008 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2219 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 2220 



 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2220 

 Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation  

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2223 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2227 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2234 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2234 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2236 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2237 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


