




















































Hansard: November 30, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 22A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3847 

 November 30, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 

great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly a number of guests who 

are here to support the introduction of Bills that will establish a 

results-based environmental regulatory framework in 

Saskatchewan. And I will ask them to give us a wave when I 

announce them. 

 

From the Saskatchewan region of the Nature Conservancy of 

Canada, Dennis Sherratt; from Nature Saskatchewan, Lorne 

Scott; from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Holly 

Hetherington, Martin Klinger, and Kristen McKee; from 

Saskatchewan Environmental Industry Managers Association, 

Lloyd Saul; from the Communities of Tomorrow, J.P. Martin; 

from the Centre for Sustainable Infrastructure Research, Dr. 

David Hubble. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the results-based reform will provide a framework 

which will enhance environmental protection while promoting 

the use of innovative technologies in our province and best 

practices. And I would like to thank the visitors that are joining 

us today for all of their help and support and advice and input 

on this file. And I look forward to working with them as we 

continue to implement the results-based regulatory framework, 

Mr. Speaker. And I ask all members of the Assembly to 

welcome these people to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to join the minister in welcoming the delegation to the 

legislature here today. Each one of them serves a very integral 

part to the environment component of our province in very 

special ways, and we’re very grateful that they do the work they 

do. 

 

I’d like to make special mention, of course, of one individual. 

That’d be Lorne Scott who we recognized in the legislature just 

about a week and a half ago with respect to having been 

awarded the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. So welcome to the 

legislature and again thank you for the work that you do on 

behalf of the province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn, the 

Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise and introduce to you and through you to 

members of the Assembly a guest seated in your gallery. Mr. 

Speaker, joining us today is Ms. Linda McIntyre. If she could 

give a wave or stand. 

 

Ms. McIntyre’s recently been appointed the Provincial 

Archivist by the Saskatchewan Archives Board. Ms. McIntyre 

holds a master’s degree in history from the University of 

Western Ontario and a Bachelor of Arts Honours degree in 

Canadian Studies from Trent University. Mr. Speaker, she has 

been with the Saskatchewan Archives for 22 years. In fact I 

believe tomorrow marks her 22nd year on the job, most recently 

as the chief archivist for records processing. 

 

And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming her 

and congratulating her on being appointed as our Provincial 

Archivist. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce a old friend of mine in the east gallery, none other 

than Gunnar Passmore. And it’s a kind of a red-letter day for 

Gunnar and I as we see his former MLA Lorne Scott being 

introduced. And of course I want to welcome Lorne. 

 

But Gunnar Passmore is with the building trades and in the 

Government Relations area right now. I’ve known Gunnar and 

his wife, Dee, for a great many years and count them as good 

friends. Please join me in welcoming Gunnar Passmore to the 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the Minister 

of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport in welcoming Ms. Linda 

McIntyre, our new Provincial Archivist to the legislature. 

Welcome. 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — And before we move on, I’d like to 

introduce a gentleman who’s come in from the community of 

Kipling, my home community — Wayne Mogk, who’s been 

involved with SARCAN over the years and was in for an 

interview with the Red Cross. So help me welcome Wayne 

Mogk to the Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Proud to stand today 

and present a petition on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 

citizens who are concerned about the condition of Highway 

310. The petition indicates that the highway is deteriorated. And 

the condition of the highway is now a potential safety hazard 

for the residents who have to drive on this highway, and it is in 

much need of an upgrade. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will read to you the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the Sask 



3848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

Party government to commit to providing the repairs to 

Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan so need. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Regina, Melville, and Foam Lake, Saskatchewan. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan 

residents that speaks to the unreasonable increases that renters 

across this province are feeling. Mr. Speaker, with many of the 

vacancy rates in this province below 1 per cent and some below 

2 per cent in the larger cities, many renters have seen their rents 

double or proposals or notices that it will double within the next 

six months, and that a majority of Canadians now live in 

provinces where there are rent-control guidelines. And the 

prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with the view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s estimated that 1 in 

98 children has autism spectrum disorder and that parents and 

guardians now must become educators, advocates, caregivers, 

and financiers, and that the majority of Canadians now live in 

provinces with adequate autism spectrum disorder strategies 

and funding. Therefore the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing a 

comprehensive provincial autism spectrum strategy that is 

based on proven best practice, evidence-based research, 

treatments, and programming, and given the complexity of 

the disorder and its treatments, the individualized funding 

concept be adapted for parents and guardians of autistic 

individuals. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

There are today 349 signatures, and they are from Regina, 

Moosomin, Qu’Appelle, Davidson, White City, and Saskatoon. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

workers in the community-based organizations, the CBOs in 

Saskatchewan have traditionally been underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty level wages. And in fact that low 

wages paid to CBO workers result in a high staff turnover and a 

subsequent lack of caregiver continuity has a negative impact 

on the quality of care clients receive. I’d like to read their 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the cities of Saskatoon and 

Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3849 

affordable water and who have not yet had any commitment of 

assistance from the Sask Party government. And the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

today in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, the 

existing construction industry labour relations Act, 1992 has 

provided a stable environment for labour relations in the 

construction industry. And, Mr. Speaker, we all understand that 

stable labour relations provide for quality of work and safe 

construction sites. Mr. Speaker, also the trades contracts support 

an apprenticeship system of training which results in a highly 

skilled work force. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required for 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitions are signed by people from Regina, 

Weyburn, Earl Grey, Foam Lake, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford. I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Saskatchewan Party. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks and concerned citizens 

from Carievale, Arcola, and Redvers, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Grey Cup 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

there are some in the province today who may be making the 

statement, you know, yesterday, that was really just a game. 

And when you consider what some people are going through 

today in their daily lives, and we think particularly of a family 

in Esterhazy, I can understand the sentiment of that. 

 

But truly yesterday was not just a game; it was the Grey Cup. 

And the Riders were in the Grey Cup and the Riders played an 

amazing game. The Riders exceeded everybody’s expectations. 

The pundits said they’d lose. The quarterback for the 

Stampeders said they’d lose by three scores. And they played a 

great game. It ended of course in a painful way though for the 

Rider nation, but truly it was not just a game. 

 

There might be others that would say, well this is just a football 

team. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are members of the Rider nation 

all around the world who would disagree. There are 10 kids 

who are fighting cancer and their family members who were at 

that game who understand that this is not just a football team. 

 

[13:45] 

 

There are a number of dads — some of them I heard on the 

radio this morning, some I know personally — were talking 

about how it was cool for their teenage kids, their teenage 

daughters even, to spend four hours with them watching the 

Rider game. That kind of brought them together in a special 

way. So they’d say it’s not just a football team. 

 

So we’re all hurting a little bit this morning, and that’s okay. It 

was a painful end to the game. But here’s the good news, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a new era in Rider football. 

 



3850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

Thanks to Jim Hopson. Thanks to the coaches and the staff and 

the players. This team strives for excellence, Mr. Speaker. One 

play doesn’t change that. One game doesn’t change that. And 

on behalf of the province, we thank the Riders for a great 

season. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

A Proud Generation Calendar 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

Tuesday night I had the pleasure of attending the launch for the 

2010 edition of the A Proud Generation calendar. 

 

The Proud Generation calendar was founded in 2003 by Tracy 

George Heese and the first calendar came out in 2004. The 

vision was to feature: 

 

Inuit, Métis, and First Nations youth who have dedicated 

themselves to living a healthy, responsible and productive 

lifestyle . . . A Proud Generation represents the dream of 

seeing young people thrive. 

 

A Proud Generation is certainly helping to realize that dream, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The 2010 launch featured the Métis fiddle of Brian Sklar, the 

powerful hand drums of the Young Scouts, and the amazing 

hoop dancing of Reba Littletent. Elder Isador Pelletier got 

things started in a good way with a prayer. Honorary committee 

members Mike Laliberte and Marty Klyne had some wise 

words for this year’s role models. And emcees Nelson Bird and 

Claudia Jones kept the show on the road. 

 

Thanks to them and to the sponsors and to the Proud Generation 

committee — which is itself a really impressive group with 

members like Tom Benjoe, Jennifer Matts, Jada Yee, and 

Kristin Francis — for a job very well done. Ēkosi, ēkosi, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The 2010 calendar features role models like Cadmus Delorme, 

Rebecca Sangwais, Jacob Pratt, Katelyn Taypotat, and Creeson 

Agecoutay. They demonstrate the strengths of a generation that 

truly has a lot to be proud of, Mr. Speaker. And I ask that all 

members join me in congratulating them and all of those who 

have joined together to help showcase a proud generation. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation Festival of Trees 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

festive season certainly brings out the spirit of charity in 

Saskatchewan people. This spirit of charity was certainly 

evident at what is considered the social event of the year in 

Moose Jaw, as the Moose Jaw Health Foundation held its 

festival of trees on November 14th. 

 

The festival of trees is the largest fundraising event in support 

of the Moose Jaw Health Foundation. The festival of trees had a 

French theme of fine wine, great food, elegant desserts, and a 

French ambiance of decorative excellence. The sellout crowd 

made up a festive audience of over 500 people who took part in 

this gala event of dining and dancing and a live and silent 

auction Saturday night followed by a Sunday brunch with a 

Christmas choir along with a message of inspiration. 

 

Over $200,000 was raised in support of the hospital. The funds 

will go toward the purchase of state-of-the-art surgical lighting 

and a new anesthetic machine. The success of the Festival of 

Trees demonstrates the community’s commitment to the Moose 

Jaw hospital. 

 

Congratulations to the Moose Jaw Health Foundation Festival 

of Trees committee for the organization of this outstanding 

event, and grateful appreciation to the businesses and the 

citizens who support the cause so generously. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

New Saskatchewan Hospital Requested 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because of the Sask 

Party’s mismanagement of Saskatchewan’s finances, 

Saskatchewan people are seeing the financing of health projects 

being set aside. While this is happening, the Minister of Health 

needs to keep a few important things in mind. 

 

A couple of weeks ago I reported to the Legislative Assembly 

that a rally was held in North Battleford, a rally that was called 

Shovels Here, New Beginnings, a rally that brought together 

community leaders, mental health advocates and families, and 

ordinary people who wanted to raise awareness about the need 

to get construction started on a new Saskatchewan hospital. 

 

I’ve now received petitions and letters signed by hundreds of 

residents of the province of Saskatchewan that I would like to 

deliver to the Minister of Health and the Saskatchewan Party 

Government of Saskatchewan. The petitions are not in the 

proper legislative format but state that the petitioners believe 

that mental health matters, that a new mental health facility is a 

critical component in the continuum of provincial mental health 

services. And the petitioners believe that the government of 

Saskatchewan should proceed with building a new 

Saskatchewan hospital in North Battleford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today I will be turning these petitions and letters 

over to the Minister of Health so that he and his colleagues in 

government can see that people right across this great province 

want him to act — want him to act quickly — to get started on 

this promised and much-needed project. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

St. Gabriel the Archangel Parish 

Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On August 1st and 

2nd, St. Gabriel the Archangel Parish in Biggar celebrated 100 

years as a parish. On the Saturday, more than 240 parishioners 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3851 

that came from near and far were treated to a number of 

activities during the day, culminating with a wonderful banquet 

and silent auction. 

 

On Sunday the Most Reverend Albert LeGatt, former Bishop of 

Saskatoon, presided Mass with celebrating priests Father Dario 

Bebillo, Father Raymond Senger, and Father John 

Malazdrewich. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is hard to describe the spirit and excitement that 

was in the church as some of the most senior parishioners to 

some of the youngest, along with representatives from the 

Knights of Columbus, Catholic Women’s League, Pastoral 

Council, St. Gabriel School, and the provincial and federal 

governments took part in the opening procession, dedication of 

the building, and celebration of the mass. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank and congratulate all those 

that organized, prepared for, and worked to make the 100th 

celebration a success, an event that those who were fortunate 

enough to attend will remember for years to come. A job well 

done. I would also like to thank all those who made the mass 

special through their ministries. It was a worthy celebration of 

100 years of worship in St. Gabriel the Archangel Parish. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Time Travel 

 

Mr. Furber: — Return with me now, Mr. Speaker, to last 

Tuesday when the member from Saskatoon Sutherland 

criticized the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] adoption of Allan 

Blakeney’s model of policy renewal. Blakeney’s New Deal for 

People was too retro, too old school for the member opposite, 

so she criticized the NDP for time travel back to a model that 

won 45 seats and improved social programs — programs like a 

children’s dental program, prescription drugs, subsidized 

housing, home care, and help for the elderly poor. 

 

But last week’s events, Mr. Speaker, have revealed the 

Saskatchewan Party to be the true masters of time travel. First 

the Premier wished a time machine would return him to before 

he made his broken promise to balance the budget. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Marty and Doc must have twisted the wrong dial on 

their flux capacitor because they’ve taken the province 

backwards, not backwards to the Premier’s March of ’09, let 

alone Blakeney’s 1971, but the Devine days of 

billion-dollar-plus deficits.  

 

That’s right, Mr. Speaker, they haven’t taken the province back 

to an NDP era The Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan says “. . . 

delivered an unbroken string of budget surpluses despite an 

activist government agenda.” Instead they’ve taken the province 

back to a Devine era where they hid their massive deficits 

behind a string of political gimmicks. Sound familiar, Mr. 

Speaker?  

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the government plan for time 

travel, I know Saskatchewan people would far rather go back to 

an NDP future of balanced budgets and solid social programs 

than to a Saskatchewan Party future of deficits and Grant 

Devine. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Greenwing Conservation Award 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have the 

honour to stand in this Assembly to pay tribute to Gregg 

Sheppard. Gregg, a former NHL [National Hockey League] 

player, has been honoured for all the work he’s done off the ice. 

On November 25th he was named the 2009 recipient of the 

Lieutenant Governor’s Greenwing Conservation Award. 

 

This award is sponsored annually by Ducks Unlimited Canada 

and recognizes those who have taken leadership roles in 

contributing to public awareness regarding the need to conserve 

Saskatchewan’s wetlands and marshes. Gregg was recognized 

for more than 25 years of volunteer service to wetland 

conservation. 

 

In 2003 when Gregg served as the Ducks Unlimited North 

Battleford zone Chair, he and others brainstormed about ways 

to raise funds. This led to the Original Six jersey program. This 

program features signed replica jerseys from key players from 

each of the NHL’s original six teams. Gregg knew that Bobby 

Orr, a former teammate, friend, and fellow outdoors enthusiast, 

had done conservation work before, so they hooked up one 

more time on this project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the program has raised $2.5 million since it began 

and is still going strong. On behalf of the government, I would 

like to congratulate Gregg Sheppard on being the recipient for 

the 2009 Lieutenant Governor’s Greenwing Conservation 

Award. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Proposed Amendments to The Financial Administration Act 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government has introduced changes to The 

Financial Administration Act which will, and I quote, “. . . 

allow new or unforeseen expenditures . . . by the Ministry of 

Highways and Infrastructure . . . to be deducted from the 

calculation of eligible highways spending . . .” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, The Fuel Tax Accountability Act has been in 

place since the spring of 2007 and the Saskatchewan Party 

loved it so much, this existing legislation, that they included it 

as a promise in their 2007 election platform. But they now seem 

to be having a change of heart as they are proposing changes as 

to how the fuel tax revenue is to be used. Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: why is this government breaking their campaign 

promise and funnelling dedicated fuel tax revenue to projects 

other than highways? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



3852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

Speaker, what this piece of legislation is designed to do is to 

bring clarity to the calculation of fuel tax as opposed to the 

situation as it is now. In the situation as it exists currently, 

dollars that are spent, for example on the global transportation 

hub, are not dedicated, are coming out of the Highways 

ministry, but are not dedicated specifically to highway work. 

 

And so what we wanted to do in putting this piece of legislation 

forward is to ensure that there is clarity in terms of the 

calculation of the amount of tax that goes to highways so that it 

will be absolutely clear for the people of Saskatchewan to 

understand how the calculation is made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, clarity hasn’t been a big 

plus for this government in its first two years. And the people of 

Saskatchewan know that this government is in serious financial 

trouble. They have gone from $2.3 billion in the bank to a $1 

billion deficit in two very short years. This government has 

also, at every turn, tried to avoid accountability for the budget 

cuts that have resulted from this $1 billion deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of The Fuel Tax Accountability Act is 

to ensure that the government keeps its promise to spend all of 

the fuel tax revenue on provincial roads. It’s about 

accountability. Mr. Speaker, why is the minister decreasing the 

amount of money actually that will be spent on highways and 

decreasing the accountability to Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the intent of this 

legislation is to ensure that the calculations are clear and 

transparent to the people of Saskatchewan and that funding that 

goes to situations like the global transportation hub are not part 

of the calculation because that was not the intent of the original 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member says as well that we have 

mismanaged and the money has gone. Well I’ll tell you where 

the money has gone, Mr. Speaker. The money’s gone to the 

largest income tax cut in the history of this province. That’s 

where the money has gone. The money has gone to an increased 

highways budget to make sure that the infrastructure is properly 

allocated. Mr. Speaker, we’re fixing roads and bridges. We’re 

funding Avastin, a colorectal drug. 

 

All of these things are important for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I don’t understand why the members 

opposite wouldn’t want more clarity and transparency in the 

way this is calculated. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Status of Domestic Abuse Outreach Workers 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Domestic 

abuse outreach workers provide an important service for 

survivors of family violence and their families. They operate 

support groups, provide crisis and short-term counselling, help 

women fleeing violence come up with a personal safety plan, 

and where necessary refer them to other services. Often they 

accompany clients to court or to the police station. 

 

Now a Saskatoon client of this valuable service has told me that 

as of December 31, these domestic abuse outreach worker 

positions are being eliminated. To the minister: why has the 

Sask Party cut funding to this program? Are women fleeing 

domestic violence the latest victims of this government’s 

financial mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we appreciate very much 

the importance of transition houses and having domestic 

violence workers and people that can provide comfort to some 

of the people in our province that need it the very most. Our 

government has increased funding by $1.1 million to transition 

houses. In addition to the $1.1 million that we have increased 

funding to, we have given annual increases of 2.3 per cent and 3 

per cent, as well as the additional 7 per cent that went to all 

CBOs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no intention to cut or eliminate or change 

programs. I’m not aware of any such cuts. And, Mr. Speaker, if 

there’s a rumour that’s going around that’s incorrect, I will find 

out what that rumour is and will attempt to have it . . . 

[inaudible] . . . And I will talk to the member afterwards to try 

and find out what’s taking place with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it sounds like the cabinet’s 

a little confused over there. This is a program that the Ministry 

of Social Services offer, and it sounds like they’re a little 

confused. We’re not talking about the shelters. We’re talking 

about the workers today, and these workers have a stabilizing 

force in the lives of many of their clients. 

 

The woman who contacted my office has been dealing with the 

same outreach worker for more than three years. In fact she told 

my office, and I quote, “Without their support, I would have 

never got out.” When she was reassaulted by her former 

husband last year, this worker accompanied her to the police 

station. This month the worker will be accompanying her to 

court. Unfortunately if the matter is held over, the woman will 

likely have to finish the process without the benefits of 

someone who has provided her with the support throughout her 

ordeal. 

 

To the minister: why is the Saskatchewan Party depriving 

survivors of domestic violence of a stabilizing force in their 

lives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the 

member opposite is aware that we’re just in a transition period 

of moving different areas of domestic violence and abuse to the 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3853 

Ministry of Justice. So I am unaware of any position being cut 

at this point in time and I will definitely look into it and see if 

that indeed is the case or if there’s just some confusion in the 

transition. 

 

But as the Justice minister said, this is an important issue and 

area for our government. We immediately, upon the election, 

increased the funding year over year — 1.1 million to sexual 

assault agencies and transition houses as well as a 12.3 per cent 

increase which was across the board to all CBOs. That’s 

substantial increases to these agencies that assist women that 

are in a domestic violence situation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there are other 

services in Saskatoon but many of those services charge a fee 

and many women fleeing violence simply can’t afford it. And 

my constituent is also concerned that she won’t be able to find 

someone who’s willing to attend court or the police station with 

her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do know that many community-based 

organizations are working with survivors of domestic violence 

in Saskatoon and right across this province, and they are doing 

very good work. But it is far from certain that the work done by 

these domestic abuse outreach workers can be easily replaced. 

 

To the minister: why are survivors of domestic violence being 

forced to replace the service, and what other programs for 

vulnerable people are being cut that this government is not 

telling us about? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite may 

not be aware that during the last year responsibility for 

transition houses has been transferred from the Ministry of 

Social Services to the Ministry of Justice. It is my hope that 

nothing was lost in the transfer or the consolidation of these 

programs but, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the member opposite 

there has been no cut to the program, nothing else that should 

have eliminated any services that were there, whether the 

services come from victim services, whether they come to the 

transition houses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is have the opportunity to 

meet with the member opposite, try and find out particulars 

from who that particular individual is. It’s not appropriate or 

fair to that individual, somebody who is probably going through 

one of the worst crises of their life, to be used as a political 

football in the legislature when there was absolutely no 

intention or no plan to cut or eliminate services in any way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of this government to ensure that 

the people among our society that are the most needy have 

good, adequate, and proper services whether it’s to go to court, 

counselling, or a place to live as they transition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Education and Health Capital Spending 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

government sent $122 million to the health authorities last 

budget year for capital spending on nursing homes. They called 

it a fiscal stimulus. This year, with the deficit out of control, the 

government decided to cut operating grants to those same health 

authorities, then told them to use the $122 million sent to them 

last year for capital spending to cover the difference. It’s the old 

bait and switch, Mr. Speaker. To the Minister of Education: can 

the minister confirm that he plans to use the same budget trick 

in his ministry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, first of all we have to realize that it is a deferral of 

capital projects, Mr. Speaker, in 13 communities. Those 13 

communities know that, Mr. Speaker. They realize that there is 

much more planning that needs to be done as they go forward 

on scoping out the projects. There also a 35 per cent share that 

they need to raise. All that work is being done, Mr. Speaker. 

When those projects are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the members who 

placed the question to give the minister the opportunity to 

respond. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as communities do their 

work and the capital, their 35 per cent share, is brought together 

and the scoping is done, Mr. Speaker, our government will be 

there with our share to make sure that those facilities move 

forward, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is simply a deferral, Mr. 

Speaker, not a cancellation as that member implied. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 

Education minister and we heard from the Minister of Health 

about his cut after cut after cut, but the question was to the 

Education minister. 

 

Here’s how the government’s version of the bait and switch 

works. Last year when it was rolling in the dough, it announced 

massive capital spending in departments like Health and 

Education. This year they have a billion dollar deficit. So what 

are they doing? They’re cancelling — or deferring capital 

projects as they claim — then cutting operating budgets to hide 

the full extent of their deficit and backfilling the operating cuts 

with deferred capital funds. 

 

They get to play hero by announcing capital projects, hoping 

people forget that they cancelled them later, Mr. Speaker, and 

they get to hide the true size of their deficit by pretending to cut 

operating budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that he plans to employ 

the same budget trick in the Ministry of Education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



3854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as we look at 

investments that we have put into all of our infrastructure, 

whether it’s highways, whether it’s hospitals, whether it’s 

education, it is unprecedented in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, there has been more done through our school 

system and capital projects through the education system, Mr. 

Speaker, in the last two . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister was asked 

to respond to a question. It seems like there’s too many others 

want to have an answer as well, but it’s the Minister of Health 

that’s been asked to respond. I invite the Minister of Health to 

finish. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have 

unprecedented investment in our infrastructure, not only on 

highways, not only in health care, but also in education, Mr. 

Speaker. We’d put up our first two years of investment into 

infrastructure, especially education, compared to two years, any 

two years, that former government would like to pick. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, forgive the people of 

Saskatchewan for not having any trust in that government and 

particularly that minister responsible for IOU [I owe you] after 

IOU and cut after cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last budget year when the money was rolling in, the 

government committed $259 million to education capital. The 

minister confirmed, in answers to written questions, that barely 

$20 million of that has been spent to complete school projects. I 

suspect that as he cuts capital spending this year, we’ll see 

examples of where the Education minister has instructed school 

divisions to redirect deferred capital funds to cover cuts to their 

operating budgets. 

 

Can the minister guarantee the people of Saskatchewan that he 

will not be playing the same bait and switch game that his 

colleague, the Minister of Health, has done with the regional 

health authorities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

Minister of Education, I would like to say that the capital 

investment in this province in education facilities, repairs to 

roofs, has never been seen before, Mr. Speaker, in the 16 years 

of NDP government. Facility on top of facility . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d like to ask the members to at least 

allow the minister to respond to the question that they’ve asked 

of him to respond to. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, category 1, health and safety issues in education 

regarding facilities, there has been more invested in the first two 

years of our Sask Party government than ever in the history of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and they’ll start, they want to start comparing 

numbers of what they invested and . . . Or else I’ll go back to 

Health for example. In the 2005-2006, 2006-2007 budget, the 

NDP, when they were in government, invested $140 million 

into capital. In our first two years, Mr. Speaker, we put in 267 

million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It seems the member 

from Athabasca wants to have an ongoing dialogue. The 

opportunity will come in adjourned debates. The Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that $264 million 

represents almost a doubling of capital investment in health 

care, Mr. Speaker, not including the 122 that we have deferred 

for long-term care, Mr. Speaker. If we would’ve put that in, it 

would be three times the amount that the NDP invested in their 

last two years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Western Agreement 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know this 

government can’t be trusted when it comes to being open and 

transparent. We also know that they can’t manage an economy 

or a budget. They were handed a boom, and we now have a 

recession and a deficit. 

 

The Premier has committed the Government of Saskatchewan 

to conclude a western economic partnership agreement with 

British Columbia and Alberta before January the 1st. But he 

won’t tell us what’s in the deal. He even refused a freedom of 

information request to make the document public. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why should we trust the 

government on trade deals when they have demonstrated that 

they can’t be trusted to manage the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to correct the record here. The minister has offered up 

some conclusions that are inaccurate and they’re not based on 

fact, especially as it relates to the economy of the province. And 

we know that his leader, the Leader of the Opposition, has over 

and over again referred — and it’s a part of the public record — 

to the economy in the province as a bust, if you can believe it. 

This . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well he just said, hear, hear, from his seat. 

He thinks the Saskatchewan economy is in a bust — the 

economy that now has posted the highest average weekly 

earnings in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. The 

same province, the same province that Dale Orr, a long-time 

economist, has said, Mr. Speaker, has moved into second place 

in the wealthiest provinces in the country ahead of Ontario. The 

same province that all the economic forecasters are saying will 

continue to lead the nation in economic growth. 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3855 

Mr. Speaker, we can build on that success, but only if we 

continue to remove barriers to investment, only if we continue 

to reach out as we will through the western economic 

partnership. We’ll do so while keeping the promises we made 

while in opposition and during the campaign, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’ll have those details come forward in the fullness of time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re in the last 

week of the session. We will not get back together again until 

March 2010, two months after the WEPA [western economic 

partnership agreement], by the Premier’s signature, is to be put 

into place. 

 

We have just completed five weeks of a legislative session 

where the government is expected to be open, accountable, and 

transparent. Mr. Speaker, we’ve waited patiently for five weeks, 

waited patiently for the Premier to bring forward details of 

WEPA — a deal that he signed with no input from the public or 

the Assembly — waited patiently for the Premier to tell us what 

he has signed. He has not done so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the Premier is really open, transparent, and accountable, why 

will he not hold public hearings on this deal like he supported 

with the previously discussed Trade, Investment and Labour 

Mobility Agreement? And why will he not make this agreement 

public during this, the last week of the legislative sitting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite will know 

the history of this issue in the province, Mr. Speaker, and 

members on this side will know it as well. When the notion of 

TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 

was first proposed for the province, the then government, the 

NDP government held hearings around the province. And we 

participated in those meetings enthusiastically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of those meetings the opposition 

said at the time that, were we the government of Saskatchewan, 

we couldn’t simply sign on to TILMA as it is because we had 

concerns with respect to the autonomy of municipalities to do 

things like new growth tax incentives. We had concerns about 

the impact on Crown corporations. We wanted to preserve 

whole the opportunity for government to own and operate 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that governments right across the country are 

lowering barriers to growth in terms of procurement. The 

Government of Saskatchewan, under the previous government, 

was trying to get an agreement on internal trade, on labour 

mobility. That’s now been achieved. It’s happened since the 

election, so that’s there as well. That was a big part of the 

TILMA agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ll not go forward with any agreement that doesn’t keep the 

promises we’ve made prior to the election. We’ve kept 112 so 

far, and we’ll keep this one too. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier has refused to answer a freedom of information request 

on this matter. Mr. Speaker, the Premier has refused to bring 

forward information on this matter to the Legislative Assembly 

or the public. 

 

He has already admitted there are concerns about 

Saskatchewan’s Crowns, about our environment, and about our 

municipalities. So, Mr. Speaker, are we supposed to take the 

Premier’s word that this stuff is taken care of, or will he prove it 

to us, put it on the table, and let us see it before we leave this 

place in just four days time? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we made promises with 

respect to internal trade agreements when we were in 

opposition. We intend to keep those promises. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this side of the 

House we can’t take the Premier’s word on this file, just like we 

couldn’t take the Minister of Finance’s word on budget day that 

potash revenues would bring in $1.9 billion. This government 

won’t make the document public and they won’t tell the people 

of Saskatchewan what’s in it. The Premier signed the 

paperwork, and now he wants us to trust him that everything 

will work out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier is known to be unabashedly 

supportive of TILMA-style free trade. A very simple question 

to the Premier: he may remember an organization called the 

Alliance for the Future of Young Canadians. What role did the 

Premier play in the alliance? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in about, on or around about 

1988, I was the western Co-Chair for the Alliance for the Future 

of Young Canadians. Yes, I was. And you know what that 

organization promoted, Mr. Speaker? It supported the 

Canada-US [United States] Free Trade Agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were those in this province, all sitting over 

there including the current Leader of the Opposition, who 

opposed that agreement notwithstanding the fact that it has 

meant wealth creation for the province of Saskatchewan, 

notwithstanding the fact that that Free Trade Agreement has 

created thousands of jobs for Canadians, has created trade 

surpluses for places like the province of Saskatchewan. You bet 

this side of the House supports free trade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

the Premier has acknowledged his co-chairing of the alliance, a 

group he was also a founding member of, Mr. Speaker. The 

group was financed by large multinational corporations, such as 

Alcan. And its main role, Mr. Speaker, the main role of the 

alliance was in the 1988 federal election campaign, and it was 

designed to disrupt political events of John Turner, the then 



3856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

Liberal leader, who opposed the Mulroney government’s Free 

Trade Agreement. 

 

My question is again very simple to the Premier, who 

apparently helped to organize what the press have reported have 

been violent protests in support of the Mulroney free trade deal. 

My simple question: why does the Premier seem to think that 

selling out the Crowns, the environment, and the independence 

of our economy is advantageous to the residents of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t personally organizing 

any violent protest. I was involved in one particular . . . Even 

after I had returned to the province, I was involved in one 

particular event with the alliance that got some national 

attention. We had a high-profile hockey player come and speak 

out in favour of free trade. It was Glenn Anderson from the 

Edmonton Oilers. And I don’t know how you could 

characterize that one as violent. I don’t think Glenn Anderson 

would even go in the corners. He left that up to Messier, 

Semenko, and the others. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s the kind of rhetoric, Mr. 

Speaker, that we heard in this country during the free trade 

debate when that member, the current Leader of the Opposition 

— that oil baron from Alberta, Mr. Speaker — used to rail 

against the notion of free trade, Mr. Speaker, even though we 

know today that it has created thousands of jobs in this 

province, that it has created economic wealth for Saskatchewan, 

that it’s done the same thing for the country. The debate about 

free trade with other countries is over, Mr. Speaker, except 

perhaps in the cobwebbed caucus rooms of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We know 

that this Premier has a strong, ideological, almost fanatical 

commitment to free trade, regardless of its cost. 

 

We also know that the government has taken us from boom to 

bust in just two years. We know that he had five weeks to bring 

details to the public through this legislature, and he has chosen 

not to do so. 

 

We also know that the Premier, earlier this year, sat down 

behind closed doors and rewrote a deal that put Saskatchewan’s 

economy on the line. And he’s done this with perhaps two of 

Canada’s most unpopular premiers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t give my chequebook to any of these 

three to balance. So why, Mr. Speaker, is our Premier willing to 

give Gordon Campbell and Ed Stelmach a greater say over the 

future of Saskatchewan’s economy than the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re simply not 

going to do that. We’re going to enter into an agreement where 

we can explore ways to perhaps co-operate on delivering health 

care. We’ve talked about jointly purchasing pharmaceuticals, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s interesting to note that a big part of the trade agreement that 

Alberta and BC [British Columbia] signed is about, is labour 

mobility, Mr. Speaker. Which premier in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in our history was a leader in terms 

of getting that labour mobility agreement — now the same 

agreement that they’re casting these scare tactics about? Do you 

know who that premier was, Mr. Speaker? It was former 

Premier Lorne Calvert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres will 

come to order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the other national leader that 

has been an advocate for labour mobility, which is a big part of 

a western economic partnership or even TILMA as it existed 

between those two provinces, perhaps the strongest voice for it 

was Gary Doer. Gary Doer, the former NDP premier of 

Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the new West is going to be stronger 

if we’re working together as one large economic region. We 

know the rest of the country has taken note of that. We know 

North America is taking note of the powerhouse in the West. 

Part of it’s because of Alberta, but a big part of that powerhouse 

is right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 121, The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 121, The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, 2009 be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3857 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 122, The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 

2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 122, The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 123, The Forest Resources Management Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 123, The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 124, 

The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 124, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered the second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill 125, The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources has moved that Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals 

. . . Order. The Minister of Energy and Resources has moved 

that Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Bill No. 610 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 



3858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 610, An Act 

Respecting Seniors’ Rights be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved that Bill No. 610, The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act be now 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before the orders of the day, I lay on the 

Table the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 108 — The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill before us to 

amend The Cities Act has actually got quite a lot of content in it 

and it reduces the government’s role in approving many things. 

But to go through it, I have the explanatory notes and I think the 

explanatory notes are probably the most . . . they’re actually 

quite clear on how things will change in the new Act, and in 

fact many of them not only do The Cities Act, but do The 

Northern Municipalities and The Rural Municipalities Act as 

well. 

 

So the first one I want to talk about is that trailers and mobile 

homes are subject to property tax. And the change of the 

definition of building, and in conjunction with the definition of 

improvements: 

 

A new definition is added to ensure that travel trailers for 

vacation/recreation use are not defined as buildings and 

therefore not subject to property taxes under the Act. And 

this is similar to a definition that’s used in Alberta’s 

Municipal Government Act.  

 

And there’s also a clarification of the definition for business 

day to clarify that time references within the Act include 

different days than just the weekdays. 

 

The second provision that I want to talk about, and this one will 

be changed as well in The Municipalities Act and the new 

northern municipalities Act. They also are talking about the 

guide to interpreting power to pass bylaws: 

 

This provision is proposed for the new Northern 

Municipalities Act, which retains more specific 

provisions than The Cities Act and The Municipalities 

Act. Although the general principles of statutory 

interpretation already apply, it is intended to clarify 

general powers are not limited by specific powers. This 

amendment is proposed again for both The Municipalities 

Act and The Cities Act for consistency. 

 

The next provision that is changed is the jurisdiction to pass 

bylaws. And the Department of Justice identified that a change 

to section 338 of The Cities Act was necessary to clarify 

penalties for officers or directors of corporations, and in 

particular so that these: 

 

 . . . referring in the same manner, so these sections were 

consistent within The Cities Act. 

 

The proposed provisions are consistent also with 62 other 

Saskatchewan Acts. 

 

As the sections currently exist, it could be interpreted to 

mean that any officer or director would be subject to a 

fine and imprisonment, even if they did not participate in 

the commission of a crime. 

 

The recommended change would not eliminate the 

possibility of imprisonment for an officer or a director 

who may be involved in the commission of an offence. 

The officer or director would be subject to penalties . . . 

[of not more than one year, as set out in the legislation.] 

 

And it’s also again recommended as a change for The 

Municipalities Act and the new northern municipalities. 

 

One of the interesting ones is about the street closures. This Act 

changes that city councils or city municipalities have the ability 

to approve street closures, except in the case of a provincial 

highway that travels through a city, and there are some specific 

provisions that we need to look at carefully. The idea does 

appear to be reasonable in principle. 

 

However one of the things that is in this section, it says that this 

clause — this is referring to clause 3(a) — is reworded as per 

stakeholder request, doesn’t identify who actually the 

stakeholder was. So that would be a question we would be 

interested in answering or have answered. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And some of these sections are amended to remove, of course, 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3859 

that the city has to obtain provincial consent. So it’s taking 

away the government’s role basically in when a street can close, 

other than one that connects to a provincial highway. It also 

focuses on the city’s obligations — not exactly the process that 

the cities have to meet the obligations. And the city is 

responsible for maintaining the records of streets within its 

boundaries. 

 

The section that talks about the closures, of the method of 

providing a public utility:  

 

This change is proposed to give councils more flexibility 

to enter into longer term utility agreements by extending 

the timeframe for agreements by 10 years. [And again] 

The same change is proposed for The Municipalities Act 

and the new Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

The change to section 43 is the Saskatchewan Municipal Board, 

which is SMB, has: 

 

. . . requested a change to streamline the application 

process for boundary alterations, amalgamations, or 

restructuring for the convenience of municipalities. It 

suggested the Cities Act could provide greater flexibility 

in the format of these applications. 

 

The application form that’s presently used has to go through 

regulations and changes to it must be made through the 

regulatory review process. The proposed wording that is here is 

going to be consistent with The Municipalities Act which allows 

the form to exist as a minister’s order and would not require this 

regulatory review process. 

 

This would provide the flexibility for the ministry and the 

Municipal Board to develop a common form for annexation 

application that could be modified in a timely way as the need 

arises. The forms in both The Cities Act and The Municipalities 

Act would need to be repealed. 

 

The next one that I want to comment on is the number of 

councillors. And several of these changes, the explanation is 

that the section is revised so that council . . . It’s noted that 

council does not operationally give notice, but the staff does on 

a council’s behalf. And again it’s the same amendment 

proposed for The Municipalities Act and the new northern 

municipalities Act. 

 

There is a new provision, provision 63.1, and this is part of The 

Northern Municipalities Act review: 

 

. . . northern municipal stakeholders strongly supported 

introducing criminal record checks for northern 

municipal councillors. Councils will be given the option, 

not required, to pass a bylaw that requires a criminal 

record check as part of the municipal election nomination 

process. Similar authority for the southern councils is 

included in The Municipalities Act and The Cities Act. 

Consequential amendments are also required to The 

Local Government Election Act which are included in 

The Municipalities Act of 2009. 

 

A subsection qualifies that: 

 

. . . the bylaw must be made in advance of the election in 

which the requirement is to take effect, so that candidates 

will have time to obtain the criminal check. Ninety days 

is consistent with other time related requirements, such as 

appointing the returning officer. 

 

The next section I just want to mention is changing how we, 

clarifying that we have mention in the Act to regular mail, and 

there are amendments that define how regular mail is . . . how 

mail is delivered, which clearly we don’t just have regular mail 

any more. And again there’s several more that clarify about 

council not actually doing the work, but staff doing it on behalf 

of the work. So those seem to be just basically housekeeping. 

 

The next one is public disclosure, and that council members 

who fail to update their public disclosure statement pursuant to 

the existing subsection are subject to disqualification: 

 

There is a concern disqualification is an excessively 

harsh penalty where the council member honestly forgot 

to advise the clerk of the change after 30 days.  

 

[This section] . . . is amended to require each councillor 

to annually submit a statement that: 

 

there have been no material changes to his or her 

public disclosure statement; or 

 

details material changes to his or her public disclosure 

statement.  

 

This is similar to requirements for MLAs under The Members’ 

Conflict of Interest Act. 

 

These amendments are again proposed for both The 

Municipalities Act and the new Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

Under the provision dealing with appeals “. . . council members 

receive “remuneration”; they are not paid salary. This 

amendment is intended to provide clarification and consistency 

. . .” and again both into The Municipalities Act and the new 

Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

The next provision is on reimbursement and the change to this 

section is consistent with another section where it is an elector 

who may apply to the courts regarding enforcement of a council 

member’s disqualification. 

 

The next section has a definition of capital property. And the 

explanation is that this section: 

 

. . . requires a city prepare its annual financial statements 

in accordance with generally accepted accounting 

principles . . .  

 

The proposed amendment is to ensure the definition is 

consistent with the CICA Public Sector Accounting 

Board terminology. 

 

And this change is also in The Municipalities Act and The 

Northern Municipalities Act — the new one. 

 

The next provision is the city to pay interest on uncollected 



3860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

amounts: 

 

This section was added to the municipal acts in the spring 

2007 . . . in response to actions rural municipalities took 

regarding education property tax.  

 

[The phrase] “That has been collected” should be added 

to clarify this applies if the city has collected the money, 

but has not passed it on to the other taxing authority. This 

is consistent with the intent in the original amendment 

from 2007 and is proposed for all three municipal Acts. 

 

There are several more sections that we would be talking about, 

and the next one is on distress and seizure of goods. The 

explanation for this one is that: 

 

Existing property tax enforcement tools are revised for 

house trailers and mobile homes.  

 

The owner of a house trailer or mobile home is 

responsible for the property tax but The Tax Enforcement 

Act is not available because there is no separate title. The 

enforcement needs to be focused on the house trailer or 

mobile home and its owner. 

 

And new subsections will address taxes owing after the due 

date and will allow the city to seize the house trailer or 

immobilize it. And another section clarifies that it’s an offence 

to tamper with an immobilization device, and these 

amendments again are proposed across the board into The 

Municipalities Act and to the new Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

The next provision is goods affected by a distress warrant, and 

this amendment relates to the others respecting tax enforcement 

on house trailers and mobile homes: 

 

It authorizes any expenses incurred in taking tax 

enforcement action on a house trailer and mobile home 

may be added to the tax roll. The same amendment is 

again going into The Municipalities Act and the new 

Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

The next one is demolition or removal of certain improvements 

that are prohibited. And Justice again identified these 

descriptions, and we’ll be looking at that to see if this 

amendment is talking about improvement to the ability to 

demolish or remove that the city may have. 

 

There’s also another provision dealing with limitation of action. 

And it clarifies how a one-year limitation period applies when 

the city is a third party to a suit, and it includes a deemed date 

of discovery for contribution in indemnity acts and actions as 

done in The Limitations Act. 

 

The warrant authorizing entry to a property, this amendment is 

to provide consistency with the preamble and it refers to section 

20 which authorizes that work is to be done, not just a plain 

inspection, and again put into the other Acts. 

 

The next one is about the city remedying contraventions. And 

this amendment apparently clarifies, “a city may use reasonable 

force to remove occupants from buildings scheduled for 

demolition, not only for insufficient sanitary conditions.” 

There are some changes made to general offences and penalties. 

Justice identified that changes were necessary to clarify that 

penalties for officers or directors of corporations would be 

necessary, and we’ll be looking to see what Justice had to say 

about that in more depth. 

 

The service of documents, moving along. “There are a number 

of places throughout the Act where documents may be served 

by ordinary mail.” And there is no provision that indicates how 

you can say that they’ve actually been delivered, so that’s 

clarified as well. 

 

There’s a provision apparently changed on explanation, and the 

municipality board is doing some of the work that . . . They can 

be appointed by the minister to undertake an audit or conduct an 

inquiry into the affairs of a city since they have the knowledge 

and expertise to carry those out. 

 

Then there’s a provision on The Land Surveys Act, and some of 

these amendments will be done because there’s certain things 

that is being changed from highways into something more 

consistent in the cities and municipalities Act. There are quite a 

few actual changes proposed in the Bill, and it does change the 

way the cities can act and where the provincial government’s 

role is. 

 

It gives them, the municipalities, a fair amount of power over 

mobile homes in particular where property taxes have gone 

unpaid. And this doesn’t seem an unreasonable change. But we 

need to have time to consider this proposal, and we need to 

ensure that it’s applied fairly and does not result in inequitable 

treatment for mobile home owners compared with other 

residential property owners. 

 

There’s a number of the cities and their neighbouring RMs 

[rural municipality] have found the process of altering 

municipal boundaries, annexing land, and determining 

appropriate compensation to be unnecessarily cumbersome. It’s 

not clear whether the government’s proposed changes to these 

provisions are an adequate solution to the problem. We’ll be 

asking to see that as well. 

 

The legislation also gives municipalities the authorities to 

request criminal record checks for candidates seeking public 

office. The government says that voters deserve to have all of 

the information they need to make an informed decision. We 

support this principle, however the specific changes the 

government has chosen to make give rise to a whole other set of 

questions. 

 

The government has chosen to make this potential requirement 

for candidates seeking municipal office, but not for those 

seeking provincial office. It seems more than a little bit 

contradictory to require this of others without requiring it of 

people elected to this legislature. And of course we run the risk 

of being accused of a double standard if we do not make a 

similar change to the provincial elections Act. 

 

And the government has chosen to limit the disclosure to 

criminal convictions. And they have not, for example, chosen to 

require disclosure where someone may have been charged with 

a serious criminal offence, but the charges have yet to proceed 

to court. And obviously people are entitled to a presumption of 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3861 

innocence until proven guilty. 

 

We do need to look at that kind of information that could have 

an effect on the decision of voters about a candidate’s 

suitability for public office and should be taken into 

consideration. It’s difficult in situations like this to know where 

to draw the line, but the matter certainly deserves more 

consideration before we simply adopt the government’s 

proposal. With those comments, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 108. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 109 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to make a few comments 

on the Bill 109, The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 or An 

Act to amend The Municipalities Act and to make related 

amendments to The Local Government Election Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill outlines a number of issues and, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan municipalities have had the 

responsibility for maintaining roads, increase in truck traffic 

that has resulted from branch line abandonment over the years, 

among other pressures. It means that municipalities are often 

forced to absorb increased costs for which they don’t really 

have the resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen larger truck traffic on our roads, 

larger vehicles, and we’ve seen what has occurred as a result of 

that, Mr. Speaker. The branch line abandonment which 

occurred over a number of years, Mr. Speaker, some decisions 

that were perhaps made around that issue did not take fully into 

effect what would happen to our roads, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the changes in agriculture. The changes in tandem 

trucks being placed on our roads, and the following damage that 

was done to those roads which were never built, Mr. Speaker, 

for that kind of heavy traffic. And, Mr. Speaker, these increased 

costs fell on our municipalities. They had to absorb these costs 

and find ways to deal with them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was also a time when the thin membranes 

were put on a number of these roads which were also not in 

anticipation of the heavy truck traffic that would be done. So 

what we have, Mr. Speaker, is starting out with the 

abandonment, branch line abandonment which took place over 

a number of years and the ensuing damage to our roads leading 

to ensuing costs for our municipalities. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation gives municipalities a 

mechanism also for resolving disputes with private contractors 

whose activities, Mr. Speaker, whose activities have had a big 

impact on municipal roads. And, Mr. Speaker, on this side of 

the House, we support this principle. But we need to look more 

closely at the mechanism in the Act before we decide to support 

the amendments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments for that in having to deal with the 

mechanisms to . . . Mr. Speaker, it is important that 

municipalities have this because the costs of repairing the roads, 

the cost, the abandonment that has occurred does not, Mr. 

Speaker, lead . . . it leads to problems for the municipalities. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in terms of resolving these issues, in terms of 

resolving these problems, we do need something in the Act and 

that is necessary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How this mechanism will work and that, we need some 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, on that. And we don’t know, we 

don’t see any place here, or have we received anything as to 

what consultations have been done on the mechanism. And we 

have to, Mr. Speaker, be careful before allowing this to pass 

that we fully understand the consequences of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a number of places where the sections deal with 

the, for example, Mr. Speaker, section, road maintenance, 

section dealing with 22.1: 

 

„agreement‟ means an agreement for the maintenance of 

any municipal road entered into pursuant to section 22 and 

includes a proposed agreement in the case where a 

municipality has caused notice to be served on . . . [the 

purpose] that an agreement . . . [has been] pursuant to . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mechanism that I spoke of is the thing that we 

have some concerns of on this side of the House, things that we 

will have to look at, things that we will have to discuss with the 

stakeholders to make sure that this is, in fact, going to work for 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, road building — the issues that were . . . 

Municipalities run into difficulties with private contractors’ 

disputes. Mr. Speaker, these need to be addressed. We have a 

number of roads that need fixing, Mr. Speaker. We have a 

number of roads which, well ever increasing, Mr. Speaker, that 

need attention and in order . . . We need to be building these 

roads, Mr. Speaker, and not spending time in arguments or 

court. We need a mechanism, Mr. Speaker, to resolve these 

disputes. And, Mr. Speaker, we see this as a positive. This issue 

needs to be addressed, Mr. Speaker. The concern however 

though is with the actual mechanism that we need to be dealing 

with here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I leave that, just the branch line 

abandonment, I think there isn’t a part of our province that 

wasn’t touched with this abandonment, Mr. Speaker. There 

wasn’t a part of our province that hasn’t been touched with the 

truck traffic. And, Mr. Speaker, new routes have been 

established. New routes, new ways and to deliver the goods to 

— whether that be grain, Mr. Speaker, or goods — to the rural 

or other municipalities, larger municipalities, and, Mr. Speaker, 



3862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

there was never any anticipation in some of those, or planning, 

that some of the roads would get the heavy traffic that they did. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in order to do that you have to . . . you 

will be building roads and, Mr. Speaker, wherever that is and, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the contracts, we need to, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to have mechanisms for doing that. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

the various . . . As I mentioned before, section 22, the road 

maintenance section on here dealing with that, we need to 

address these and have a careful look at this and, Mr. Speaker, 

look at perhaps whether the necessary consultations have been 

done around this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I go into . . . There are also changes to the 

requirements for public disclosure of conflict of interest. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, they appear to bring municipal legislation more in 

line with the requirements for MLAs which, Mr. Speaker, does 

seem reasonable, but we need to consult with municipal leaders 

around this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue of conflicts and this . . . perhaps we are 

more aware as MLAs that we have to complete. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the municipalities, we wonder whether, you know, 

what consultation was done with the municipal leaders and will 

they understand, as we bring this legislation forward to deal 

with that and what impact will this, Mr. Speaker, what impact 

will this have on them, Mr. Speaker. It seems all in all that if we 

were to bring this in, in line with what we are all familiar with, 

it seems fine. But a number of questions, Mr. Speaker, as to . . . 

need to be answered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act, The Act to amend The Municipalities Act 

and to make related amendments to The Local Government 

Election Act, Mr. Speaker, also deals with changes to allow for 

population figures to be calculated differently depending on the 

purpose again, Mr. Speaker, for which the information is used. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need more information about these changes 

and how they will work, Mr. Speaker. How will the population 

counts be done, Mr. Speaker? Who will do them, Mr. Speaker? 

The issues around who will be counted and, Mr. Speaker, how 

they’ll be used, Mr. Speaker, I guess much more importantly 

and for what purpose will they be. If, Mr. Speaker, it’s for 

clarity then, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we would be, again in 

principle, supportive of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the population counts, I guess the question, 

some of the questions maybe would be as to how often they 

would be done, Mr. Speaker. Who would be doing them? What 

would they be used for? Who actually would be counted? Those 

sorts of questions, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Act, that 

would need to be asked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation also gives municipalities the 

authority to request criminal record checks for candidates 

seeking public office. The government says that voters deserve 

to have all the information they need to make an informed 

decision. And again, Mr. Speaker, we support that principle, as 

previously mentioned on the other two points. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that the voters deserve all the information is 

fine, but however the specific changes the government has 

chosen to make give rise to a whole other set of questions, Mr. 

Speaker — a whole other set of questions. Firstly, the 

government has chosen to make this a potential requirement for 

candidates seeking municipal office but not those for provincial 

office. Now, Mr. Speaker, the obvious question is, why not? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, section 89.1, criminal record checks, is: 

 

The following section is added after section 89: 

 

“. . . A council may, by bylaw, require that every 

candidate submit a criminal record check in the form 

required by the minister in addition to the nomination 

paper submitted pursuant to section 46 of The Local 

Government Election Act. 

 

And subsection (2): 

 

Any bylaw made pursuant to subsection (1) must be made: 

 

[And again] in the case of a municipality other than a 

rural . . . at least 90 days before the day of a general 

election; and 

 

in the case of a rural municipality, before August 1 of 

the year in which it is to take effect”. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is where we would be doing this. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it does, on looking at this, seem a bit contradictory if 

we require this of others without requiring it of people elected 

to this legislature, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are 

important questions surrounding that for me and, Mr. Speaker, 

as I talk to my constituents or people about this, the issue comes 

forward as to what, Mr. Speaker, what was the thinking around 

this to exempt those seeking provincial office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is fairly . . . These are, Mr. Speaker, not fairly, 

these are important changes to legislation, adding this 

requirement for those seeking municipal office. I have not to 

date, Mr. Speaker, heard anyone say that they would be 

opposed to this but, Mr. Speaker, the issue of the provincial 

office, people seeking provincial office, has definitely come up 

in my discussions. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, the obvious is, 

what are they trying to hide, Mr. Speaker, or why would you 

not do it across the piece? 

 

As most people are fair-minded people in our province, they 

would be asking, why do we not make it fair for everyone, Mr. 

Speaker? If it’s good enough for the municipalities, is it good 

enough . . . It should be good enough for everyone in here. So, 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bothersome thing about this section, and 

I’m not certain as to what the minister had in mind regarding 

this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve attempted to look at the minister’s statements 

in his opening remarks on here and, Mr. Speaker, I do not see if 

anything about this. So, Mr. Speaker, it is somewhat 

disconcerting to a timely . . . or not a timely but an important 

issue such as this and perhaps timely, Mr. Speaker, that we look 

at this and see that in the minister’s own introduction of the Act, 

we do not see mention of the Criminal Code checks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister does say . . . However it does say 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3863 

this. He says, “The next issue I’d like to discuss relates to the 

proposal for optional criminal . . . checks in municipal 

elections.” 

 

And he says: 

 

As I described in my second reading of remarks for both 

the new Northern Municipalities Act and The Cities 

Amendment Act, municipalities will be able to decide 

locally if they want to require a higher level of public 

transparency in the election process. The purpose of 

allowing such checks is not to disqualify someone from 

running for office, but to inform electors. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the concern here is to inform the electors, 

then I think the concern should go across the piece and include 

those in provincial office, Mr. Speaker. I’m not certain what the 

thinking here is. We were not given any explanation as to why 

it would not go further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can only stand 

and wonder what was happening. 

 

Now again the minister went on: 

 

I expect some municipalities may choose to implement 

these checks and some may not. It is the municipalities 

who are in the best position to decide if these checks are 

something that would benefit their communities. [And, 

Mr. Speaker] It’s important to remember that 

municipalities will have the authority to make this choice 

at the local level. The province is not forcing any 

particular municipality to undertake this. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder what was happening or 

what the thinking was when you put the criminal checks in and 

who had requested this, Mr. Speaker. It would be interesting to 

know what consultations went on and who was requesting this, 

and in fact then, I guess, who was not requesting this — who 

would not want criminal checks done, Mr. Speaker, to inform 

the voters of this province, of the municipalities, of the province 

as a whole as to what we were doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not certain what to make of that if the 

minister was simply catering to two municipalities. Were there 

three? Was it a large number of municipalities in the province 

that were requesting this? If you do this, it does lead to a 

checkerboard kind of approach across the piece. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, does it not raise then people saying, well 

what are you hiding? What would you be hiding in this 

particular municipality that didn’t pass that? What would the 

thinking be? What would they go and say . . . A certain 

municipality would be saying, we’re not passing that. And if the 

voters next door would say, well the councillors in our 

municipality, they’re posted. All the criminal checks are posted 

and here they are. And so why are your councillors not posting 

them? 

 

[15:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting if the minister had gone on 

a bit more and explained, explained to us other than what he 

said, just simply allowing the municipalities to put up or require 

the optional criminal record checks, if he would have perhaps 

had a discussion or showed us the consultations that showed us 

who. Is it 98 per cent of the municipalities that are covered by 

this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or is it only one that is requesting 

this? And who is the one that is requesting this and why are 

they doing that? 

 

Now I guess for thinking about why are they doing that, that 

might seem obvious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as to why they might 

be doing that. I think as the voters would . . . A very obvious 

concern or obvious thing to be thinking about is to know who 

we are voting for so that it allows for a degree of transparency. 

Again here we see this government that talks about 

transparency and openness is allowing, under criminal record 

checks, allowing each municipality to do that. 

 

Now what would be the reasons? I would be interested in 

hearing the reasons of all municipalities not doing that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I’d like to know the reasons of all of us not 

putting our criminal checks in, perhaps even charges, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, so that we could all know what is happening. 

We all come here. We are on the public stage. We’re under the 

public’s eyes, under public scrutiny to say, here we are. These 

are our records. We run on those records and let the voters 

decide in each municipality and, Mr. Speaker, I would say in 

each constituency. 

 

So the questions about transparency here are again, it’s a bit of 

a shell game as to what is going on. Why was this legislation 

proposed? If we would know who was requesting it . . . Because 

obviously on this reading, I can assume that not everybody 

would want this. And why then? What were the arguments of 

not wanting that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I would like to hear 

those arguments as about why we would not want criminal 

checks. Perhaps we should expand it to criminal charges. I 

don’t know. 

 

But, you know, let’s have that discussion to say to everyone . . . 

I’m sure if the voters knew about this, and we will be talking to 

more people about this, if they would ask the questions on this 

issue, most people, if I may guess on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

would say, sure, let’s do criminal checks. Criminal checks are 

sort of a common day occurrence now. A number of employers 

require them for their jobs. Yet here we are, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in this legislature, or in municipal government, and we 

are saying, let’s do a checkerboard approach to this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So what was the thinking, what were the consultations, are the 

important questions here to have this type of changes like the 

criminal record checks, 89.1, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

“. . . A council may, by bylaw, [to their own bylaws] 

require that every candidate submit a criminal record 

check in the form required by the minister . . .” 

 

Now it’s not clear as to when these would be passed. Perhaps 

that’ll become clearer in the Act under regulations. But the 

issue for us, the issue for me is, why not? Who was consulted? 

Who said that they would not like to do this? Who instigated 

this? Was this the minister’s own? Was this the minister 

without consultation? 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this has occurred with this 



3864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

government already, and we can name the Acts where there’s 

been no consultation and have simply tried to ram something 

through. Is this Act like that? Is this just simply the minister 

trying to propose something and then saying to people, well you 

can do it if you want to do it? You can do it if . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, let me say it to you this way: if it’s the right thing to 

do, then we should do it. And if it isn’t, then we shouldn’t do it. 

 

I’m not sure why the minister wants to have a debate within the 

Act. Why does the minister want to have a debate in the Act? If 

it’s important to have criminal record checks, then in the Act 

there should be criminal record checks. I can think of a number 

of occupations where it’s important to have criminal record 

checks. And that’s said in the various Acts — you should have 

a criminal record check. 

 

Yet here we are as representatives of people who we say that we 

should be transparent, that we should be accountable to people. 

We are saying that we will give a choice, a choice to 

municipalities to do that. And I’m uncertain now as to whether 

the municipalities were consulted or whether some 

municipalities brought this forward, whether there is agreement. 

Or what are the arguments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, against 

criminal record checks? What are the arguments? 

 

And I guess it leads the electorate . . . and this is where we 

perhaps, the pessimism in terms of voters comes in, where 

people think, why are they not being forthright about anything 

as important as criminal record checks? Criminal record checks, 

Mr. Speaker, are simply . . . have been decided upon in other 

areas. You either do the criminal record checks or you don’t. 

And here we are raising an issue of criminal record checks with 

elected officials, and we seem uncertain whether it’s the right 

thing to do because instead of taking a role in this, we’re saying 

to the municipalities, you decide that, to do that. 

 

So either there was a concern raised by municipalities — which 

number, who were they? — that this was an issue brought 

forward to the minister or there was not, and the minister is 

simply throwing something out. 

 

These are the types of things that lead us to look at and say, 

what consultation has been done? What consultation led the 

minister to fashion an Act of this kind, The Municipalities Act, 

and to want to amend and to add sections, new sections around 

criminal checks? What were the discussions? What are the 

background papers on this, to do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let alone having said all those, made 

those comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about whether we want 

this, who wants it? The minister has now raised the question in 

the electorate’s mind of why not make the same changes to the 

provincial elections Act. So why are we not? We have now the 

voters perhaps asking more questions. So if it is good enough 

for the municipalities, what about the provincial legislators in 

our province? And why would you want to create that sort of 

concern? Why would you want to create those sorts of 

problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

We would want to deal with the Bill and deal with it in an entire 

fashion. You would talk about what are the impacts of this Bill 

on other governments. And those we do not see here. And this 

does not seem to be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve mentioned 

earlier . . . Has this been thought out and thought through? Has 

this been really thought out and thought through on this issue? 

 

This is an important issue. It’s not an issue simply . . . I guess 

all issues are important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without getting 

into trying to prioritize issues, but I mean this issue obviously is 

important to all of us. And yet we are treating it in a fashion that 

sort of says well if you want to, you can and you don’t have to; 

and in fact we’ll do it for the municipal but we won’t do it for 

the provincial. This is a very haphazard approach to legislation. 

 

You might want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not well 

thought through, taking this approach. We don’t, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, again what . . . I personally was not contacted. You 

know, as a legislator, I might have been asked in some fashion 

as to whether or not . . . what I thought about making the 

provincial level politicians subject to criminal checks? I don’t 

know if the member from Regina Northeast was asked about 

this either, as to whether or not . . . what he thought on this. I 

mean, I would think that we have obviously the opportunity to 

debate this Bill in the legislature and then ask our questions. 

But to the minister, it is definitely an approach which has me 

puzzled as to what . . . It is unique to the point of being 

somewhat irrelevant, the legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does this do for our election 

process in this province when you split the different levels into 

municipal and provincial and offer different things, especially 

on something like criminal checks which goes right across the 

piece? We all live under the same laws, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and we all have the opportunity to, as we make our decisions 

. . . we are charged or not charged, I guess, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But this definitely, this double standard . . . And I think double 

standard is the thing that people would be saying about this, is 

that why? And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t want people 

coming up to me and saying, why have you passed this Bill for 

municipal politicians and you won’t pass it for provincial ones? 

I mean, why would I want to have to meet that on the doorstep 

when I go door knocking and have to explain. Are people 

saying, well why don’t you tell us about your criminal record 

checks? I would just as soon just have that posted. And if we’re 

going to do it, let’s do it, and this business about who would 

decide. 

 

And perhaps since they are the government, the minister could 

not get agreement on the provincial record checks. Maybe he 

couldn’t get agreement. And having the majority over there, he 

knew that he needed that agreement. Otherwise he wouldn’t put 

it in because this way, he went to the municipalities and he said, 

well you do it yourself so that if the municipality had the 

majority in there, they would do that. But he couldn’t get — 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, what this leads to is that — he couldn’t 

get agreement from his own caucus or from cabinet to have 

criminal record checks. Is that, Mr. Speaker, what’s happened 

here? 

 

Is there a problem over there that the Saskatchewan Party 

government are opposed to provincial criminal record checks of 

the politicians? And is that why it’s not in here and setting what 

some would call a double standard so that we would have, 

municipalities would have the choice, those that would want to. 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3865 

They would do it. But at the provincial level, we would not. 

 

Now for our side I again, as I said, neither I nor — I understand 

— the member from Regina Northeast have been contacted on 

this issue to discuss it. So from our side in terms of whether we 

would want provincial government credit . . . not credit, 

criminal checks before . . . well when we run for office, so that 

our constituents, those people that can vote for us, know that 

about us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So again I have concerns. It seems a somewhat scattered 

approach on this Act. It raises questions about whether the 

government itself is opposed to provincial criminal checks. Are 

they opposed to themselves as criminal . . . What were the 

discussions? Who would have said to this minister that, put this 

legislation in for us but, you know, don’t put it in for our 

neighbouring municipality. Very unclear. 

 

And again just on this, my second point on this, over and above 

the municipal provincial, is the government has chosen to limit 

disclosure of criminal convictions. They have not for example 

chosen to require disclosure where someone may have been 

charged with a serious criminal offence, but the charges have 

yet to proceed to court. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s obviously, one of the obvious 

things is, I guess, people are entitled to presumption of 

innocence until proven guilty. But again here, as I ask my other 

question, is that the Sask Party government that is trying to, 

opposing provincial criminal credit checks, the question here 

would be, if people have the right to know whether their 

candidate has been convicted, do they also have the right to 

know whether a candidate has been charged and what . . . That 

kind of information could have an effect on the decision voters 

make about a candidate’s suitability for public office, and 

should that be taken into consideration. 

 

So we have some very serious issues here, and it’s quite, I 

guess, disheartening in some ways that they are being dealt with 

in this manner. So issues of whether the Sask Party government 

is opposed to criminal checks because . . . obviously we could 

just have a scheme here that would say we should have criminal 

checks for everyone; those should be posted. Or we allow 

people to have a choice. But choice doesn’t even exist for the 

provincial members seeking office at this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s obviously when we enter into 

charges and which charges should be brought forward and that. 

Those are difficult questions. But again we are not elected to 

make easy decisions. Decisions are not easy. We are called 

upon to make, to tackle difficult problems and that is why we 

are here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So when it comes to issues like 

this, we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, concerned how this works. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I leave this discussion, this debate 

with a lot of questions, questions about the intent and the doubts 

that this creates — this haphazard approach creates — in the 

mind of the voters of this province over these very important 

changes that are here. 

 

So why the issue surrounding why only municipal? Why 

voluntary? And why not provincial? And then the questions of 

why they might not want provincial criminal checks. That is 

just scratching the surface, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because there 

are many other issues around . . . Again as I said, how much 

disclosure should there be? How much disclosure should there 

be? 

 

Should everybody see the criminal records, the criminal 

convictions? Is that not fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have those 

posted so that the public can decide. Let the public decide and 

let the voters decide because they are the ones that put us here. 

They are the ones that vote for us. They should know who we 

are. Who are they electing to this legislature to represent them? 

Or in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it might be looked on as being 

somewhat disingenuous to run under some false assumptions 

and put yourself forward that way. I think I would rather be 

running and being upfront with the people who vote for me in 

saying, this is who I am and these are the policies that I stand 

for. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, most people on the doorstep are 

reasonable people, and they understand when you go there and 

you speak with them, whether on a daily basis or election time. 

When you speak to the people, they ask you the questions. We 

tell them about what we stand for, what our policies are. We 

might sit down, invite us into their homes. And we tell them 

who we are, how we’re connected to our constituencies, what 

our connection is to the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

those are important things to know. 

 

And part of that is our character and what we are like. And one 

of the ways that society judges, one of the ways that society 

judges us is criminal records and the criminal records that we 

have attained through whatever. There are reasons, but those are 

important to the voters and the electors. 

 

And then we see this Act coming in. And the Act talks about 

municipal candidates seeking municipal office will have to do 

criminal record checks providing, however, if the bylaws are 

passed at the local level to allow them to do that. So it is a very 

odd approach that is being taken here. 

 

But I think the basic question that has to be driving this is why 

the Sask Party government, what are they trying to hide in not 

having provincial politicians disclose our doing criminal record 

checks. That’s, at the end of the day when you read the Act, and 

anybody who has sat down and gone over it, that becomes the 

question. What are they trying to hide? And people have said to 

me, what are they trying to hide? What are they trying to hide? 

So why not do it? If the issue is a good issue and we have 

certain professions, certain jobs that require this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, why not do it? If it’s right, it’s right, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we should just do it. Instead the minister has taken 

an approach that is somewhat disconcerting, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a lot of what the discussion is, 

about hiding. Why are they are not transparent? Why are they 

always . . . Why are they not answering questions? Why do they 

introduce laws and then not consult? Why do they not . . . Why 

are they not upfront? They talk about being upfront and here’s 

who we are, but they hide, they hide who they are, Mr. Deputy 



3866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

Speaker. 

 

They hide who they are, and that is shown in the lack of 

questions that are posed on a daily basis here, and now the lack 

of transparency that they go into a Bill such as this, a Bill that’s 

. . . And who in some quarters people say, this is very 

important. Criminal record checks, this is very important, and 

those should be posted where all people can read so that they 

can make their own decisions and come to their own 

conclusions about whether the candidates that they want to vote 

for have that. And who would not want that? 

 

And so I want to know, when you propose something like this, 

what the discussions were, what potentially the consultations 

were that led to this sort of approach — the approach of where 

you split off municipal and provincial — and then the question 

of why you would want to not have provincial politicians have 

criminal record checks. 

 

The obvious thing again is . . . And I hope I don’t have to get 

into a lot of discussions on the doorstep around this, trying to 

defend why we do not have to have criminal record checks, in 

my riding because I have better things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

talk about than criminal record checks. 

 

But again not perhaps criminal record checks, but why is the 

Sask Party government hiding behind not having criminal 

record checks and posting them? If the minister felt so strongly 

about this, perhaps he should have gone out or she should have 

held back on the Bill until he got agreement from his Sask Party 

members to go for it and say, we want provincial. 

 

Or let’s hear the arguments why they do not want it. I think 

that’s more important. What I would like to hear from that side 

over there is why they don’t, but the minister did not say 

anything about that. He did not say why are they hiding from 

having the Sask Party get criminal record checks, but in fact all 

he said was that: 

 

The next issue I’d like to discuss relates to the proposal for 

optional criminal record checks in municipal elections. As 

I described in my second reading of remarks for both the 

new Northern Municipalities Act and The Cities 

Amendment Act . . . [they] will be able to decide locally if 

they want to require a higher level of public transparency 

in the election process. 

 

Now he agrees that it’s a higher level of public transparency, 

but yet it is not . . . That’s sort of good for in one place but not 

another. And then, “The purpose of allowing such checks is not 

to disqualify someone from running from office, but to inform 

electors.” 

 

Now we agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What is that? It is just in 

words here in terms of introducing the Act, but it doesn’t come 

out in the legislation. So if he agrees that he wants transparency 

and he wants to inform the electors, then why would he not 

want to take this step and just do it. Like why not do it? What is 

he afraid of? What is he hiding? Or again, why are they trying 

to do a cover-up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what are they 

covering over there? What is it that lurks over there that the 

electors should know? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister then goes on, and here’s quite 

a breakthrough: “I expect some municipalities may choose to 

implement these checks and some may not.” Now how about 

that. We have the minister saying he wants to allow for a higher 

level of public transparency in the election process, and the 

purpose of allowing checks is not to disqualify somebody, but 

to inform electors. So we have transparency. 

 

And then he says, I expect some municipalities to implement 

these checks. If I was a municipality and I read that this is a 

higher public transparency, and then . . . So I would feel like 

I’m not transparent because that’s the opposite of being 

transparent. So if he’s allowing for a higher level of public 

transparency and then he says, I expect some municipalities to 

do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how do you read those two things 

together? 

 

The minister is saying to people of this province, I think that 

this provides a higher level of public transparency. And then he 

says, I expect some municipalities. What message does that 

send to them? That some of them are not transparent. 

 

And so therefore then I asked the question of him. I asked the 

question of him: so why is the Sask Party government not 

transparent? What are they trying to hide? And why are they not 

being transparent on that side of the House, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Because the minister has already agreed that we 

require a higher level of transparency in an election process. 

And why does he say that? The purpose of allowing such 

checks is not to disqualify someone from running, but to inform 

the electors. And we all agree that the electors should be 

informed. 

 

But then he goes on, and immediately the next sentence . . . And 

I’m not certain who wrote this for him or whether he did that 

himself. He says, I expect municipalities may choose to 

implement these, and “It is the municipalities who are in the 

best position to decide if these checks are something that would 

benefit their communities.” So the minister thinks that this is a 

higher level of public transparency. He believes in a higher 

level of public transparency, that minister does. But the 

municipalities might not. There’s some municipalities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in this province that might not believe in a 

higher level of transparency. 

 

Now that would be an interesting one in terms of an election 

being held, when the next elections are held and people running 

in one municipality next door to the other one saying, it looks 

like your folks over there running in your municipality are not 

being transparent. They’re not being transparent in accordance 

to what the minister has said because he says this is a higher 

level of transparency if you do this, but this municipality’s 

determined that they won’t do this. 

 

And it would be interesting to know why they wouldn’t want to 

do that, as I’m interested here, no doubt, and wondering why 

the Sask Party government, what they’re trying to hide, and 

why they’re not being transparent on this issue as well. What 

are they trying to hide? But again it’s not surprising. It’s not 

surprising for what we’ve heard from these folks opposite, that 

they are anything but transparent. 

 

And he ends off: 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3867 

It’s important to remember that municipalities . . . have 

the authority to make this choice at a local level. The 

province is not forcing any particular municipality to 

undertake this.”  

 

This gets more interesting the more you read it because it starts 

out with a higher level of public transparency — this is great for 

the electors — but the province is not forcing anybody. Where’s 

the push back coming from on this? Where’s the push back 

coming from this? 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s going on? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — What is going on over there that now, but 

we’re not forcing you to do that? Why does he feel he has to 

force them to do this? I mean, where was the discussion that 

you have to get into this type of language if you consulted and 

you had agreement? You either had agreement or not. Or maybe 

you didn’t consult, and this was just something you dreamed up 

and just brought it in here, and now we have to try and sort our 

way through this. And it’s not something very easy to get 

through because you have conflicting messages. Conflicting 

messages. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So if he didn’t consult, and now he has to find a way out. And 

so he says, “The province is not forcing any particular 

municipality to undertake this.” What does that mean? What 

does that mean?  

 

So it’s a higher level of responsibility or a higher level of 

transparency. It’s sort of a these are the things to do. And then, 

we don’t want to force you to do this, but we’re not doing it 

ourselves. Now talk about a mixed message, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker If you’re sitting here as a municipality or you’re sitting 

there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well on this side it’s a 

mixed message, and it has me quite confused as to what is 

happening. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope . . . I would say the clarity, 

there’s no clarity here in terms of what direction. This is almost 

. . . It is haphazard, and it’s almost a hodgepodge of ideas 

thrown together and sort of this is good. You don’t have to do 

it, but if you want to do it, you can do it. What direction? This 

is no direction. This is no direction. And again it’s not 

surprising from that side the lack of direction, the lack of vision, 

the lack in an issue. 

 

And this issue is just a smaller kernel of what we see in the 

larger picture, the lack of vision here, in terms of saying, this is 

either a good idea, we’re behind it. This is the kind of 

leadership we want to provide on this file, and we move 

forward. Instead we have, it’s a good idea. You can do it if you 

want to do it, and we’re not trying to force you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to do it. 

 

Think about it. You know, as a voter, as a legislator in this 

legislature how that message resonates with the people not only 

in this building but outside. So I guess the thing I say to people 

on the doorstep is, what I have to say is, well, they’re really not 

forcing the municipalities to do it. But they think it’s a good 

idea, and they can do it if they want to. 

So I think at that point in time, probably the elector would be 

saying, well what is it they’re saying? What are they saying? 

Well what about them? And I’ll say, well what are they trying 

to hide? What are they trying to hide? So instead of discussing 

policy issues on the doorstep, I’m going to have to be spending 

my time saying, well they’re not transparent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They’re not transparent here because they think it’s a 

good idea, but they don’t want to do it. And then they don’t 

want to . . . we’re not forcing anybody. 

 

Now this is what we have to take to the doorstep and talk about 

and try and convince voters here, that the Sask Party 

government, well, has some vision in this area or has . . . 

they’re taking a leadership role in something that’s so important 

as voting and to the electors. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say that in a Bill that spans 

from increased truck traffic and branch line abandonment, as I 

started out making my initial points, and the pressures the 

municipalities are feeling . . . And so they have to deal with 

issues like this because municipalities, some say that they are 

closer to electors, immediate. And so the kinds of pressures that 

they feel and the costs for dealing with these things, not only do 

they have to deal with these, but they now are forced to deal 

with whether or not we think credit checks are good. And it’s 

almost a Bill that’s driven by guilt because if you don’t do it . . . 

This is a good idea. The minister thinks it’s a good idea. But it’s 

your choice whether you do it or not, but we won’t force you to 

do it. 

 

This is almost laughable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the 

approach this minister has taken on this Bill — almost 

laughable of the approach. So in between trying to deal with, 

dealing with the disputes of contractors on roads and dealing 

with the costs, the pressures that they’re feeling, on top of all 

this, we want to put on these municipalities the idea that you 

can have criminal checks. It’s a really good thing to do. We 

think it’s an excellent thing to do. The minister in fact thinks it 

brings forward a higher transparency, and it’s good for the 

electors. Let’s not forget that that’s what he also says. He thinks 

this is good for the electors of this province, and it informs the 

electors, he says. He says that. 

 

And so now the municipalities have to also struggle with this. 

Do we believe the minister? And do we do what he says 

because he’s proposing a higher level; he’s proposing a 

holier-than-thou kind of position? You should do criminal 

checks because I think it’s a higher level of public transparency 

in the election process. He agrees with that. Right on — a 

higher level of an election process. And then he says, but we’re 

not going to force you to do it, and you can decide to do it. So 

now there’s a debate that has to take place. 

 

And why did that debate not take place before this Bill was put 

in, before this Bill was put in so that people would deal with the 

real issues out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The real issues of 

fixing roads. The real issue of what rail-line abandonment has 

had on the roads. And big time, big time, big time costs caused 

by rail-line abandonment because we never anticipated, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the anticipation of the number of heavy, heavy 

trucks that would go on the roads and the roads that they would 

use. Those roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were not meant for the 

kind of traffic, designed for the kind of traffic that came after 



3868 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

rail-line abandonment. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are also changes to the 

requirements for public disclosure of conflicts of interest. And 

again here the minister brings this in with requirements for 

MLAs. And here we see the minister is quite clear — there will 

be conflict of interest, and you’re going to do what the MLAs 

do on this issue. If what I’ve been saying up to this point in time 

. . . We could say that the minister here has shown some 

leadership on this issue because he has said, this is what we’re 

going to do. On this issue of conflict of interest, which is an 

important issue as well — that the electors know what the 

conflict of interest that members would have — he says, you 

will be like the MLAs. And it’s clear. He just simply says it and 

it’s done. It’s done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There are no . . . you can choose to have conflict of interest. I 

think it’s good, but we’re not going to force you to do it. Very 

unclear, if you compare this part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 

part about criminal checks. And it really makes me wonder why 

you can have conflict of interest and you can say that you’d be 

like the MLAs, but you put in criminal record checks and all of 

a sudden we don’t want to do that. What are they hiding? What 

is the Sask Party government hiding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

they don’t want criminal checks? 

 

So it’s okay to do conflict of interest disclosure in line with 

MLAs. That’s very clear; I will take a leadership role in saying 

that. But when it comes to criminal record checks, we’re going 

to duck and run. We’re going to duck and run on this one. And 

we’re also going to say you can have a choice, but we think it’s 

a good idea, but again we’re not going to force you to do it. 

 

Now there’s a message, two messages: one on conflict of 

interest and one on criminal record checks. So my question 

remains, after going over this Act, is what is the Sask Party 

government hiding? Why are they hiding this? Why would they 

not go ahead with this, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I mentioned the population figures, and 

again there are questions that we will need to do more work on 

there. I talked about the roads, the increase in traffic, and I’ve 

talked about the mechanisms in the Act. Now we support, 

again, the principle of having the mechanism to resolve disputes 

between contractors, but we need to know more closely what 

that mechanism will work like. Again, here there are obviously 

well-founded suspicions of whether or not the minister talked or 

spoke with municipalities, spoke with the municipalities about 

this. 

 

So we would like to be doing some more consultations in that 

area. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I would move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 109, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 110 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 110 — The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to basically look at Bill 110 and to offer some of the 

opinions and certainly some of the challenges with Bill 110. 

And after I’m done my discussion, I want to move that we 

adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in northern Saskatchewan have the 

right to real democratic input into the decisions that affect their 

lives. And I look at some of the parts of this Act and the 

legislation proposed is to give northern municipalities more 

autonomy and more authority in line with the provisions already 

in place for southern communities. And while we support that 

principle, I certainly want to add a bit more what some of the 

challenges are when it comes to operating northern 

municipalities in Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things that people ought to know, that legislation, as 

we draft up rules and regulations and processes here in Regina, 

that we must always take into account the reality of life in 

northern communities. Being a former mayor in Ile-a-la-Crosse, 

I know some of the challenges that local leaders face when they 

try and provide leadership to the small northern communities. 

And many of these northern communities, while their ambitions 

are great and their hopes are great, there is certainly challenges 

that they face in reality — something that we need to always 

incorporate when it comes to realizing what the northern 

communities face when we do up laws and rules and 

regulations here in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the municipal leaders in northern 

Saskatchewan play a vital, vital role. It’s not to diminish nor is 

it meant to demean the role of our southern counterparts, but 

many times in these northern communities the role of the mayor 

and certainly the councillor is really, really highlighted in the 

fact that many municipal elections you’ll often see people 

voting and turning out — 85 to 90 per cent of the people come 

and vote for their mayor and for their councillors, and the role 

of mayor in northern Saskatchewan is one of high esteem. 

 

And if you look at some of the challenges that the people place 

on their leadership, I want to make sure that when we look at 

some of the provisions in this municipal Act and some of the 

changes, that people ought to know from day one is that 

northern municipalities face an incredible, incredible challenge. 

And the leadership, this all rests on the shoulders of the 

councillors and the mayors, and they have a lot of work to do. 

 

And of course as MLAs we often travel to southern 

Saskatchewan, roughly 800 kilometres from my home. And one 

of the things that’s, I think, really important is that we are 

sometimes removed from the communities and we’re all over 

the place and we spend some time here. The mayors and the 

councillors are in their communities pretty steady. And since 

they’re there on a regular basis, they see every day some of the 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3869 

challenges of living in northern communities. 

 

And that’s what I want. One of the messages I want as a result 

of Bill 110 is to make sure that some of the provisions and the 

changes that are being proposed is that people ought to know, 

and particularly the Sask Party and the minister ought to know 

and should understand, the complexity of operating these 

northern communities and certainly the challenges, and at the 

same time that we don’t leave the municipal leaders to fend for 

themselves. 

 

Obviously they are very proud, the mayors and the councillors 

are, of their role and they cherish their responsibility given to 

them. But we must never forget the incredible different and 

unique challenges that northern municipalities face when it 

comes to operating their communities. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So we look at this government’s financial mismanagement and 

we begin to see some of the cuts to the important programs that 

are offered in the North. And we tend to become more and more 

worried that, again, you look at some of the rising costs of 

operating a community in southern Saskatchewan, you can 

almost compound those rising costs to double of that that a 

southern community will pay when it comes to northern 

communities. 

 

In terms of access to services, it is an incredible problem as well 

in northern Saskatchewan. And basically the list goes on and 

on. And when you have some of the unemployment rates and 

some of the resulting social challenges and the issues, there is 

no question in my mind that northern municipal leaders 

certainly need to be heard and they need to be respected. 

 

And as I look at some of the issues on this Bill, there is some 

things that we support in principle. But it’s one thing to support 

in principle some of the changes that are being proposed within 

the Bill, but it’s certainly another thing to say, well here is the 

resulting financial support; here’s the resulting service support 

so you’re able to do your job more effectively. 

 

What this Bill talks about, Mr. Speaker, is a request for criminal 

record check for candidates seeking public office. And I noticed 

from the minister’s comments, he spoke to a few people in New 

North. I would like for the record, Mr. Speaker, is to see what 

kind of requests that particular issue was asked for by a number 

of northern communities. If the municipal office is required to 

do that, those seeking provincial office should do so as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult in these situations of criminal 

record check versus non-criminal record check to see where we 

draw the line. And I think it’s important that we look at this and 

provide more consideration and more thought as opposed to 

simply adopting this government’s proposal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things, the glaring omissions of 

Bill 110, it makes reference to trying to bring the northern 

communities more in line with the provisions already in place 

for southern municipalities. And while we said we support 

those principles, I’m going to ask the question . . . There was a 

great success and great support, I personally support the notion 

that Meadow Lake and Martensville were declared cities. 

I congratulate and commend the mayor and the council of both 

those communities, in particular the mayor of Meadow Lake 

who’s a very fine mayor. And we certainly, you know, 

recognize and we applaud that particular effort because 

Meadow Lake is a growing community, and it certainly is a 

community that should receive city status. 

 

And yes, there’s people out there that may be concerned about 

the cost of fire protection services, and will this increase our 

taxes in later years and so on and so forth. And while they have 

a right to express those concerns, I’m quite positive that the 

mayor and council of the city of Meadow Lake would certainly 

look at trying to find some answers and to alleviate some of 

those concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to challenge the Minister in relation to 

The Northern Municipalities Act when he mentioned the fact 

that he’d like to see, he would like to see similar options exist 

for northern communities as they would for southern 

communities. And the line, for those that may not be aware, 

there is a northern administration district which is basically 

considered the northern line of the NAD [northern 

administration district] line. And all the communities north of 

Meadow Lake, north of Creighton, and north of Prince Albert 

are considered within the northern administration district. And 

The Northern Municipalities Act, Bill 110 of course has 

implication on that particular Act. 

 

And one of the things that I think is important is, you look at the 

community of La Ronge as an example. It’s got a combined 

population of Air Ronge, La Ronge, and of course the Indian 

band. You’re looking at roughly between 6 and 7,000 people, 

and that’s just the census. And while I applaud the effort of the 

minister to look and declare Martensville and Meadow Lake a 

city, if you want to be fair and consistent with your legislation, 

perhaps it’d be wise to also look at trying to declare La Ronge a 

city because La Ronge I think would fit the criteria that 

Meadow Lake fit. 

 

And as a result of that, you want to be consistent, then perhaps 

it’s time we look at declaring La Ronge a city. Is that a 

possibility? And the answer is, well if the rules are consistent 

with that of southern Saskatchewan, then I think La Ronge 

ought to be declared a city and therefore receive city status. And 

while I can’t specifically speak for the Cumberland MLA, I’m 

sure he’ll have a lot of thoughts on that because I’m just kind of 

unloading this on him as we speak. 

 

But in terms of The Northern Municipalities Act, is there a 

provision in that Act that would allow the minister to declare La 

Ronge a city? I think it’s something that we ought to look at and 

we ought to research. And again going back to the points I 

raised earlier, if it is meant to give the northern municipalities 

more autonomy and more authority in line with our southern 

counterparts, then perhaps a designation of a northern city 

would be appropriate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of these Bills and I have a lot of 

concerns. And I’m not going to elaborate on the concerns more 

today; I’ll have some as we continue to look at the Act. And so 

therefore I will ask my colleague to also add some of his 

opinions as well. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 



3870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to have the privilege to enter into 

this debate, the debate on this particular Bill, the Bill that is I 

think quite important to northerners. And it’s the Act respecting 

the local government in northern Saskatchewan and making 

consequential amendment Act, changes to other Acts. 

 

And I say it gives me a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Speaker, 

because it certainly does. I had the privilege — and I consider it 

a privilege — of travelling through northern Saskatchewan a 

few summers ago as part of my responsibilities that was handed 

to me by the then premier, Mr. Calvert, that asked me to do a 

review of the northern overtime exemptions Act. And in order 

to do that, I felt it was necessary to get out and talk to the folks 

who are, quite frankly, impacted by this. 

 

The northern overtime exemption Act was a unique Act. I think 

Saskatchewan was the only province in all of Canada where an 

area of the province was designated as to be exempt from 

employers having to pay overtime to employees. And the line 

was not as it was quite . . . As I travelled throughout northern 

Saskatchewan and we held public meetings in many, many 

communities . . . I wouldn’t say in every community; I think 

there was three communities we didn’t get into. But outside of 

that, we were in every community and we held public meetings 

in all these various communities. And most people referred to 

the dividing line between north and south as NAD line. And 

that of course was not the line that was used for the northern 

overtime exemptions. The line there was the township line of 

township 62. 

 

But it was really a eye-opener for me personally, having had the 

opportunity to travel in northern Saskatchewan and spend some 

time in each one of these communities and talk to and visit with 

many of the residents of these communities. Boy, was it ever an 

eye-opener. The uniqueness or the differences between northern 

Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan is almost as different 

as night and day. 

 

And I think all members should take the opportunity to travel 

the North and spend some time up there. And I don’t mean just 

during the prime tourist season of July and August. And I don’t 

mean just for the purpose of fishing, of some of the great 

fishing that’s up in that area or, later on in the season, for some 

of the great hunting that’s up in there. But I would encourage 

them to travel northern Saskatchewan and take time to meet the 

people, because they are certainly very friendly and hospitable 

people. 

 

But there’s a uniqueness about northern Saskatchewan, for me 

at least, having been born and raised in the southern part of the 

province here. The uniqueness is, I suppose, it’s so 

community-based. Each community is very, very, very much 

community-based. And it’s isolated in as far as being long 

distances between communities, great distance between 

communities. 

 

And a lot of these communities are self-reliant. They provide 

much of the services that they need. They provide it themselves. 

They find ways and means to be able to have those services 

locally, because they quite simply can’t travel to the next 

community to get them because of the distance involved. 

 

And you can understand, Mr. Speaker, that that is one of the 

areas that — in my critic area as the critic for Highways and 

Infrastructure — is of concern to me and my northern 

colleagues. Is that in these communities, unlike the rest of us in 

southern Saskatchewan who enjoy in our communities usually 

four all-weather roads into our community, one going in each 

direction — so you can come in from one direction and go out 

another — and usually they’re done if not on a paved surface, at 

least on an all-weather road. Well that’s not the same in 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Most of these 

communities in northern Saskatchewan have one road, have one 

road in and one road out. They simply don’t have the luxury of 

having a choice of two or three different roads. 

 

So you can understand why having quality infrastructure, 

quality roads, is so very important to the North and to having 

the ability to be able to move back and forth with, well basically 

I say, with ease, with the ability to do so whenever they so wish 

despite climatic conditions. 

 

And I can recall one time, we were on . . . We went from La 

Ronge to Pinehouse; we had a meeting in Pinehouse. And it’s 

quite a long distance so we left fairly early in the morning. I 

like to do this as much as possible, get into the communities as 

early as possible so that we could have some time to travel 

around the community and go into some of the stores and get to, 

you know, just a brief meeting with the mayor and the council 

and some of the store owners. 

 

And I remember doing this in Pinehouse and it was very 

interesting. We had lunch, actually had supper in Pinehouse 

before our public meeting. And we had a good turnout. I believe 

if my memory serves me correctly, it had something like 40 to 

50 people at the meeting. It was a good discussion, very 

knowledgeable people. Many had experienced working and not 

having been paid overtime and all the rest of those very nuances 

to that particular Bill. 

 

And that, while the meeting was going on, we experienced one 

of those — this was in the month of August, I believe it was — 

and we experienced one of those summer rain storms that come 

up sort of out of the blue. It just had poured. It rained pretty 

heavily. And of course, when the meeting was over with, at 

about 10:30 at night, we had to still make our way back to La 

Ronge. 

 

And it was a most interesting drive because it was only one 

highway. There was only the one road. And it was in not in the 

best of shape. And it certainly required more attention. And I 

remember driving out and I remember saying to those who were 

with me that I was quite pleased that we had a four-wheel drive 

vehicle because after that rain we were driving in about three to 

four inches of just a really slushy, mushy surface on that road. 

And it was certainly something that certainly needed a 

four-wheel drive in order to have a bit of a good chance of 

making it out of there without any difficulty. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill, The Northern 

Municipalities Act, something that I could probably relate to 

having had the opportunity of spending 10 years of my life, I 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3871 

was municipal councillor in a southern municipality. So I have 

some idea of what some of the issues might be and how they 

may be looked at through the eyes of somebody in northern 

Saskatchewan and somebody who is serving on municipal 

council in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

There certainly is, as I have already stated, a uniqueness about 

northern Saskatchewan, and that is why it is so very important 

that when we make these changes, when we make these 

changes to the governance of the municipalities of northern 

Saskatchewan, it is absolutely essential that we carry out those 

discussions with those people in the North who are going to be 

affected because they best know what changes need to take 

place. They best know what changes will affect them and 

improve their life and it’ll improve the lot of their community. 

 

And it is important that we have that opportunity and take that 

opportunity to speak to these people who have these concerns, 

because unless you have lived it, unless you have experienced 

it, unless you’ve spent a lot of time in the North, there is a 

uniqueness there that’s not comprehendible by somebody from 

the South just coming in on a flyby or just a brief pass through 

as I did and be able to understand it all, because that’s certainly 

not the case. 

 

This is why it’s so important that before the government makes 

any significant amendments to the northern municipal Act or 

the other Acts that are related, that there is that consultation, 

that discussion does take place. And I have yet, Mr. Speaker, to 

see any evidence that that is the case here. I’m hoping I’m 

wrong but I have yet to see that evidence. But if you travel in 

northern Saskatchewan, you quickly identify that the issues that 

are facing northerners in a lot of ways are similar to that facing 

southerners, to that facing the people in southern Saskatchewan, 

but there’s also a uniqueness there. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And I remember that when I was travelling through and having 

my public meetings in regards to the northern overtime 

exemption, we used as a prop or to give the good folks there an 

idea of the area we were talking about, we used a map of the top 

half of Saskatchewan. The map started just below township 62 

and went up and it showed the entire area of the province that 

was affected by the then legislation that exempted employers 

from paying overtime to northern workers. 

 

And it didn’t fail, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t fail that there was a 

comment at a public meeting by someone there saying, boy it’s 

nice to see a map that shows northern Saskatchewan and not 

just the South. Because what they had become used to when 

you’re looking at maps of Saskatchewan, there’s a lot of cases 

that just shows southern Saskatchewan. It doesn’t show the 

North because it’s not a highly populated area. It shows 

southern Saskatchewan and, quite frankly, those folks who 

lived in northern Saskatchewan would be a bit disturbed by the 

fact that they were left out. They were ignored. They were 

overlooked and that, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping is not the case as 

far as this legislation is concerned. 

 

I’m hoping that the government has done its homework and has 

done consulting and has talked to the people who live in 

northern Saskatchewan because they are unique in a lot of the 

ways, and a lot of ways they’re similar. A lot of the issues that 

they face are similar. I mean issues of health care are similar to 

those in the North. The issues of education — similar to those 

in the South. The issues of transportation, of infrastructure, of 

roads — it’s similar to those in the South. 

 

The difference is, as I already indicated as far as roads is 

concerned, in the South, we in the communities in southern 

Saskatchewan here enjoy usually a good quality road leading 

out of our community in any one of the four directions, and all 

four directions. Whereas in northern Saskatchewan the 

uniqueness is that they have one road, and they need to keep 

that road up and keep that road in the best of possible shape 

because that’s the only road they have. It’s the road that they 

come in on; it’s the road that they go out on. It’s the road that 

their services come in on; it’s the road that their services go out 

on. So it’s very important that we have that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is truly necessary for the government to 

have carried out meaningful consultations with the communities 

of northern Saskatchewan to ensure that they have had that 

ability to discuss and identify those issues that are of 

importance to those communities. And we need to look at 

providing those opportunities to those communities to be able to 

develop the services that they require and be able to develop 

ways, through co-operation — through co-operation with the 

provincial government, with other communities in the North — 

to have access to those services that their people so desperately 

require on an ongoing basis, but actually should be their right. 

 

A lot of these services that we enjoy in southern Saskatchewan 

here, we take for granted. Why? They’re handy. They’re close 

by. If we don’t have it in our particular community here, we can 

drive to the next one close by and enjoy those services. That, 

Mr. Speaker, is not the case in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So it is important that we have those systems in place so that 

northerners can enjoy an improved quality of life. And I think 

that’s what we all, as legislators here, are looking for. We’re 

looking for the ability to improve the lives of Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And I think we should be paying special attention to northern 

Saskatchewan because it has the uniqueness there. Particular 

uniqueness of distances is very important. And we need to, you 

know, keep that in mind as we enter into any time, any time we 

enter into a debate over making certain changes to regulations 

and legislation as to what effect that may have on northern 

people. 

 

But more importantly, we need to have that discussion with 

them because they’re the people on the front lines. They’re the 

people born and raised there. They’re the ones that know what 

needs to be done. They’re the ones that know what works and 

what doesn’t work. They’re the ones that know the changes that 

would improve their lot, improve the life of the people in 

northern Saskatchewan and improve those communities. That 

should be the goal of all of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the same time, we need to ensure, we need to ensure that the 

legislation and the municipal legislation, northern municipal 

legislation, it needs to reflect the reality of the life in northern 

Saskatchewan. That’s the difference. It needs to reflect the 



3872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

reality of life in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, there’s all kinds of opportunity for us to think, this 

would be good for them. There’s all kinds of opportunity for us 

to say, well this is better than what they had. But there’s a 

reality that the life in northern Saskatchewan is different than 

that in the South. And we need to carry those consultations out 

with those communities so that the legislation, when the 

changes do take place, those changes are meaningful and those 

changes do reflect the reality of life in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And many northern leaders . . . Now during my time as 

travelling in northern Saskatchewan I had the opportunity to 

meet with, on many occasions, mayors from the communities, 

the various communities that I was in, and the town council. 

And they had an organization there called New North, which 

was an umbrella organization of all the municipalities in 

northern Saskatchewan. And the membership was made up of 

the mayors of each community. And it was, I think, a wonderful 

step forward because it allowed them in northern Saskatchewan 

to speak with one voice on those issues that affected them all 

right across the piece. 

 

And many issues are, like I said earlier, many of the issues in 

northern Saskatchewan are very similar to those in southern 

Saskatchewan. Many issues affect one community the same 

way they affect another community, although one community 

may be on the east side of the province and the other one on the 

west side of the province, but the issues are the same. 

 

So the organization of the New North, as it was constituted of 

the leadership of each community — the mayors of each 

community — was certainly a valuable tool, I think, to northern 

Saskatchewan. It allows them to speak with one voice on the 

issues that face their communities. And it allowed them to carry 

out meaningful discussions with governments of both levels — 

federal government and provincial government — and they did 

so with one voice. And they did so with outlining the concerns 

that affected all of their communities. And I found that a very 

great organization. 

 

I met with the organization officially in Prince Albert at one of 

their meetings. But I had the opportunity also to meet with 

many of the mayors in their own communities, and you kind of 

get to know, in a very broad way, some of the issues that they 

were facing. And it certainly struck me as different, unique in 

the fact that the biggest issue, biggest hurdle that they had to 

deal with was the distances between communities. To travel 

from one community to the other was not something that was 

done lightly. A lot of times, the travel was planned to be as 

beneficial as possible so that there was no wasted time and no 

wasted dollars and cents because, quite frankly, it was 

expensive to travel long distances. You can understand the 

stress involved in doing that. 

 

But these community leaders face many issues, many 

challenges because of the services that they require on, quite 

frankly, a small population and the vast distances in between. 

So they have to find ways and means to make these services 

affordable and yet in a climate that is very expensive. And the 

climate is very expensive because of the distances involved and, 

in a lot of cases, small communities, small populations 

requiring the same service and the same level of service as if it 

was a larger community. 

 

And therefore it increases the burden of costs and increases the 

burden of the municipal leaders finding out and identifying 

ways and means that they could provide these services to their 

ratepayers, to the folks that they represent, in a way that’s 

affordable and in a way that’s meaningful and in a way that 

meets the needs of northern people — the people who live in 

these small communities. 

 

And the issues are, as I said, Mr. Speaker, a lot of cases are 

similar to that of southern Saskatchewan, but in other ways 

they’re a little different. The social challenges I think is perhaps 

one of the issues that local government faces up north there, the 

fact that they have high unemployment which is not a good 

thing. And certainly governments in the past have worked on 

this issue, and I hope this government here would work on it 

too. I don’t see any evidence of that though, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I do see evidence of, I see evidence of this government 

simply ignoring northern Saskatchewan. That’s most obvious in 

the most recent deliberation by this government of about a year, 

year and a half ago when they announced that they came up a 

five-year rolling plan for their highways in this province. And 

that five-year rolling plan did not include northern 

Saskatchewan. I was very disappointed when I’d seen that 

because they once again simply ignored northern 

Saskatchewan. They left northern Saskatchewan out of the loop. 

 

And that’s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, because I think 

northerners want to be included in Saskatchewan. They want to 

be felt as a part of this province. They don’t want to be isolated. 

They don’t want to be separated. They don’t want to be looked 

upon as different. They want to be part of this province. Do 

they have unique issues? Yes, they do. As we all have unique 

issues, they have unique issues too. But they also want to be 

included in this province, in part of this province. 

 

I will, for the life of me, never understand why this government 

couldn’t see fit to have included northern Saskatchewan in their 

five-year plan. Oh yes, now that it’s been brought to their 

attention that they’ve ignored northern Saskatchewan, now they 

announce that they have a northern Saskatchewan five-year 

plan. 

 

But they’re working on it. They haven’t got the plan yet. 

They’re still working on it. It’s still under study. Well, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It sounds like an afterthought to me. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Exactly right. It sounds like an afterthought to 

me, and that’s exactly what it is, Mr. Speaker. They ignored 

northern Saskatchewan. They ignored northern Saskatchewan 

originally. When the heat came on them, when heat came on 

them, by my colleagues particularly from the North, then they 

decide — whoa — well we’ll have to address this. We’ll have 

to address this by introducing a northern-only five-year strategy 

plan, but we’ll have to talk about it. It’ll probably take them 

five years to talk about it before they . . . [inaudible] . . . So they 

were ignored, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now that’s rather sad, rather hurtful, I would say, to be a 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3873 

part of Saskatchewan and to be considered a Saskatchewan 

citizen, to be obligated to the responsibilities of a Saskatchewan 

citizen and then to be ignored, ignored, but particularly on that 

issue. It’s an issue with a . . . very, very important because 

roads and transportation in northern Saskatchewan is very, very 

important to northerners. 

 

Why? Because as I’ve already said, Mr. Speaker, most of these 

communities have one road. They don’t have four all-weather 

roads like we enjoy in southern Saskatchewan that leads out 

from our communities in each direction. What they have is one 

road. One road in, one road out. They need to maintain that road 

in the best possible condition so that they can have access to 

going in or going out as they need, but so that commerce can 

flow in and out also, so services can come in and out, so goods 

can come in and out. And that is very important in northern 

Saskatchewan because that’s the only road. That’s the only 

road. 

 

And in many cases, Mr. Speaker, we note that those roads in 

northern Saskatchewan have been ignored by this government. 

But they have also been perhaps put down on the list because 

they didn’t even make the five-year list that the government 

first announced, the five-year rolling plan that the government 

first announced. They didn’t even make that one. They were 

ignored. 

 

Then the minister acted, I think after a fair amount of heat both 

in the House here and certainly in committee, decided that well 

we have to put this particular issue to bed. The best way to do 

that, we’ll strike another committee to do a review of the 

situation in northern Saskatchewan and bring in a five-year 

rolling plan for the highways of northern Saskatchewan. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re still waiting for. And we’re still 

looking for that. 

 

And I think New North, if you talk to them, that would be 

probably the first thing on their list of needs attention, would be 

the roads. If you’ve travelled those roads — and I have in the 

summertime when it’s dry — you’re driving in a cloud of dust, 

an absolute cloud of dust. And after a stretch of dry weather, the 

dust will be two to three inches thick on that road. And I have 

driven on many of those roads, Mr. Speaker, and I drove in an 

absolute cloud of dust. And I’ve got to admit it is very, very 

dangerous because you can’t see the traffic coming at you. 

 

And I’m also reminded of my experience driving from Pelican 

Narrows to Sandy Bay, and boy, is there ever a road you don’t 

want to drive on when it’s dusty and driving in a cloud of dust. 

That’s one of them because it is a very treacherous road — very 

sharp curves, very sharp hills, very difficult to see. And I did 

have the experience of following a large truck basically from 

Pelican Narrows all the way to Sandy Bay in a cloud of dust, 

and it was not fun. It was not fun. There was times I certainly 

had my heart in my mouth because you just simply couldn’t 

see, and you didn’t know what was coming over the edge of the 

hill because it was just thick dust, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that those folks drive on 

every day. I mean, it’s something I’d experienced once. I went 

in once and out once. And like I said, going in, in a cloud of 

dust, I had my heart in my mouth. Well you can imagine those 

folks driving in that road all the time. Dust in the summer, snow 

in the winter, ice in the winter. Those are treacherous 

conditions, and yet northern Saskatchewan was left out of the 

government’s five-year rolling plan. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And when you talk to the municipal leaders up there, they just 

simply shake their head and they wonder why. Why are they 

being treated so differently than the rest of Saskatchewan? Why 

is it, when the government unveiled its five-year rolling plan, it 

didn’t mention northern Saskatchewan in any of their plans? 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, what it did do was took funds that were 

already designated by the previous government for road repair 

and road improvement in northern Saskatchewan. They took 

those funds away. They took those funds away. They said, oh 

it’s been, it’s been rescheduled, or we’ll come back to it at 

another time in the future here, but first we want to do a study. 

We simply forgot to do northern Saskatchewan when we did 

our original study. We implemented a new committee here to 

study northern Saskatchewan and to identify what needs to be 

done in those roads, and eventually maybe we’ll even find some 

money to start doing it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, time is going on, and we are not seeing any 

action. What we are seeing, though, from the members, from 

my colleagues from the North, there are a number of petitions 

coming in about the highways and the condition of those 

highways because they are dangerous, treacherous. And some 

of the locals . . . in fact on one of the highways there — I think 

it was 123 — was one the locals have termed an area there as 

suicide curve. And those are the local people, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are the people who drive on that road every day. Those 

are the people who know that country. I mean, that’s their 

country. And those are the areas that were designated to be 

repaired by the former government. That’s what the money was 

set aside for that. This government comes along. They pull that 

money out of there. And, Mr. Speaker, and they do that to . . . 

and the northern leaders are saying why. Why did this happen? 

You know, why would this government do that? I mean we 

need it. We’re Saskatchewan citizens. We need some services 

on our roads too. 

 

But what happened? This government decided to yank that 

money out. And, Mr. Speaker, that was done when the 

government had money. That was done before the fiscal 

mismanagement of this government became apparent now. So if 

they didn’t fix those northern roads when they had money, the 

northern leaders are saying, what’s going to happen now that 

the provincial government has driven the finances of this 

province into the ditch? What’s going to happen to our northern 

roads? Are we going to even be on a five-year wait-list? Are we 

even going to make their five-year wait-list? That’s the 

question, Mr. Speaker, that northerners, northern leaders are 

asking today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the concern here, that many northerners have, is 

that the government may come up with a five-year list, then 

each year they’ll defer it. They’ll defer it. They’ll say, well next 

year. Last year this government was saying, well this is this 

year country and we’re doing it now. And a year later, or just 

shortly less than a year later, they’ve put the finances of this 

province into the ditch, and now they’re saying, well we’ll defer 



3874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

things. We’ll just defer it. We’ll defer it for another year. We’ll 

defer it for another couple of years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the concern that northern 

Saskatchewan people have and northern leaders in northern 

Saskatchewan have is if the government is in bad financial 

shape now, then what is going to make it better next year? What 

is going to make it better next year? Or are they just going to 

once again borrow against the assets of the Crowns or borrow 

against the assets of the province to defer, defer a deficit 

budget? But meanwhile, start driving up the debt, cutting back 

services. And the first place that they sense we’ll cut back is 

northern Saskatchewan where they’ve already been cut back by 

this government, been ignored by this government, were 

promised that they would come up a five-year wait-list for the 

highway construction, the highway improvement in northern 

Saskatchewan, but that has now been deferred, deferred. 

They’re going to continue to defer work in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s sad because, Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan has 

so much to offer. There’s so much in northern Saskatchewan. 

Not only in the richness of the minerals and the tremendous 

tourism that it has, but there’s just so much it offers in the way 

of genuine people, genuine people. When you get out there, Mr. 

Speaker, and meet them, they’re just genuine, wonderful 

people. All they want is to be able to have a reasonable quality 

of life. 

 

They want to be able to do it in their home area which is 

northern Saskatchewan. They want to be able to enjoy some of 

the things that we take for granted in southern Saskatchewan. 

That’s a relatively quality health care. They want to be able to 

have access to decent education, and they would like some 

reasonable jobs. They would like to have a job, a reasonable 

job, that they can rely on and they’re able to earn money, be 

able to . . . and support their families, and a reasonable lifestyle. 

 

And they have a government, a provincial government, that 

simply ignores them. It simply ignores them. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is not helpful. This is not helpful to the people in northern 

Saskatchewan, and it certainly doesn’t build a strong 

relationship for the entire province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the vehicles there to deliver those services are 

there through northern Saskatchewan, through the communities 

of northern Saskatchewan and through the — New North is one 

of them — through the municipalities that are set up in northern 

Saskatchewan. They simply need the tools and the ability to 

deliver a lot of these services. And those services who could be 

delivered through these, through these municipal bodies, Mr. 

Speaker . . . if they would receive some co-operation from this 

government and if they would be able to enhance their position, 

and this government would be — rather than ignoring them — 

this government would be working co-operatively with them to 

help develop an atmosphere which northerners would enjoy the 

improvement and quality of life, but also their communities 

would enjoy the opportunity to enhance themselves perhaps 

through economic development that would create some jobs for 

local people, so they could be employed right in their own 

communities. 

 

And those opportunities are there, Mr. Speaker. It’s like one 

fellow said; the only thing holding us back is our lack of 

imagination. And I think that’s what we have here. We certainly 

have the abilities up there. We certainly have the resources up 

there, but simply have to have the imagination and the desire to 

put them together to make them work in a meaningful way for 

northerners. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly don’t want to see changes to 

The Northern Municipalities Act that is going to further isolate 

those municipalities, that’s going to further leave those 

municipal leaders on their own to fend for themselves. Like I 

said, they united under the umbrella organization of New North 

which I think is a wonderful organization. 

 

It certainly reflects the needs of northerners. It certainly reflects 

the needs of northern communities, and it gives them the ability 

to negotiate with parent governments, whether it be provincial 

government or federal government, and it does so, allows them 

to be able to talk with one voice, a united front with the various 

government agencies and departments to identify what changes 

need to take place in order to further improve the lots of 

northern Saskatchewan. And I encourage certainly the 

northerners to continue down that road because I think it’s a 

meaningful dialogue that needs to take place. 

 

A concern I think that we all share, certainly northerners share, 

is the fact that this government’s financial mismanagement is 

starting to result in cuts right across the face of government, but 

certainly looking at cuts within the programming in northern 

Saskatchewan. Because, I suppose, two reasons: (a) smaller 

population in northern Saskatchewan and less affected by those 

cuts; and (b) most programming in northern Saskatchewan, 

because of the distances involved and the delivery systems 

involved, are probably a little more expensive than that might 

be such in southern Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It doesn’t make them any less needed, 

though. 

 

Mr. Harper: — But it certainly . . . My seatmate says it doesn’t 

make it any less needed. Certainly not any less needed or any 

less deserved. These people are Saskatchewan people and they 

deserve to be treated the same as anybody else in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And that was why the government of the past took the initiative 

to remove what I thought was a very bad piece of legislation 

and that was the northern overtime exemption policy. It was a 

policy, it was the government for a number of years here in this 

government — the only province, by the way, the only province 

in Canada to have such a policy — and that was removed by 

our government. So it provided the opportunity for employees 

to enjoy the benefits of their labour when that labour required 

them to work overtime or more than 40 hours out of the week or 

80 hours out of two weeks. They were able to enjoy the benefits 

of that labour, the same as somebody in the South. 

 

And that’s only fair. There’s no reason why anybody in 

northern Saskatchewan just simply because of their 

geographical location should be treated any different than 

anybody else in this province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3875 

Yes, well that’s the way it was. That ain’t the way it is now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is on this particular amendments that 

the government is proposing in The Northern Municipalities 

Act, 2009, is a number of questions come into mind is, was 

there consultations carried out? Was there consultations carried 

out in regards to these changes? If there was, and I assume there 

was, but if there was, who did they consult with? When I say 

they, I mean the government and the government’s officials — 

who did they talk to? Who did they talk to? 

 

And what method was used? Was there a travelling committee? 

Was there a committee that travelled around northern 

Saskatchewan and met with the leadership in the North, had 

public meetings with the residents of the communities? Did 

they talk to those folks out there? Did they carry out these 

consultations? 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, is this something that was dreamed up by 

bureaucrats sitting in southern Saskatchewan, on the 16th floor 

of a ivory tower here, and at the direction of their masters, their 

political masters over here and said, let’s make some of these 

changes? We want you to bring forward these changes, and 

here’s the parameters of what we want you to make those 

changes in. And that would certainly limit the bureaucrats’ 

ability then to think outside the box or do the consultation with 

people in northern Saskatchewan who are the front-line people, 

the people who face these issues each and every day. 

 

Now this is a very important Act to northern people because, 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the organizations that represent 

northern Saskatchewan or deliver the services to northern 

Saskatchewan are primarily done through the municipalities. 

It’s done through the communities. It’s done through the 

municipalities. The municipalities in each community in 

northern Saskatchewan is a very, very important organization 

— very important organization — because it provides . . . It’s 

the centrepiece. It provides all the systems that northerners 

enjoy. 

 

And that is why it’s so very, very important that when any 

changes are made to the northern municipal Act, that these 

changes have to be done very carefully, done very thoughtfully, 

and be done with a degree of determination to ensure that these 

changes don’t have a negative effect, but rather, Mr. Speaker, 

have a very positive effect on people in northern Saskatchewan. 

Because that should be the role, that should be the role of any 

changes being made by any government is to ensure that the 

changes have a positive effect on those communities, have a 

positive effect upon the people in those communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have yet to have any assurance from this 

government that any of these changes that are being sought in 

this Bill here is that of meaningful thought, meaningful 

discussion, careful planning, a lot of consultations to ensure that 

these do not have negative effects on northern people, but rather 

just the opposite results — have a very positive effect on the 

people of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when these consultations took place — if 

they took place — what form, what form did they take? Like I 

said, was it a travelling committee that travelled around 

northern Saskatchewan and held meetings and talked to 

northerners? If there was, I’d like to have a schedule of it. I’d 

like to know what communities they met in. What time frame in 

which the consultations took place? Who did they meet with? 

What was the nature of the discussions? What was the 

discussions and the issues raised in each one of these 

communities? 

 

I’m sure they weren’t all the same because my experience in 

having travelled northern Saskatchewan, having held public 

meetings in various communities up there, that certainly you 

didn’t have exactly the same debate. Yes, the principle of the 

issue was the same, but you didn’t have the same debate. Why? 

It’s because the people there, each one had their own unique 

experience that would be reflected within their comments on the 

particular issue at hand. In my case, it was a northern overtime 

exemption issue. And they had all had different experiences 

with that particular issue. 

 

And I’m sure that, Mr. Speaker, when you talk to northerners, 

particular northern municipal leaders, about the changes to The 

Northern Municipalities Act, then they would probably have, 

each one would have, in principle, the same point of view, but a 

unique approach to it because of their own personal experiences 

and their own opinions on what needed to be done to improve 

things for not only northerners but for Saskatchewan as a 

whole. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s my belief that when you improve the 

life of some individual or improve the life, the situation with 

people within a community, we all benefit from that. One way 

or the other, we’ll all benefit from it. It’s sort of the 

trickle-down theory. But when you improve a life for 

somebody, we’ll all benefit from it. And I think you can see that 

in northern Saskatchewan. When there’s opportunity at 

meaningful employment, that community prospers. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And we need to be looking at . . . One of the things I believe we 

should be looking at through The Northern Municipalities Act 

here is we should be looking at ways and means that we can 

incorporate economic development into our communities here 

because a lot of these communities are facing high 

unemployment. And the folks there certainly have the ability. 

Many of them have the skills. They just simply need the 

opportunity. And that is something that I think is responsibility 

of government. 

 

This government should be working with northern leaders, 

working with those people in northern Saskatchewan and the 

municipalities in northern Saskatchewan to identify ways and 

means that they can improve the lots of those communities 

through further economic development. 

 

And I don’t mean just depending on the big jobs. Whether it be 

in the uranium mining sector or logging or whatever it may be, I 

don’t mean just the big jobs. I mean there has to be the 

opportunity for the smaller operators. There has to be those 

opportunities and they should be supported by government to 

identify ways and means that smaller operations can flourish, 

can prosper, can cause for employment. 

 

And I think it’s no secret, Mr. Speaker. I believe that if you 



3876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

looked at the stats in Canada, you would see that 72 per cent of 

all jobs created in this great country of ours are created in small 

shops, in shops of 25 or 50 employees or less. And I think that’s 

a rule of thumb that should certainly be applied to northern 

Saskatchewan, is that yes, we need the big jobs. We need the 

uranium mining jobs. We need the development in uranium 

industry. We need those types of economic activities to take 

place. 

 

But we also need to have smaller operations that can perhaps 

provide services to the larger ones, or provide some type of 

benefit to larger companies up there that would create jobs of 

25, 30, or 40 jobs in these communities. And these would go a 

long way, a long way to addressing some of the unemployment 

issues, but also go a long way to addressing some of the social 

issues that are faced by northern communities throughout our 

great North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, getting back to the consultations, if they took 

place. Like I said, I would like to know what form those 

consultations were held in. Were they public meetings, as I said, 

or were they just simply private meetings or were they meetings 

with perhaps just the leadership of the North? Or did they take 

place at all? Was there any type of consultations at all? 

 

And if there was . . . And I would think it’d be difficult to make 

amendments or changes to a municipal Act that has direct effect 

on northern communities without at least talking to those 

communities, at least talking to the leadership, the municipal 

leadership of those communities. 

 

Personally I think it should go further. I think it should have 

gone further into allowing the residents of those communities to 

have their say. To have the opportunity to voice their opinions, 

not just through their leadership but directly to a committee 

that’s doing the review or doing the consultations for this 

particular changes to the municipal Act. And, Mr. Speaker, if 

these consultations were carried out, I would hope the 

government would be willing to provide to the opposition 

members a list of the communities in which these consultations 

took place. 

 

First I’d like a list of those who made up the committee that did 

the consultation on behalf of the government. I’d like to know 

who was all involved in that. What was their background? What 

qualified them to sit on this committee and what report did they 

produce that indicated that these changes here that are outlined 

in Bill 110? What changes, what report indicated that these 

changes would be beneficial to the northern people, would be 

beneficial to the northern communities? And how would these 

changes simply improve the quality of life for people in 

northern Saskatchewan? 

 

How would it improve the ability for the northern communities 

to deliver the services that they look for? Most of the services in 

northern communities are delivered through their municipality. 

So how would this improve the municipality’s ability to deliver 

these services, make it more efficient, more effective, perhaps 

even less costly? 

 

Where is that report? What led the government to believe that 

these changes are the correct changes? I mean it’s fine to make 

a change. But I would hope that our intention is to make 

changes that would benefit people, benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. Particularly in this case, it’s going to benefit 

people in northern Saskatchewan through changes to The 

Northern Municipalities Act because the northern municipality 

is a very important organization that delivers the services, 

delivers the services to the fine folks in northern Saskatchewan 

in each one of their communities. 

 

So how was these consultations carried out? Were they done on 

a community level? Were they done simply by meeting perhaps 

with New North? Was that it? Or did New North simply report 

back that this is what they thought should be done? Was there a 

report given? If there was a report, would the government table 

that report so that the opposition members would have the 

ability to compare the report with the changes that they’re 

proposing within the legislation? I think that’s only fair. 

 

I would hope that the government is making changes based on 

good recommendations that would come from people in 

northern Saskatchewan. There’s a real need, I think, to have 

people to make these recommendations, to make the 

suggestions for recommendations, a real need to have this 

coming from people in northern Saskatchewan. Because those 

people in northern Saskatchewan experience a uniqueness that, 

quite frankly, I don’t think many of us in southern 

Saskatchewan realize. And that’s a uniqueness of having to deal 

with a lot of issues that you and I take for granted. 

 

The issues of communications. Quite frankly, the issue of 

communications that we take for granted here, it’s a lot more 

difficult in northern Saskatchewan. Part of the problem is the 

distances involved. And if you had travelled at all in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I know in your case, 

you have — you will quickly recognize that there’s large, large 

distances between communities. There’s large distance. 

 

And a lot of those roads are . . . Well I think it’s being quite 

generous to call them a road. And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

you have had the experience of driving over some of them 

yourself and I think you would agree that, in northern 

Saskatchewan, not all the roads but certainly many of them 

certainly need attention. And it is important because the 

isolation of these communities, the distance between these 

communities, calls for good communications but also calls for 

good roads. 

 

And the ability to travel between these communities is so very 

important because not every community in northern 

Saskatchewan has a hospital. So those communities who do, 

certainly it is imperative that the road between those 

communities are reasonable. Reasonable so that if an 

ambulance is required, an ambulance can travel with a 

reasonable speed, but most importantly with great safety to be 

able to deliver a patient to a hospital who may need some 

emergency services. And I’ve seen some of that when I was up 

there in northern Saskatchewan. Ile-a-la-Crosse comes to mind 

where an innovative facility was under construction, and it was 

the only community in the area that had a health care centre, 

had a hospital, and it certainly required work on the road. 

 

Now I realize that because of the construction going on in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse that all the construction material came across 

that one road. They only had one road, Mr. Speaker. I said 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3877 

earlier it’s the uniqueness in northern Saskatchewan that us in 

south quickly lose sight of is, that we enjoy good quality roads, 

good quality, all-weather roads usually leading out of our 

community in all four directions. And if we don’t want to go 

north, we can go south. We don’t want to go south, we can go 

east or west, but usually on an all-weather road.  

 

That’s not the case in northern Saskatchewan, particularly in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse where it was one road. There’s one road in, the 

same road out. All the building material came across that road. 

And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it was simply a thin 

membraned paved surface that was meant to be nothing more 

than just dust-free, but with all that heavy weight coming across 

there, it was pounding the road out and pounding the road out 

quite severely. At the same time that was the only road in, the 

only road out. And that was the road an ambulance would have 

to use if it had an emergency situation where it was bringing 

somebody, say from Buffalo Narrows into Ile-a-la-Crosse to 

receive medical attention. The ambulance would have to travel 

across that road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only was it a rough road with holes in it, and 

some serious holes in it too, that would create some real hazard 

to the mechanical operation of the ambulance, it would also be 

very hard on the patient. And the back of that ambulance would 

be bouncing over that road and bouncing through those holes. 

But it also created a safety problem, a safety problem for 

anybody trained to move with any haste. And certainly an 

ambulance would be, in the case of an emergency, would be 

trying to move with as much haste as possible, would create a 

really a serious, serious safety problem where an ambulance 

itself could be involved in a rollover, or an accident with a 

patient in the back would just compound the problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is essential that this government carries out 

some meaningful discussions with these communities to ensure 

that their priorities are met. And I don’t know that those 

discussions took place. I don’t know that this Bill as it’s 

outlined here certainly recognizes what those priorities are. 

There’s no indication from government as to what method of 

consulting was used by the government to come up with these 

recommendations or these proposed changes to the municipal 

Act.  

 

Which, Mr. Speaker, I suppose is rather unfortunate because I 

would think that governments making changes to an Act, 

period, but particularly in this case a municipal Act, particularly 

in northern Saskatchewan where the municipality is such a very 

important organization to those communities — it’s the 

organization or the system of delivery of services to these 

communities — and when you make changes to that Act, the 

government would want to be on, I would think, solid ground to 

make these changes to ensure that these changes were beneficial 

to the municipality and beneficial to the people there. 

 

And they would want to be able to say, well we’re doing this 

because of the recommendations from a committee. And a 

committee was put together, and the committee either travelled 

northern Saskatchewan or they consulted with people right 

across the piece, northern Saskatchewan, and came back with 

these recommendations. And they compiled these 

recommendations into a report. They gave the report to 

government. The government then took that report and applied 

it to the northern municipal Act, made recommendations so 

changes in that Act based on the recommendations in the report. 

 

Well if that’s the case, Mr. Speaker, then I would ask the 

government, table the report. Table the report so that we in 

opposition can look at that report and compare it then to the 

proposed changes to see that the government is correct, that the 

government is reflecting in these changes the recommendations 

by those in northern Saskatchewan who put together the report. 

 

And I would hope that that report was put together by people in 

northern Saskatchewan because they are, the folks in northern 

Saskatchewan are the front-line troops. They’re the ones that 

live in northern Saskatchewan day in and day out, all year long. 

They’re the ones that quickly recognize what changes have to 

be made — what changes should be made, I should say — to 

improve the lot of northern Saskatchewan, to improve the lot of 

people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to have some assurances. I 

would like to have some assurances from government that the 

recent — and I don’t know how recent this is — but certainly 

the recent disclosure of the fiscal mismanagement of this 

government isn’t going to start to jeopardize the lot or the 

situation as faced by people in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that this government has overspent itself by $1 

billion. We know that this government is trying to balance its 

budget by shifting that billion dollar debt over onto the Crowns 

and by cutting other programs that the government had on its 

to-do list. They’re cutting that. They’re deferring others, which 

is just another term of cutting, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 

shifting some of their promises of tax breaks and so on and so 

forth to a deferred debt is really what it is, Mr. Speaker, that 

we’ll be facing in the future. 

 

But I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that when the government is 

looking at ways and means of cutting back on its spending, that 

they don’t look at northern Saskatchewan as a place where they 

can really cut. I know it’s tempting. From a political point of 

view, it’s likely tempting because the number of people in 

northern Saskatchewan that would be affected, as far as number 

of votes is concerned, is probably a small amount. 

 

And many of the programs that are delivered into northern 

Saskatchewan are probably a little more expensive than that in 

southern Saskatchewan because (a) because of the distance 

between communities and the fact that many of these are 

smaller population communities, and that these are areas where 

it’s so attractive to get in there and cut. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that that’s not the case because 

there’s certainly a uniqueness about northern Saskatchewan that 

should demand our attention, that people there deserve to have 

the same benefits as anybody else in Saskatchewan. They 

should have the same benefits and enjoy the same privileges as 

anyone else in this great province of ours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the government doesn’t go 

down that road, now that they have identified themselves into a 

financial crunch here. And that isn’t going to go away overnight 



3878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2009 

— I can assure you that, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to 

certainly be dealing with it again next year. 

 

And my fear here, Mr. Speaker, is that they have sort of, like, a 

tiger by the tail here, that this thing may escalate well beyond 

their ability to begin to control it. And in their attempts to 

control it, they will continue to drive the finances of the 

province into the ditch by increasing the debt on the Crowns, by 

increasing the debt on the province, but also by cutting services 

— and in this case, cutting services probably to some of the 

most vulnerable people. And that’s the people in northern 

Saskatchewan. They’re the ones that’s going to be cut. And 

that’s my fear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when these consultations took place or when this 

committee travelled to northern Saskatchewan, if that is what 

has happened — I mean, I’m not sure exactly how they came 

about with the recommendations for these changes, but if they 

travelled throughout northern Saskatchewan, did they go to all 

the communities? Did they hold meetings in all the 

communities? Was there consultations carried out in all the 

communities? And if so, was it by just the community 

leadership? In this case, it’d be the municipal leadership. Or 

was it public meetings held? Did every person in northern 

Saskatchewan get the opportunity to have their say, have their 

input? After all, it’s their lives that are being affected. 

 

These changes will be affecting their lives, affecting the lives of 

their families. So did they have the opportunity to have that 

input? Was that type of consultation carried out? Did they have 

the opportunity to talk to the committee that was making the 

recommendations and explain to them what it was that they 

thought should change, what effect it would have on their 

communities, what effect it would have on their families, what 

effect it would have on their ability to continue to be a part of 

northern Saskatchewan, be able to continue to make a living 

and continue to live in northern Saskatchewan? Was that the 

type of consultation that took place, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And another question I would have is, was there a good 

cross-section of representation from the communities at these 

meetings? Was there a good cross-section of the communities 

consulted, whether they be at the meetings or whether it be in 

some other forum that the consultation took place? Was there a 

good cross-section, was there a good cross-section of the 

community that was asked for their opinion and given the 

opportunity to express their opinion? 

 

I would hope it wasn’t just narrowed down just to the leadership 

of the community, it wasn’t just narrowed down to the 

municipal leadership because I think it’s very important to have 

that type of consultation widespread. Because it’s the people 

that are on the front lines each and every day that live in 

northern Saskatchewan, that experience northern Saskatchewan, 

recognizes the challenges that northern Saskatchewan offers 

and it also recognizes the many positive things that northern 

Saskatchewan offer, that can make the recommendations as to 

how to change, what changes need to take place in the 

municipal Act so that northern Saskatchewan will benefit, will 

benefit. 

 

And there’s a uniqueness. And I remember when I was up in the 

North travelling on my consultation tours of . . . And I’m just 

trying to remember which community it was in. I remember one 

of the leadership said to me, he said, I’m glad. I’m glad that we 

got a southerner doing the consultation on the overtime 

exemption.  

 

And I said, well I’m glad I’m doing it too, but what makes you 

so glad that we have a southerner doing this consultation? And 

he said, well, he said, if you travel northern Saskatchewan at all 

and are at all open-minded and at all look around, you will 

begin to understand what it is that our colleagues from the 

North have been trying to explain to the southerners for many 

years, is that there’s a uniqueness here. 

 

There’s something special about the North that needs to be 

treated, not special, but that needed to be treated in their own 

unique way. And I think that’s all that northerners ever asked 

for, Mr. Speaker, was the opportunity to be treated fairly, justly, 

and equally. And that is something that I’m hoping, I’m hoping 

that this government would continue to work in that direction. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as you can tell, I’m not holding my breath on 

that front because I’m not sure that this government has the 

ability to be able to look at northern Saskatchewan in a way that 

would ensure that they are going to be able to benefit from the 

prosperity, benefit from the improved economy in this province 

in the same way as everybody else in Saskatchewan. 

 

And that becomes fairly evident, Mr. Speaker, when you just 

take a look at what has happened in the last couple of years. 

And one of probably the first places it shows up is again in the 

highway system, when you look at the highways in northern 

Saskatchewan, how they have been neglected by this 

government. This government has simply neglected the 

highways. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this government, in its own 

arrogance, didn’t even include northern Saskatchewan in its 

five-year rolling plan. 

 

More likely, Mr. Speaker, it should be really called a five-year 

wait-list because anybody on that list is going to have to wait 

five years, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, because of this 

government’s fiscal mismanagement of this province in the last 

year driving the finances of this province into the ditch, that list 

now being deferred, deferred, deferred. So some of the good 

folks that are on that list five years from now will still be on 

that list, still waiting for something to happen, I’m afraid, five 

years from now, and ten years from that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to understand why the people of northern 

Saskatchewan who were ignored by this government in its 

five-year rolling plan when it proposed its five-year wait-list for 

highways . . . what it did do, what it did do is it ignored 

northern Saskatchewan. And because of the heat that was put on 

the minister by question period here and also by estimates, but 

also by the good folks in northern Saskatchewan who came out 

in droves, droves to continue to drive home that point, the 

government decided well maybe at the last minute we need to 

do something to look like we really care about northern 

Saskatchewan. So they came up with a committee that’s going 

to review the highways in northern Saskatchewan, that’s going 

to have its own five-year wait list for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Well the good folks up there are saying, you know, what’s the 

difference? If we’re waiting three years or five years, we keep 



November 30, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3879 

getting deferred and we don’t see any action, and we don’t see 

any improvement to our roads. What we did see, we did see was 

a commitment by the former government to put money into it. 

The money was there and the commitments were being carried 

out. The government changes and the new government pulls 

that fund back, reaches in and pulls that money back. 

 

Then they say to the people in northern Saskatchewan well 

we’re not going to do it as you were promised. We’re not going 

to do that road work now. We’re going to defer it. We’re going 

to defer it until after the study. Then once the study takes place, 

we’ll have a five-year wait list then and then we’ll be able to 

defer that. We’ll defer that simply because we don’t have the 

money any longer to do what should have been done in the first 

place. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it saddens me that that’s the case because 

northerners, if you travel up there at all, you’ll find that they 

don’t expect a lot. They don’t have high expectations. They 

don’t demand a lot. They’re not in the same high expectation 

and demand levels of, certainly, those in the southern part of the 

province. All they want is the ability to be able to have, seek out 

a reasonable quality of life. They want to have access to some 

of the services that we take in the south, take for granted — say 

health care services and dental services and educational 

services. Those are the kinds of things that they want to have 

reasonable access to. 

 

They want to have the opportunity to travel on a decent, 

all-weather road. And they’re not asking for it to be paved, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re just wanting to have it in good condition so — 

whether it be spring or fall, summer or winter — when they 

have to use that road, the road is there and fit, in condition for 

them to use. But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it is so that it is 

in a safe condition for them to use. 

 

And if you’ve been following the news at all, Mr. Speaker — 

and I’m sure you have — you noted that there has been a 

number of accidents, of fatal accidents in northern 

Saskatchewan. And one highway, and I believe it’s 123 

highway, where the area, that highway had been nicknamed by 

the local residents there as, and I quote, suicide curve. Why, 

Mr. Speaker? Because of the number of accidents that happened 

on that particular stretch of highway. 

 

It’s been brought to the attention of this government, but there 

has been absolutely no action on that particular stretch of road. 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is disappointing because I think that we 

all have the right to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan, 

regardless of where they live, regardless of where they live — 

whether it be in the South, the East, the West, or the North — 

they have access to reasonable quality of services, those 

services of course being health care, being education, but also 

being highways. They need to have access to a reasonable, safe 

highway. 

 

And I will say that, Mr. Speaker, because . . . And I want to 

correct myself, Mr. Speaker. I guess the highway I was 

referring to was the wrong highway; 915 is the highway that 

has, 915 has the highway that’s been designated . . . a portion of 

that highway has been designated by the locals as suicide curve. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I apologize to those for my misquote. I was 

just working from memory. And obviously at my age, my 

memory’s starting to fail me. But it was 915 that has a section 

of that highway that the locals have designated as suicide curve. 

 

And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that a part of the changes that 

this government would be looking at to The Municipalities Act 

would be to ensure, ensure that all municipalities, all those 

communities there would have a good quality, all-weather 

access road. And that is not the case today, Mr. Speaker. 

Unfortunately that doesn’t seem to be a high priority of this 

government because it doesn’t seem to be moving in that 

direction, or at least I don’t see any signs of it. And I say that 

because there is certainly been nothing introduced. There’ve 

been no . . . On press releases, there’ve been nothing coming 

out of the Ministry of Highways that would suggest that they’re 

paying any attention at all to northern Saskatchewan. And that’s 

quite unfortunate because northern Saskatchewan has so much 

to offer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I see that the time allotted for my remarks is 

quickly drawing to a close. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to say that it has truly been a pleasure for me to be able to 

take part in this debate, and it’s brought back some good 

memories. It’s memories of . . . that I spent in northern 

Saskatchewan a couple of summers ago. And I can tell you I 

wanted to encourage all the members in this House, if they have 

the opportunity to spend some time, to travel northern 

Saskatchewan, spend some time up there, please do it. You’ll 

come back with a greater understanding of the issues that are 

facing northern Saskatchewan. But I think each and every one 

of us will come back a little bit of a changed person because of 

that experience. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It’s been moved by the 

member from Regina Northeast that the debate be adjourned. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Agreed. I recognize the 

member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Considering the closeness of the hour, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It’s been moved by the 

member from Humboldt that this House do now adjourn. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt that motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Agreed. Carried. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3847 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3847 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3847 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3847 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3847 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3847 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3847 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3848 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3848 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3848 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3848 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3848 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3848 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3849 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Grey Cup 2009 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3849 

 A Proud Generation Calendar 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3850 

 Moose Jaw Health Foundation Festival of Trees 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3850 

 New Saskatchewan Hospital Requested 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3850 

 St. Gabriel the Archangel Parish Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3850 

 Time Travel 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3851 

 Greenwing Conservation Award 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3851 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Proposed Amendments to The Financial Administration Act 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3851 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3851 

 Status of Domestic Abuse Outreach Workers 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3852 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3852 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3852 

 Education and Health Capital Spending 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3853 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3853 

 Western Agreement 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3854 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3854 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3856 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 

 Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 

 Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 

 Bill No. 610 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3858 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3858 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3858 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3861 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3868 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3870 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


