




















































Hansard: December 01, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 23A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3881 

 December 1, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all of my 

colleagues in the Legislative Assembly a very special guest who 

has joined us for today’s proceedings. It’s a pleasure to 

introduce Mr. Wu Xinjian who is the consul general of the 

People’s Republic of China. He has joined us in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Wu was born in Beijing in 1956. He’s married 

and has a 14-year-old son. After holding a number of important 

jobs in the protocol department of Foreign Affairs in China, Mr. 

Wu was appointed as consul general in Calgary on the 11th of 

December, 2006. 

 

China is Saskatchewan’s second most important export 

customer, Mr. Speaker. It’s estimated that by next year the 

yearly exports from Saskatchewan to China will exceed $676 

million in value. Imagine how many families are employed by 

that kind of economic activity right here in our province. And 

so we’re very grateful for that partnership, for that export 

partnership that we have with the People’s Republic of China. 

 

I look forward to meeting with Mr. Wu tomorrow. He does 

have a number of meetings that are happening however for 

today as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I’m also aware that 

Mr. Wu is fond of golf. So I expect that we’ll be talking a little 

bit, hopefully, about golf and maybe comparing our respective 

games and handicaps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to invite all members to join us in the 

Assembly in welcoming Mr. Wu here. Before I do, let me just 

say, at least let me try to say: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Mandarin.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Premier in welcoming Mr. Wu and, I believe, also the consul of 

economic commercial section, Mr. Lei, who is along as well. 

Good to see you again. And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

through you and to members of the Assembly, that obviously 

China is in fact hugely important when it comes to grain and 

potash, and we look forward to working with the consul general 

in Calgary over the next few years and wish you the very best in 

your stay here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Martensville, 

the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Later today I 

will be reintroducing the government’s greenhouse gas 

reduction Bill, and I would like to introduce some guests that 

have joined us today in support of Saskatchewan’s Bill to make 

sure that we protect our environment. 

 

And I would ask them if they could wave as I introduce them. 

From Evraz Inc., Jim Markatos; from Consumers’ Co-operative 

Refineries Ltd., Doug Dunnigan; from the Saskatchewan 

Mining Association, Pam Schwann; from Morsky Industrial, 

general manager, Marty Willfong; from the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative, Norm Henderson; from Saskatchewan 

Environmental Industry and Managers Association, Lloyd Saul 

and also Dr. Jon Gillies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the stakeholders that we have consulted with over 

the past year have been a huge part of the approach that the 

government has taken, and I would like to publicly thank all 

those who have helped us and will continue to help us as we 

work on regulations to enact our legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to join the 

minister in welcoming the guests to the legislature today. Thank 

you for the work you do, and it was certainly a pleasure to see 

you here today. So on behalf of the opposition, I would like to 

welcome the guests to the legislature as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the rest of the Assembly it’s a great privilege to 

introduce two individuals seated in your gallery. First of all is 

Lissette Coulling. She’s the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Brain Injury Association. And also with her is 

Larry Carlson who is the past president of the association. If 

you could both kindly stand and we can acknowledge you. 

 

I just wanted to say that I wanted to thank them for all the great 

work that they do. Today we had the opportunity of attending a 

reception, as you know, recognizing some of the volunteers and 

the great work that the volunteers do in Saskatchewan for this 

association, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think we can ever thank our 

volunteers and the people that are involved with these different 

organizations enough. So I’d like all members to join me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join in the minister welcoming the special guests 

from the SBIA [Saskatchewan Brain Injury Association]. That 

was a wonderful event we had at lunchtime recognizing the 

volunteers, whether they be individuals or survivors or groups, 

very worthwhile work that they do. It’s so important. And of 

course they talked about the journey they’d taken over the last 

20, 24 years and things that they look forward to. So I on behalf 

of the opposition would join the minister in welcoming them to 



3882 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

the legislature. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery I’d 

like to introduce a number of individuals from the communities 

of Southey, Strasbourg, Preeceville, Rama, and Ituna. These are 

farmers, Mr. Speaker, who have come to the legislature today 

on a snowy and icy day because they are owed money with Big 

Sky Farms going into creditor protection, Mr. Speaker. So 

they’ve come to the legislature today to hear the debate and 

hear the answers that the government has with respect to their 

situation. So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 

them to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier, the member 

from Canora. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

part of that group, there are two young men who are very close 

to where I live with my wife, Gail. The two gentlemen are 

Clarke and Kelly Graham. They only live a half mile away from 

me and every time I’m home of course I get to see them drive 

by my yard as they go to their yard. And they’ve been active in 

our community, Mr. Speaker. They’re strong advocates of our 

hockey team. And, of course, they’re great farmers. And I know 

that they have tremendous concerns about the future of Big Sky 

and where they go. 

 

So I’d like all members to welcome Kelly and Clarke Graham 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Hey, Mr. Speaker, here’s an intro 

for you: 

 

I’m rapping today 

Because these kids are so cool. 

They come from Saskatoon 

From Dr. Egnatoff School. 

A group of 81, 

They’re in grade 8. 

We know they’ll learn a lot. 

So that’ll be great. 

 

The school’s population is a beautiful sight. 

A mosaic of cultures, 

Which we know is so right. 

They’re busy right now, 

Christmas concerts and band. 

I’ll ask all hon. members to give them a hand! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll stop right now, at the request of my 

colleagues, with the rap at the risk of any future embarrassment 

to myself. But, Mr. Speaker, along with 81 cool students, we 

have a group of cool teachers as well in the government gallery: 

Mr. Van Olst, Mr. Farthing, Mrs. Giesbrecht, and Mrs. 

Roadhouse from Dr. John G. Egnatoff School in the heart of the 

Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency. 

 

And whenever, you know, we know that the groups from Silver 

Springs bring very large groups of students. And they are also 

accompanied by many cool parents — Shelly Klassen, Ray 

Bowkowy, Owen McKeith, Jody Parschauer, Deb Johnson, 

Karen Mochoruk, Tom Berryere, Kelly Peru, Tyrone 

McKenzie, Gail Leck, Christine Moroz, and Andrew Ritza. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through you and to all members of the Assembly, 

we’d like to welcome this fine group of students, their teachers, 

and their chaperones. I look forward to meeting with them after 

question period. I look forward to their questions and maybe a 

bit of a critique about my rapping abilities. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Please join me. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the condition of Highway 310. The 310 

Highway has significantly deteriorated and as many 

communities are reliant upon tourism as an economic 

development, this highway is certainly a barrier to that type of 

growth in our communities. 

 

And the petition states that the highway is a potential of a safety 

hazard for residents who drive on that highway each and every 

day. And it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, the 310 Highway is in dire 

need of an upgrade. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read to you the 

prayer now: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

so need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 

of Ituna, Hubbard, and Goodeve, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on the issue of maintaining quality health care 

services in the province and that the Government of 

Saskatchewan needs to recognize the essential role of all health 

care providers as valued members of the health care team. And 

that this government needs to realize that the utilization and 

value of the full range of professional skills offered by health 

care providers is promoted through the address of retention and 

recruitment issues and by ensuring safe staffing levels. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3883 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Zealandia, 

Rosetown, Biggar, Harris, Fiske, Elrose, and Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to again present 

petitions in support of people with autism. It’s estimated that 1 

in 98 children has autism spectrum disorder and that parents 

and guardians must now become educators, advocates, 

caregivers, and financiers and that the majority of Canadians 

now live in provinces with adequate autism spectrum disorder 

strategies and funding. The petition reads then: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing a 

comprehensive provincial autism spectrum strategy that is 

based on proven best practice, evidence-based research, 

treatments, and programming; and given the complexity 

of the disorder and its treatments, the individualized 

funding concept be adapted for parents and guardians of 

autistic individuals. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

There is over 200 more signatures to add to the 200 I presented 

yesterday, and these petitioners today are from Regina, 

Gravelbourg, Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, Balgonie, 

Strasbourg, Edenwold, Regina Beach, Indian Head, Lumsden, 

White City, and Pilot Butte. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

workers in community-based organizations, the CBOs in 

Saskatchewan, have traditionally been underpaid and many 

continue to earn poverty level wages. 

 

And we know that CBO workers care for and provide valuable 

services to some of the most vulnerable members of our society 

such as persons living with mental and intellectual disabilities, 

women and children in crisis, low-income, at-risk individuals, 

young children, youth, Aboriginal, immigrant, and visible 

minority persons. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Melville, Maple Creek, 

Webb, and Regina. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water and who despite the fact that these petitions 

have been read every day of the spring session as well as every 

day of the fall session, have not yet had any sign of 

commitment from the Sask Party government in terms of 

commitment of assistance. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake, Stanley Mission, Prince Albert. I so 

present. Thank you. 



3884 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

that are concerned about public employees being able to 

disclose information in the greater public interest, Mr. Speaker. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We respect and request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan pass Bill No. 609, The Whistleblower 

Protection Act in order to ensure the safety, security, and 

protection of any employee who acts as a whistle-blower 

by disclosing information for the greater public interest. 

 

I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, the 

existing construction industry labour relations Act, 1992, has 

provided a stable environment for labour relations. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we all know that stable labour relations provide for 

quality work and safe construction work sites. Mr. Speaker, also 

on that, the building trade contracts that are now in existence 

support an apprenticeship system of training which results in 

highly skilled workers. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required for 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Kinistino, Semans, 

Saskatoon, Buffalo Narrows, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, Grand 

Coulee, Lumsden, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The petitioners note that the 

vacancy rate for rental accommodation in The Battlefords is 

very low but the cost of rental accommodation in The 

Battlefords is increasing at an alarming rate. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of North 

Battleford and Saskatoon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the shameful billion dollar deficit created by the 

Saskatchewan Party government in just two years, Mr. Speaker. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks from across 

southeastern Saskatchewan, specifically Arcola and Carnduff. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 

who are concerned about rapidly rising rents throughout the 

province; that private apartment vacancy rates were less than 1 

per cent in Regina, North Battleford, and Moose Jaw in April 

2009, and less than 2 per cent in Saskatoon and Swift Current; 

that the majority of Canadians now live in provinces with rent 

control guidelines, including Manitoba, BC, Ontario, Quebec, 

and Prince Edward Island. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control, with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Saskatoon. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move on, I just want to remind 

members of the rules of the Assembly which they’ve put in 

place through the Board of Internal Economy. Over the past 

number of years, the laying of petitions has been basically 

limited to the prayer, although Speakers have allowed a short 

and brief comment. Some of the comments recently have 

actually been infringing on rule 16(3) and (b), “No debate on 

any matter on or in any relation to the petitions is permitted.” 

 

I would ask members to be mindful of the rule, and in future 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3885 

days we will allow members just a quick, brief comment, and 

then go directly to the prayer. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

World AIDS Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the first international AIDS 

[acquired immune deficiency syndrome] Day was on December 

1st, 1988. Twenty-one years later, 33.4 million people are living 

with HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], including 2.1 

million children. Half the people who become infected do so 

before they are 25, and are killed by AIDS before they are 35. 

The theme of this year’s World AIDS Day is universal access to 

HIV and AIDS treatment, prevention, and care, recognizing 

these as fundamental human rights. 

 

Global leaders have given the pledge, translating this 

commitment into action at the local level. Action taken here in 

Saskatchewan means supporting programs that have proven 

successful, like the needle exchange program. Such programs 

answer the international call to fundamental human rights. 

 

In Saskatchewan there were 174 new cases diagnosed in 2008, a 

40 per cent increase in one year, a rise equal to a new case of 

HIV being diagnosed every two days. The Sask Party 

government’s response to these numbers is to limit the needle 

exchange program, a program their own study determined was 

functional and in need of expansion. 

 

In many African countries, people die of AIDS needlessly 

because their cultures deny basic protections from the disease. 

Fear and taboo play a large part in hindering proper treatment 

and programs. How is Saskatchewan different if they choose 

ideology over evidence? 

 

Our focus must be on research and implementing models that 

will save lives. We have a choice. We can do what works or 

hang on tenaciously to ideology that doesn’t. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fellow members of 

the Assembly, today, December 1st, is World AIDS Day. Today 

more people than ever before have HIV and new infections 

occur each year. Thirty-three million people live with HIV 

worldwide. In Saskatchewan last year there were more than 170 

new cases of HIV. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recognition of World AIDS Day, the 

Saskatchewan Ministry of Health today announced a new HIV 

initiative — HIV point of care testing. HIV point of care testing 

is a new priority for the HIV program in Saskatchewan that will 

help with prevention, education, treatment, and support services 

for those affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, approximately 25 per cent of those infected with 

HIV are unaware of their infection. HIV point of care testing 

will help individuals at risk to access testing in a timely manner. 

This in turn will allow opportunities for follow-up care and 

education and, most importantly, help reduce the rates of 

transmission, especially to newborn babies. 

 

The Ministry of Health will continue to work on strategies to 

ensure more people have access to HIV testing and are aware of 

their HIV status so they can receive treatment and prevent 

transmission to others. As members of this Assembly, we can 

contribute by supporting initiatives that raise awareness about 

HIV and AIDS. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fellow members, please join me in officially 

recognizing the World AIDS Day. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Support for Producers 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, there are producers here in the 

gallery today that want to hear what this government has to say 

about Big Sky Farms. The government has been silent so far, 

refusing to offer support to the farmers affected. 

 

In fact the member from Canora-Pelly has been pretty quiet on 

this issue since he rose to speak in 2001 after the opening of a 

hog operation in Rama. And what did he have to say about it 

then? Nothing but good things, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll quote: 

 

. . . this operation will employ 40 people year round in the 

Rama and Hazel Dell areas, with an annual payroll of 

$1.4 million. 

 

Local farmers will also benefit from this operation since 

about 800,000 bushels of feed grain will be required for a 

large feed mill being constructed at a seventh location 

also near Rama. Needless to say, this will be for the most 

part a benefit for my constituency. 

 

If the members opposite know how important this operation is 

to farmers, why can’t the government offer them anything now? 

The farmers are only asking for the government to fulfill its 

contractual obligation as majority shareholders. Saskatchewan 

Party government have become pros at talking only about good 

news. They like to play the cheerleader, pretend that everything 

is great, but when bad times hit like it has for these farmers, the 

government is suddenly silent. 

 

Well the farmers that are here today want more than just 

cheerleading from the sidelines. And unfortunately this 

government’s cheerleading does not pay for their fuel, their 

fertilizer, their land leases, or their co-op bills. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Brain Injury Association Recognizes Volunteers 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a very 

special day. Over the noon hour, the Saskatchewan Brain Injury 

Association hosted a volunteer recognition event here at the 

Legislative Building. The event recognized the outstanding 

commitment and contributions of 14 volunteers and community 



3886 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

contributors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Honourable Dr. Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, is a patron of the SBIA 

and was in attendance at the event. The SBIA is in its 24th year 

of operation. The Government of Saskatchewan continues to 

support organizations like the Saskatchewan Brain Injury 

Association and fund initiatives that help those who are most 

vulnerable in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is estimated that approximately 2,200 people 

sustain brain injuries in Saskatchewan each year, but 150 of 

those people will need multiple services and lifetime support. 

Through a partnership with Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance, a strong network of service providers has been 

formed to reduce the incidence of acquired brain injury in 

Saskatchewan and to improve the quality of life of individuals 

with acquired brain injury and their families. 

 

In 2009-10, approximately $4.7 million was provided to 

acquired brain injury programs throughout the partnership. 

Members of Saskatchewan legislature, please join me in 

recognizing the work done by the Saskatchewan Brain Injury 

Association and their volunteers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Volleyball Championships Held in Ile-a-la-Crosse 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

commend the organizers of a fantastic event this past weekend, 

the 3A provincial boys’ volleyball championships held in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. I’d like to thank all the teams that earned the 

right to compete for this championship: the Ile-a-la-Cross 

Huskies, hometown favourites; Wolseley Warriors, Redvers 

Rams; Dalmeny Cougars, Leader Saints, Waldheim Raiders, 

Wadena Blue Devils, Kinistino Blues, Langenburg Screaming 

Eagles, and the Neilburg Trojans. 

 

I wanted to especially commend the Saskatchewan High 

Schools Athletic Association for their vision in selecting a 

northern community to host such an incredible event. The 

SHSAA [Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association] 

brought our province together as a result of this choice. I 

wanted to thank the staff at the elementary school and of the 

high school for their great effort in hosting the event. It must 

have been a challenge having all those young people around. 

 

Our local high school team, the Ile-a-la-Crosse Huskies, were 

bronze medallists, while Wolseley took silver and Waldheim 

Raiders finished as provincial champs. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

commend Huskies coach, Glen Bouvier, and thank Hughie, the 

mascot — Hughie the Huskie — who put on an incredible 

show. 

 

I want to thank our visitors who came and became part of our 

Ile-a-la-Crosse family. It’s amazing what some of these 

northern communities can do when given the opportunity. The 

kids, the staff, our team, and all teams who participated showed 

great, true, Saskatchewan spirit last weekend and I’m proud of 

all of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

Saskatchewan Book Awards Gala 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 17th 

annual Saskatchewan Book Awards Gala was held on Saturday 

evening. The evening showcased writers, publishers, 

illustrators, and was enjoyed by hundreds of people who just 

love books and reading. 

 

This event reminds us what a strong literary talent we possess in 

Saskatchewan. Their stories are very often about the Prairie, 

Mr. Speaker. They characterize us. They relate our history and 

stories to readers throughout the world, often revealing our 

similarities and drawing closer global bonds. 

 

Speakers at the gala included Mr. Rudy Wiebe, an 

internationally known author and two-time Governor General’s 

Award winner. Mr. Wiebe has written a number of books, many 

of which reveal his proud prairie heritage and/or his Mennonite 

roots. 

 

Some of the award highlights that evening were: Trevor 

Herriot, who won for his book Grass, Sky, Song: Promise and 

Peril of the World of Grassland Birds; Wilfred Burton and 

Anne Patton’s book, Dancing in my Bones; and Karen Edwards 

won the Children’s Literary Award for One Cold Armpit — an 

interesting title. The Award for Poetry went to Gerald Hill for 

14 Tractors, and the Book of the Year is Legacy of Stone: 

Saskatchewan’s Stone Buildings by Margaret Hryniuk and 

Frank Korvemaker, published by Coteau Books. 

 

Congratulations to the Saskatchewan Book Awards on a very 

successful year. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

representatives from our province and our country will soon be 

heading off to the COP 15 [Conference of the Parties] climate 

change conference in Copenhagen where world leaders have a 

fleeting opportunity to form a real agreement and together take 

action to fight against climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province has a chance to be a leader on the 

world stage. We have the resource potential to tap into our 

renewable energies to combat our carbon footprint. We have the 

technology, the intellect, and the overwhelming public support 

to address climate change quickly and effectively, yet our 

Premier is offering no leadership, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government cut $320 million from the Green Future Fund, have 

reneged on their campaign promise to cut greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent, and have offered little in the way of 

renewable energies. 

 

Here we are only days before the most monumental climate 

change conference of our time, and the government has nothing 

to show for their two years in government. Instead our Premier 

is toeing the line of the federal government by following their 

embarrassingly modest targets. 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3887 

Mr. Speaker, as Canada refuses to take action and continues to 

delay any progress in fighting climate change, our national 

reputation on the international stage is deteriorating. In fact 

dozens of developing countries walked out on Canada’s address 

during recent climate talks in Thailand earlier this year, and yet 

this is the policy that the Premier is copying. 

 

After seeing the bungling of this government on this file, the 

people of Saskatchewan think the climate that needs changing is 

which party is in government. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Big Sky Farms 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have today 

in the gallery a number of farm families who have come here 

today because of the problems at Big Sky Farms, and the fact 

that they hauled grain to Big Sky Farms and are now out of 

pocket tens of thousands of dollars. 

 

Now we know that the Government of Saskatchewan owns 60 

per cent of Big Sky Farms through Crown Investments 

Corporation. We know that five ministers of this government sit 

on the board of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan] and they appoint the board of Big Sky Farms. 

We see the management links and we see the financial links 

between the government and Big Sky Farms. 

 

My question to the Minister of Agriculture is this: when did he 

know about the financial difficulties of Big Sky Farms, and why 

didn’t he let the farmers know of this difficulty and that they 

might not be paid for the grain they were hauling there? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly empathize with the producers that 

have supplied feed to Big Sky and are caught in this situation. 

But having said that, we sympathize and empathize with all the 

creditors that are caught in this situation with Big Sky, as we 

are when any business goes down in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition neglected to say in his question 

though is who got us into this situation in the first place. It was 

the previous NDP [New Democratic Party] government. The 

previous NDP government, Mr. Speaker, invested into Big Sky, 

was picking winners and losers in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, if the NDP had not been investing in private business 

out there, we wouldn’t be having this conversation today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister 

of Agriculture. The minister can throw blame and yell and 

holler about who made the investment in Big Sky Farms, but 

there is a question and it’s a question about responsibility and 

being forthcoming on this issue. 

 

And I want to ask him the following question. Given the fact 

that the now Deputy Premier supported the building of the barn 

at Rama, and on July 5th of 2001, the member from 

Canora-Pelly stood here in this Assembly and said the 

following statement, and I quote, “Needless to say, this will be 

for the most part a benefit to my constituency.” 

 

My question to the minister is this: who has it right? Is it the 

Deputy Premier who supported the investment or the now 

Minister of Agriculture who says the farmers shouldn’t be paid? 

Who’s correct and who’s wrong on this important issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I checked to see if the NDP, when they were in 

government for 16 years, had set any precedents to coming to 

the aid of creditors in any financial transaction where a business 

had gone under in the province of Saskatchewan. Do you know 

what I found, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely not once did the NDP 

government come to the aid of creditors in any business in the 

province of Saskatchewan, even though in many of those 

businesses they were investors and had put taxpayers’ dollars at 

risk into those . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There’s a few opposition 

members that are making it difficult for even the guests to hear 

the response. I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to use the 

example of World Wide Pork in Moose Jaw, who closed its 

doors. And the members opposite had an investment of 

taxpayers’ dollars, and a number of hog producers in this 

province had hauled hogs there. And when that plant went 

under, Mr. Speaker, the creditors got nothing. 

 

Did the members opposite tell them that this was going to 

happen? Not for a minute. And did they honour any of those 

creditors’ debts that were owed to them? Not one red cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are not putting more money into Big Sky 

— I want to make that very clear today — or any of Big Sky’s 

responsibilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let me make it clear that the opposition 

is not asking the minister or the government to put more money 

into Big Sky Farms. That’s not the request. The request from 

the farmers who are here today is to be paid for the grain they 

took to Big Sky. That’s what’s being asked for and he shouldn’t 

confuse it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister knew well in advance of the problems 



3888 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

at Big Sky because there were Sask Party ministers on the board 

of CIC who appointed the board members at Big Sky Farms. 

They would be getting daily reports, I’m sure. If they weren’t, 

then it’s gross mismanagement. 

 

The question is, when the board of Big Sky filed for protection 

on October 26th, tens of thousands of bushels of grain were 

hauled after that date. How is it that the minister, who would 

have known that the farmers wouldn’t be paid, allowed that to 

happen and didn’t inform the farmers? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the minister, I just 

want to remind our guests in the galleries that they’re not to 

participate in any form or fashion in the debate. I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, Ernst & Young are the monitors here and are going 

through the CCAA [Companies’ Creditors Arrangements Act] 

process out there. And we’re hoping that producers out there, 

including all producers out there that supplied feed to Big Sky, 

get all or at least a large part of the dollars that they’ve got at 

risk out there right now. Mr. Speaker, we also know that Big 

Sky is topping up the price of barley and wheat, and I know this 

isn’t going to solve many problems out there, but it may help 

somewhat. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s very hypocritical of the members 

opposite to say in this situation the present government should 

deal with it, even though we didn’t for the 16 years we were in 

power. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what’s hypocritical is the 

Deputy Premier saying he supports the deal and the Minister of 

Agriculture saying it was a bad deal. That’s hypocritical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I heard the minister say that when it comes 

to creditors, that the farmers will be treated the same as the 

bankers when it comes to the settlement, if in fact it gets to that 

point. Is that clear, that the farmers will be treated equally to the 

bankers in the settlement when it comes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

another side to this story. Every, Mr. Speaker, every taxpayer in 

the province of Saskatchewan has $30 million at risk in this 

venture. Not just producers, not just the other creditors in this 

situation. Every taxpayer in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you never know where to take the Leader of the 

Opposition. One day he’s an Alberta oil baron saying we’re 

spending too many dollars on education tax reduction . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, on one hand he’s saying 

we’re spending too much on things like education tax reduction 

for farmers, income tax reduction, things like that, Mr. Speaker. 

The next day, Mr. Speaker, he’s a born-again socialist saying, 

get into private business and take a chance on losing more 

taxpayers’ dollars in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister be mindful of some of the 

terminology and the references that could be used against 

members. I recognize the minister. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of 

Agriculture. For a number of weeks now, these farmers and 

many others have been trying to get meetings with the Deputy 

Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, and they haven’t been 

able to get meetings. What I want to ask the minister today: the 

farmers are here; he is here. Will he agree to meet with them 

later today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the 

answer to that question is, certainly I will. At any time I will 

meet with the producers. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think some of the things I want to reiterate 

to the members opposite, and I see the Leader of the Opposition 

just glowing out there, if I’d just got this province into a $30 

million mess, I don’t think I’d be smiling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t take great 

pride in putting $30 million of taxpayers’ dollars at risk and 

watching them go out the window. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we had dollars like they lost in SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] or 

Navigata, where I’ve got a list of three or four pages, or other 

ag ventures they got into that are all written off. Durafibre — 

7.3 million NDP invested in that company, totally wrote off. 

Mr. Speaker, again, World Wide Pork — million and a half 

totally wrote off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this list goes on and on. At what point will the 

NDP admit they should never have got into private business in 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Supply of Physicians in Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m holding the Sask Party 2007 

election platform, and on page 9 they promise to increase the 

number of doctors working in rural areas. But on any given day, 

I can pick up a rural paper and read stories of doctor shortages 

and emergency services cutbacks in communities like Arcola, 

Redvers, Carlyle, Lestock, Shaunavon, Climax, and Frontier to 

name just a few. And today the health careers website lists 116 

doctor vacancies, compared to 87 during the ’07 election 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3889 

campaign and 84 in the spring of ’07. That’s an increase, all 

right. It’s an increase in vacancies. 

 

My question to the minister: the government couldn’t keep this 

promise during the boom times; how are they going to keep it 

when they now have a billion dollar deficit? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly knew when 

we were in opposition, and certainly now that we’re in 

government, that human resources, the shortage of human 

resources that this province faces is significant. And it just 

didn’t happen overnight, Mr. Speaker. This has been an 

ongoing issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve dealt with the nursing issue. There’s more 

work to be done there, Mr. Speaker. We set a target. I realize 

that’s foreign to the opposition. They would never set a target, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re 75 per cent to that target in the first two 

years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I will tell you on the physician side of it, Mr. Speaker, 

is that after year after year after year after year of decline of 

physicians in rural Saskatchewan, this past year, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s not a lot, but for the first time we saw more physicians 

practising in this province than we have for many, many years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can say whatever he 

wants, but the fact is he’s failing rural Saskatchewan, and they 

know it. Our offices are inundated with calls from people all 

across rural Saskatchewan telling us that health care services 

are being cut back in their hospitals because their doctor has left 

and no one is coming to fill the void. 

 

People are telling us they have to travel one or even two hours 

to get emergency services. And now they’re telling us that in 

places like Oxbow you have to qualify as an emergency by 

phoning the HealthLine. To the minister, Mr. Speaker: is this 

what it’s come to in Saskatchewan under the Sask Party 

government? Why do people have to call the HealthLine to 

qualify as an emergency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, a number of months ago 

I announced a physician recruitment strategy that is doing its 

work. Mr. Speaker, and I’ll have more announcements as we 

move forward. In fact next week we’ll have another 

announcement that will certainly address this issue . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

placing the question to allow the minister the same opportunity 

to respond as the members on the opposite side allowed for the 

question to be placed. Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, and what I would tell 

you is that, for years and years the College of Medicine under 

the former government was at 60 seats — shamefully low. In 

fact it was the lowest attendance in the College of Medicine of 

anywhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That was their record. 

 

Under our government, Mr. Speaker, in the first two years 

we’re up to attendance record acceptance of 89 medical 

students, Mr. Speaker, with residency positions up to 100. It 

used to only be at 60 under that former government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Yes, it’s going to take time for those changes to bear results in 

rural Saskatchewan, but at least we’re addressing the issue. And 

they did absolutely nothing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s impassioned rhetoric 

isn’t going to help the doctors in rural Saskatchewan that are 

there working 72-hour shifts. People are waiting two to four 

weeks for routine appointments, and communities like 

Shaunavon and Coronach are hiring professional recruitment 

agencies to help them find doctors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, communities are being told to come up with their 

own incentives to attract doctors. The delay in the children’s 

hospital is making it harder to recruit pediatric specialists. And 

the Sask Party has broken its promise to add an emergency 

helicopter to the ambulance system. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: will he admit that his 

government’s commitment to health care in rural Saskatchewan 

is nothing but budget cuts, broken promises, and angry rhetoric? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it absolutely 

amazing that that critic would say rhetoric is increasing the 

number of College of Medicine seats from 60 to 89. It would be 

only the opposition that would say it’s rhetoric when we 

increase the number of residency positions from 60 to over 100, 

Mr. Speaker. It would only be the opposition that would call 

that rhetoric because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, people in 

Saskatchewan see the changes that we’ve made. They realize 

it’s going to take time. And, Mr. Speaker, those changes will 

bear results. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to rely extremely heavily on 

foreign-trained grads. We want to change that and become more 

self-sufficient, training our own citizens right here in 

Saskatchewan so they can continue to practise here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Education Capital Spending 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Sask Party tried 

to duck answering questions in terms of what’s happening to 

educational capital in the province. So today we’re going to try 



3890 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

again. 

 

So last year when the money was still coming in, the 

government committed $259 million to education capital. And 

the minister went around the province announcing project after 

project after project. He became the king of press releases. Now 

the minister has confirmed, in answers to written questions, that 

barely $20 million has been spent to complete school projects in 

the past two years. 

 

To the Minister of Education: are you going to use this $259 

million in education capital, which I understand is in a fund, to 

fund K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] operating grants next 

year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I indicated in answers last week, the government, since we 

have become the government of the day, we have allocated 

$303 million to school capital. Mr. Speaker, that covers a wide 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask the Leader of the Opposition to give 

the minister an opportunity to respond. The Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the very first amount of 

money that we allocated to then the NDP government’s budget 

in ’07-08 was $13 million. Mr. Speaker, 12 million of that went 

to the two projects that I believe the member who asked the 

question announced in 2003, Mr. Speaker. We finished the two 

projects by adding $12 million to those two projects, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since then we have many projects under way. We 

have projects that are nearing completion. Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated this morning to the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association] convention, I had the pleasure of cutting a 

ribbon at Norquay School, where nearly $2 million was spent 

on the project in Norquay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many projects under way. Those are 

projects that are on the list. The member knows that. And her 

question, the written question is the projects that they had 

started that we finished. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to try this 

again. The minister has gone about the province issuing press 

release after press release. In fact he’s issued a couple of press 

releases on dozens of projects. Now they sent money out the 

door last year into the education capital fund. I’m trying to 

understand what’s happening to that fund. 

 

Now we know that there are projects that are being designed 

and they’re in planning and so on and so forth. But this 

government has a budget problem next year. I’m trying to 

understand. Is it the intention of this government to use that 

fund, that has not yet been spent because some of those projects 

are just in the design and planning stage, to cover operating 

grants next year for K to 12 schools? It’s a very simple 

question. Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move 

forward with a number of projects. Mr. Speaker, the money is 

available. The money is available. The school boards know that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can provide the member opposite with a list that 

will show her the 22 major projects that we’ve talked about in 

this Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, the ministry share for 

that amount of our related costs is $246.9 million, Mr. Speaker. 

That money is sitting in a fund. We have allocated a large 

portion of that out the door already. 

 

She knows that, Mr. Speaker. She knows that there are projects 

under way, Mr. Speaker, including the first phase of the Nutana 

project, which, Mr. Speaker, the Nutana project and the E.D. 

Feehan project are $12 million right in her backyard, Mr. 

Speaker. And she doesn’t even know that those capital projects 

are under way. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Funding for Boards of Education 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I note the minister didn’t 

answer the question. So we’re going to try again. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, last night I met with a number of school 

trustees across the province. And they’re counting on this 

government to provide them with stable, secure, and predictable 

funding, as promised in their spring budget when they took 

away school boards’ abilities to tax. But the Minister of 

Education this morning told them that they’re not going to get a 

stable and secure and predictable funding arrangement until 

2012. 

 

Now when is that? I think that’s after the next election. It’s not 

deny, deny, deny, but it’s delay, delay, delay, Mr. Speaker. So 

can the minister tell us what is taking them so long to get their 

act together that the school boards can’t rely upon stable, 

secure, and predictable funding before the next election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, isn’t it interesting that that 

member was part of a government who gave in three successive 

years to boards of education minus four, minus two, minus four, 

Mr. Speaker. Is that predictable funding from that former 

government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we made a change, a very significant change to 

how schools are funded. Mr. Speaker, last year we provided an 

additional $241 million to boards of education so that we could 

indeed meet the commitment to property owners, especially the 

agricultural communities, and make those changes, Mr. 

Speaker. 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3891 

Mr. Speaker, this morning the member was standing right 

beside me when I said, it’s my goal to ensure that over the next 

two years we have a funding plan in place. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

am not going to put in place a funding plan that is not properly 

developed, that has not worked out all its kinks. And, Mr. 

Speaker, my plan is to ensure that in the third year, if we have 

to, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to put in place the plan that 

boards of education can count on, unlike that member before. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Municipal Operating Grants 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister also needs 

money to go with that long-term funding. That’s his biggest 

problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, budget day may seem like a long time ago, 

especially for the Minister of Finance, but let me remind him. 

On that day there was a number of claims that he and his 

government made, and one of those was that they had achieved 

their commitment and the promise of long-term revenue sharing 

with municipalities by putting 90 per cent of one point of PST 

[provincial sales tax] towards revenue sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commitment this year is to move that to a full 

point. But fast forward to this week, Mr. Speaker, and the 

Minister of Finance is obviously stepping away and looking to 

break that promise. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is he 

breaking yet another promise to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And I am happy to talk about the municipal operating 

grant program, Mr. Speaker, and remind the members that in 

our first year as government . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Our first year in government we increased municipal operating 

grants by ten and a half per cent, Mr. Speaker. Our second year 

in government we increased municipal operating grants by 24 

per cent. Mr. Speaker, a 35 per cent increase in two years — 

$45 million, Mr. Speaker, $167 million a year to our 

municipalities. The highest number it has ever been, and 

something that the members opposite would never do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, over and over again we 

have heard the Minister of Finance chalk up all of this 

mismanagement purely to potash, the drop in potash revenues 

and the misplaced projections. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s purely a 

red herring because this government has enjoyed huge revenues 

to the provincial government. It is barely under $10 billion. And 

you can look back at other budgets. You can look back at 

provincial accounts. That is historical revenues for the province 

of Saskatchewan. And the reason they’re breaking these 

promises is because of their mismanagement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, clearly this minister is just hiding behind this 

commitment, and he’s going to dump this responsibility onto 

the municipalities. So why is he forcing municipal leaders to 

put in a place a price or tax hike, purely to cover their 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can see that the 

premise of the member’s question is entirely wrong. This 

government has increased municipal operating grants by 35 per 

cent — $45 million over two years, Mr. Speaker — to $167 

million, the highest it has ever been. And, Mr. Speaker, I can 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure 

municipalities that it will be at least $167 million going 

forward. And I’ll tell you what we won’t do, Mr. Speaker. We 

won’t do what the NDP did which was claw back $600 million 

in revenue sharing over the 16 years of their government and 

raise the PST. That’s something we won’t do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Policing and Public Safety. 

 

Canine Drug Unit in Saskatchewan Jails 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise in the House today to talk about a new initiative 

that will work to enhance public safety in Saskatchewan. Early 

today, in a first for the province, I signed a letter of 

understanding with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] for the use of one full-time canine handler and dog to 

crack down on the use of illegal substances in our adult 

correction facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of this government’s platform promises was 

to crack down on gangs and drugs in jails. We understand that 

drug use and trafficking have become a huge issue in our 

facilities in the last decade, and we are committed to seeing 

improvements made in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say we have already made much 

headway on this promise over the past two years. Today all of 

the large adult secure correctional facilities have an institutional 

clothing policy which works to eliminate the wearing of gang 

colours, and to hamper drugs being hidden in street clothing. 

On top of that all men’s secure custody facilities now operate 

under a non-contact visiting policy, ensuring that visitors are 

unable to slip drugs to inmates. 



3892 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

These moves have gone a long way in reducing the amount of 

contraband that ends up in our facilities, and today’s 

announcement will only add to this progress. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, since late 2007, this government has been 

contracting drug dog services periodically for use in our 

correctional facilities on a casual basis. This new agreement 

with the RCMP is really about enhancing what is already in 

place and increasing capacity for drug suppression and 

enforcement in our facilities. By adding the RCMP’s drug dog 

to existing drug search services contracted by the ministry, we 

have an additional tool to reduce drug traffic in our correctional 

facilities. 

 

While there’s still a few details that need to be worked out, 

what I can tell you is that the province will be funding a new 

canine officer and dog to be located in Meadow Lake. That 

officer and dog, along with others based out of Regina, Prince 

Albert, and The Battlefords will then be available to corrections 

for regular routine searches of our facilities. This new initiative 

will allow adult corrections to have access to a drug dog on a 

full-time basis which in turn will give officials the flexibility 

and support they need to ensure our facilities are a safe place for 

staff, inmates, and visitors alike. 

 

Funding for this initiative will total 185,000 in the first year and 

130,000 per year on an ongoing basis. And depending on 

staffing within the RCMP, the dog and handler could be 

available to adult corrections as early as March 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier today at our announcement we met a 

German shepherd named Maverick who did an impressive 

demonstration for those in attendance. I’ll tell you this: he was 

definitely not an animal I want to mess with any time soon. And 

I’m confident in these dogs’ abilities to get the job done. 

 

In closing, I would like to reiterate that this government is 

incredibly pleased to partner with the RCMP on this very 

important initiative and for the first time ever to have access to 

our very own drug dog on a full-time basis. We believe this is 

yet another significant step in achieving our goal of a safer and 

more secure province for all Saskatchewan people. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the minister 

for sharing this with me just before the session came in this 

afternoon. It’s generally viewed as good news. Anything we can 

do to enhance public safety and enhance the safety of the many 

good people working in corrections, and of course to help 

inmates, people that are in these secure facilities, help them to 

lead better lives and improve themselves as well. 

 

The minister said, Mr. Speaker, that the devil is in the details, or 

words to that effect. There’s a few details to be worked out yet. 

I really genuinely wish that there was more effort made at 

helping inmates with affordable housing and jobs and 

educational opportunities and the things that will help people 

break the cycle of being in and out of jails, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I say on the dog issue, on this issue it’s genuinely viewed 

as basically good news. I will say, Mr. Speaker, that I had some 

surprise as I was reading this because I’ve long thought that the 

first dog would be a tracking dog to help the minister find some 

of the inmates he’s let out early or even a bloodhound to help 

the Sask Party to track down whistle-blowers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people are asking if this minister’s legacy is 

going to be that he will be known as the minister responsible for 

who let the dogs out. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction 

of Greenhouse Gases Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 126, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases Act now be introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 126, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 127, The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved that Bill No. 127, The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3893 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — At the next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 128 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 128, the miscellaneous labour mobility amendment Act, 

2009 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has moved first reading of 

Bill No. 128, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Next sitting of 

the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to present its eighth 

report. I move: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Crown 

and Central Agencies: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 545 through 561. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 545 through 561 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 111 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 111 — The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 

2009/Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

rise on debate of Bill 111, The Northern Municipalities 

Consequential Amendments Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few opening remarks on this Bill. This 

legislation amends three Acts including The Interpretation Act 

to replace references to the former northern municipalities Act 

with The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s worthwhile to note perhaps that not only 

with this part of the Bill but there’s a French portion, Mr. 

Speaker, that will be amended as well. 

 

It is interesting that this Bill comes forward now because this 

Bill, as we all have seen, simply covers changing amendments, 

as I mentioned, in three Acts and then including The 

Interpretation Act after other Acts are passed, Mr. Speaker. 

Since those Acts, that Act is not yet passed, it becomes 

somewhat interesting that this Bill appears at the time that it 

does. 

 

But that be it as it may, Mr. Speaker, I would think that in order 

that we all perhaps understand this Bill, the Bill 111, An Act to 

make consequential amendments resulting from the enactment 

of The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009, that I would read this 

Act into the record. But unfortunately I’ll not be able to read the 

French portion. But, Mr. Speaker: 

 



3894 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

HER MAJESTY, by and with the advice and consent of 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 

follows [Mr. Deputy Speaker]: 

 

Short Title 

This Act may be cited as The Northern Municipalities 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. 

 

S.S. 1977, c.A-18.011 amended 

2(1) The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 is 

amended in the manner set forth in this section. 

 

(2) Clause 48(2)(a) is amended by striking out “as 

continued by section 3 of The Northern Municipalities 

Act”. 

 

(3) Clause 49(2)(c) is amended by striking out “The 

Northern Municipalities Act” and substituting “The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009”. 

 

(4) Clause 99(2)(c) is amended by striking out “The 

Northern Municipalities Act” and substituting “The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009”. 

 

(5) Clause 100(a) is amended by striking out “as 

continued by section 3 of The Northern Municipalities 

Act”. 

 

And then we go to: 

 

S.S. 1995, c.E-0.2 amended 

The Education Act, 1995 is amended in the manner set 

forth in this section. 

 

Section 296 is amended by striking out “The 

Northern Municipalities Act” and substituting “The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009”. 

 

Subsection 296.1(2) is amended by striking out 

“clause 192(1)(e) of The Northern Municipalities Act” 

and substituting “section 231 of The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009”. 

 

Clause 304(3)(b) is amended by striking out “The 

Cities Act or The Municipalities Act” and substituting 

“The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act or The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009”. 

 

Now I did have the opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to speak 

yesterday on one of those Acts. And again, as I mentioned 

earlier, this Bill appearing as it does on the order paper now is 

difficult, in fact, for us to act on because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

if the other Acts are not passed, if the Act is not passed, then it 

makes these changes . . . There would be no changes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I know one of the Bills I spoke to yesterday, and I again 

could repeat what I said there but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

issues there in terms of what the minister was saying to us, in 

terms of the criminal checks — that we talked about, that I 

talked about yesterday — the criminal checks and how they 

were not dealing with those for everyone, but in fact being 

somewhat particular or choosing, choosing who would deal 

with them or not. And then in fact being very . . . 

 

In fact there was a lack of vision on that particular Bill, as I 

remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, lack of vision where they 

talked about how we would have to put in our conflict of 

interest on . . . and that that would be the same as the MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for municipal 

politicians. And that was okay because there was a, sort of a 

straightforward approach to that. But again as I mentioned, that 

was not when it came to criminal checks. 

 

Now I know we also talked about The Northern Municipalities 

Act. And here yesterday there was much discussion on that Act 

and a lot of issues raised regarding consultation, transparency, 

and how these were all going to be dealt with. Now it does 

cause me great concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see that now 

we have Bill 11, The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act and now again that this Bill amends three Acts 

including The Interpretation Act to replace the . . . with The 

Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

As I say, the three, the Acts that are being amended here as . . . 

And perhaps I could put into the record again what the deputy 

leader on this side of the House had to say on this, and she said, 

“Mr. Speaker, The Northern Municipalities . . .”The member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow had this to say: 

 

. . . The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act hits on the three Bills that the minister 

has just spoken to, makes the changes that are appropriate 

with the implementation of The Northern Municipalities 

Act. 

 

Again, so it hits on the three Bills that the minister just spoken 

to, makes changes that are appropriate with the implementation 

of The Northern Municipalities Act. So we need The Northern 

Municipalities Act. And you heard the members yesterday, 

particularly the members from Athabasca and Regina 

Northeast, speak on that particular Bill and raised very good 

points on that Bill. And again we then see that how are we 

going to act on Bill 111 when in fact those other two Bills 

haven’t been passed? 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now I know you’re probably waiting to hear what else the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow had to say. And I’ll just 

read to you what she did say. She went on to say that: 

 

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act has changed, 

also The Education Act and The Interpretation Act, 1995, 

just to be brought in line with The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as of yet, of course . . . 

 

She went on again as much as similar as I did. She wasn’t going 

to comment on the French interpretation, and I could 

understand that. And, Mr. Speaker, I would do likewise. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is again as I mentioned, there have been 

many speakers on The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. And 

this Act is known as The Northern Municipalities 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3895 

Consequential Amendments Act. And as we heard again from 

the member from Athabasca and Regina Northeast put very 

good points on the record, points that I think we all have to 

review and have a closer look. 

 

I know there are issues regarding consultation in those Bills, 

issues of transparency. Who did the government speak to? Did 

they speak to anyone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are questions I think 

that were raised. Did they actually speak to anyone? And 

particularly, we know their record on northern issues. We know 

their record on northern issues and where they stand on that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult for us, at this time on this 

side of the House, to say that Bill 111 — again is the short title 

for the Act — The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act, would go forward. I think you would agree 

with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is difficult at this time, 

knowing the difficulties we have with The Northern 

Municipalities Act, being here and talk on the issues that were 

raised by the members who entered this debate yesterday and 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow who made the opening 

comments on behalf of the opposition. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the history of Bills coming forward before 

us, in terms of where there are consequential amendments as a 

result of the Acts, have been in most cases been dealt with once 

the initial Acts are passed. And it is somewhat to me . . . 

perhaps is I find it a bit disconcerting that we are having to deal 

with this Bill now. So I am not certain why this Bill comes in 

the order that it does without the other Bills being, with the 

initial Bill being passed. But we find that that’s in fact the case 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Bill . . . 

 

Now again there are people that perhaps could look at that, and 

perhaps we have to look closer at the Bill. I’ve just simply made 

these opening remarks regarding my concerns, as I have said, 

my concerns that there are members who have spoken out on 

the lack of transparency, consultation issues regarding The 

Northern Municipalities Act. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

one runs, flows from that Act. 

 

And so having dealt with that, I think what we have to also look 

at is, we would have to check are the clauses correct? Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, these are the kinds of things that we would 

have to check. Are the numbers correct? Are we actually 

making the changes that are necessary here? And so I think 

there is probably some value in going over the Bill prior to 

being, Mr. Deputy Speaker, trying to determine whether the 

numbers and in fact the accuracy of the amendments are 

correct. 

 

Now those we will be going over yet, and we will no doubt be 

needing, on these Bills, to do the due diligence that we need to. 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is important that we do this.  

 

Now unlike, as I mentioned I think, the members opposite, in 

terms of the experience that they have in northern 

Saskatchewan, we have heard many of the comments and the 

lack of knowledge. And it is, I think, one of the points that we 

would be looking at before we would even think of agreeing 

with Bill 111, that we would look at The Northern 

Municipalities Act and take that into our discussions as we 

move forward on this Bill, Bill 111. 

Again this Act is The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act. But my main concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are that there are so many outstanding issues in the North, so 

many issues that need to be dealt with, and particularly the 

consultations and whether those have been done. And we see 

over and over and over again here, the members and how there 

is a lack of consultation. And they move forward without 

careful . . . doing the due diligence. 

 

And we’ve had many, many examples of Bills having to be 

withdrawn and resubmitted. And this is a concern if we were to 

pass this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all of a sudden that we 

would find that they had to withdraw a Bill because they found 

something that was wrong. And that speaks of a record, a record 

over there that becomes more dismal as the time goes on. 

 

And we now see that sort of spilling over into the financial. 

First it was just simply the Bills. When the money was all there 

to spend, and weren’t we having a good old party spending 

money that was put together by the former NDP government. 

And now we see that the record on finances is no better than the 

Bills that they have been putting forward and withdrawing and 

resubmitting Bills. 

 

So I’m reluctant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, reluctant, very reluctant 

to have our side look at a Bill of this nature and just simply say, 

this is fine and we should move this forward. There’s much to 

do here. As I mentioned again, we would be at the very least 

reluctant to see this passed today because the initial Bill is not 

yet passed. So it comes in an order that comes as a bit of a 

surprise to me as to why this Bill would be here now. But it is 

before us, and for whatever reason, the government wants us to 

debate this now. 

 

But I’ve also, I think there are more things I want to say about 

the northern . . . their lack of understanding the North. But for 

right now, I think we would have to go over . . . We would have 

this on paper. And I’ve read the amendments for this Act into 

the record so that we can all see it in the future and so that we 

are all on the same page, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to 

this Bill. 

 

Now requiring more time on this Bill to do the proper due 

diligence in terms of making sure the amendments, the numbers 

. . . We all know how important that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

when we go in here, that it’s best to catch those kinds of errors 

now as opposed to later. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the things that we should not forget 

though, the things that we should not forget, is again this 

government’s, what they have shown in terms of putting 

forward Bills, in terms of their track record on that, in terms of 

their track record. 

 

And now as I’ve mentioned, now the people of this province 

who were enjoying, enjoying what they called a boom. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that boom has turned into a bust. And 

daily as we sit here and listen, that boom has truly turned into a 

bust. And daily we find each department . . . and it’s getting 

worse. And those members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can tell 

from the looks on their faces that this is bad for Saskatchewan. 

This is really bad for the people of Saskatchewan who worked 

so hard to build up an account. The $2.3 billion, if you can 



3896 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, gone out the window. 

 

And now we have to pull back money and meanwhile saying to 

everyone that there’s tax cuts. They’re not tax cuts, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They’re not tax cuts. These are now . . . They’re 

getting back and they’re going back and they’re taking away 

from kids and schools so that they can give tax cuts to other 

people. Now what a shell game that is — taking away money 

from children and schools and being happy and telling people 

that they’re having tax cuts. 

 

And this reminds me of this Bill and the Bills that they have 

passed, and particularly the order of this Bill coming as it does 

now. Because what does that say, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What 

does that say about a government who many are finding hard to 

trust, Mr. Deputy Speaker? And so as I go out and I talk to 

people about perhaps Bill 111 or any of the others, this is sort of 

symptomatic or this is an example of how they bring forward 

legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 111, I think I’ve made the 

arguments of how we are having difficulty to deal with this. 

I’ve talked about the finances and the mishandling of finances 

in this province. They complain today that they cannot help 

farmers because this is going to cost them. Yet they run up a 

debt of $1 billion over and above that, the money that was 

coming into the coffers at that time. 

 

Wasn’t it a party, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Wasn’t it a party? And 

some people were having a good time and now some people are 

going to pay for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re going to pay 

for that. And a lot of people are saying this reminds them of the 

1980s. It reminds them of the Devine era and how things 

worked then. They just can’t wait to get their hands on the purse 

and start spending that money and . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

thank the members for allowing me to introduce a guest. I am 

pleased to introduce to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through 

you to all members of the Assembly a guest seated in your 

gallery, my older brother Dallas Duncan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dallas lives in Medicine Hat with his family. And 

he’s in for some business, Mr. Speaker. And I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, that he works in the alternative energy business where 

the company that he works for does a number of things such as 

geothermal wells and other things like that, Mr. Speaker. And 

he’s very happy with what this government is doing in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

And I can tell you that he certainly has been listening intently to 

the member’s speech. And his comment from the gallery was 

that if the members think that it’s a bust in Saskatchewan, they 

should try living in Alberta right now. So I would ask all 

members to welcome me introduce my brother, Dallas. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée 

The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

one of the other things that the monetary situation or the 

budgetary situation we find ourselves in Saskatchewan is that it 

reminds me of somebody finding a wallet, finding a wallet and 

spending the money. Now a lot of people would return the 

wallet, or they would be mindful of, it was there, would go 

through procedures. But what is the feeling there when you just 

find a wallet of money and you spend it? And you spend that 

money? That is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not a position that I 

would want to be in. And then running into the owner of the 

wallet and explaining what it was that has happened here. 

 

So here we’ve gone from boom to bust. And we put in Bills. 

We take Bills out. We change Bills because they’re not correct. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provincial government wonders, 

or the Sask Party government wonders why people are losing 

faith in them, are losing faith. And some have lost faith. Some 

have lost faith in them. And they propose . . . And it starts from 

the simple things. And as I mentioned before, it wasn’t simple, 

but in terms of proposing Bills, where they proposed Bills, they 

had to withdraw the Bills because they were improperly put 

forward. 

 

And so now we have to go over Bills like Bill 111 with care and 

with scrutiny so that we make sure that we understand what is 

in those Bills and the impacts that they might have. So we go 

down to the minute details, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I read the 

Bill into the record so that we would have the actual Bill read 

into the record, and we have it on paper so that we would have 

to discuss it. But I think also that point, and the order of the Bill 

has come forward on this important issue. 

 

But first the importance here is northern Saskatchewan, 

northern Saskatchewan and what that means. It means it’s . . . 

The North is resources. The North is a wonderful people. The 

North is about wide open spaces. The North is about hunting 

and fishing, and that’s what comes to mind, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And the understanding from the members opposite, 

and there’s a concern here as to what their understanding truly 

is. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so from our side we have had a 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3897 

member from Athabasca speak on this, whose constituency is in 

there, and his comments. And that those members should pay 

special attention to the comments that he made, the comments 

that he made about the North, and to the member from Regina 

Northeast who travelled as well in the North when he was 

working on amendments to The Labour Standards Act and the 

questions that he asked. And it is of some concern to me 

whether members from the Sask Party government have in fact 

done that kind of work. 

 

I think in terms of a Bill that I had the opportunity to speak on 

yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just yesterday the Bill that I had 

an opportunity to speak on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The 

Municipalities Amendment Act and the issues around The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, and how the minister in 

speaking to that Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, how he spoke and 

said, well what we want is to allow the municipalities to have 

people who run for public office post criminal records. 

 

It was an innocent enough statement or a good statement, but it 

was what followed afterwards which was just a bit 

disconcerting. So he said that it was especially that this would 

be something that would add to elections in municipalities, that 

something that he was — it sounded from his words — that he 

was supporting and would be in favour of. Then he said he gave 

the municipalities the choice to do that. And then he said he 

wouldn’t force them to do that. Now that was very, very 

interesting. I’m not sure people reading that who are 

councillors, what exactly they would be thinking he was saying. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what was he actually saying to them? So, 

many concerns about Bill 111.  

 

Many concerns that we have be that in the fields that are out 

there. We learn daily in the Education for example that the 

money is not there, Mr. Speaker, and it is very disheartening to 

hear those kind of things. Because as we went around the 

province, everybody was cheering and saying, here we come. 

We’re spending the money. It was like the found wallet I talked 

about earlier, the found money, and we were very good at 

spending money. 

 

And then it comes later and now we have to say that . . . And 

now we hear that in fact perhaps the money will roll, but it will 

roll after the election. After the election it’s going to roll now. 

So now it’s 2012, and now the money won’t come till after the 

election. Now that’s disappointing, I think, to the students that 

we hear. And I wonder what the Willowgrove school will, in 

Saskatoon, what’ll happen there, that this will be very 

interesting to see on that. 

 

So these are concerns as to . . . That we have to have faith in 

this government when they propose a Bill 111 that in fact that 

they are . . . Because they can say things. And then will they be 

pulling them back? And we’ve seen this in many Bills where 

they proposed Bills, and they’ve pulled them back in and then 

had to resubmit. So we wonder if this is the same thing now. 

 

As I said before, is that this started with Bills when the money 

was flowing and now it’s . . . We’ve worked our way to the 

finances of this province where now the money’s there and now 

it’s gone. It’s a shell game that we have going on, and we 

wonder if the Bills are still . . . if we can still have faith in them 

as they propose the Bills that they have done the due diligence. 

And actually we’re after transparency and consultation, and 

there was nothing of that that we . . . In the minister’s 

statements, there was nothing in the minister’s statement 

surrounding whether or not the due diligence had been done. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it might be worth reading into the 

record what the minister had said here, and he said, Mr. 

Speaker, “I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 111, 

The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 

2009.” He said, the Act represents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he 

said: 

 

The Act represents changes that are being made to 

bilingual Acts as a result of the introduction of The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997, The 

Education Act, 1995, and The Interpretation Act, 1995 are 

the three Acts amended in this Bill. All other 

consequential amendments are contained within The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 itself. 

 

So that’s what the minister . . . And the minister went on: “The 

changes being made to these statutes, as in all other 

consequential amendments contained in The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009, primarily do the following . . .” And 

this is what he said that they would do: “. . . replaces references 

to The Northern Municipalities Act with references to The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 . . .” And that would be 

because of the changes in 2009. Mr. Deputy Speaker, “. . . 

updates the various . . . municipal definitions and other statutes 

as defined in The Interpretation Act, 1995,” an Act which 

comes into play in a lot of changes. 

 

Now accordingly, he went on to finish, accordingly, Mr. 

Speaker, he moved the second reading of Bill 111, The 

Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. 

 

So again, the minister was straightforward, as this Bill is as 

straightforward in terms of what it had to say, what Acts it was 

changing. And I guess one might say that we should not be 

overly concerned, that this is a straightforward Bill, and that 

perhaps we’re making a bit more of it than should be. 

 

But I think from what we see across the way that due diligence 

needs to be done on every piece of material that we see from 

their Bills and otherwise because the record, the record has now 

. . . What we see from the other side, the record is not 

something that I don’t think anyone would be holding forth as 

something to be very proud of. And I think we see . . . We’ll all 

be looking forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to more news from 

there as they muddle their way through this. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that there are probably more 

members willing, wanting to get in on this debate. And it’s an 

important debate, Bill 111, again making the consequential 

amendments to this Act, the Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from the enactment of The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009. It’s amazing that a Bill or a piece of 

legislation of this sort and the ramifications that it can have on 

this legislature, and I know that there are many other members 

wanting to speak. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will thank you at 

this time. 



3898 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 

111, An Act to make consequential amendments resulting from 

the enactment of The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many people would think that this particular 

piece of legislation because it makes consequential amendments 

to other Acts would be very minor in nature, Mr. Speaker. But 

if you understand the legislative process and the work that is 

undertaken to ensure that when we change one piece of 

legislation that the impacts and references in other pieces of 

legislation are also changed, is a very large undertaking. 

 

It requires many, many members of the civil service, who work 

in the legislative branch over at the Department of Justice, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to spend time reviewing those Acts to ensure 

that as we change one Act we make the necessary changes to 

any other legislation that in fact mentioned in that Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we have people who specialize in that in the Department of 

Justice. They ensure every single time that an Act is amended 

or changed that if there needs to be consequential amendments 

made to other Acts, that is in fact undertaken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consequential amendments in other Acts may 

affect one Bill, two Bills, three Bills, 25, 30, 40, maybe 50 or 60 

Bills, Mr. Speaker. In any given session of the legislature, we 

may amend upwards of 50 to 60, and I’ve seen as high as 100 

Bills amended in a single year between new legislation and 

amendments in legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you undertake an amendment in a Bill 

like The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009, then you have to 

look at does it impact other pieces of legislation. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, this particular Bill No. 111 indicates that it does in fact 

make changes in three other Bills. And we need to understand, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what those implications are on those 

particular pieces of legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at this Bill and it seems a relatively 

simple Bill. It’s a bilingual Bill, Mr. Speaker. It has 

amendments in both French and English, consequential 

amendments. But it does undertake to make amendments in 

three other specific Bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d like to 

spend about an hour, maybe a little over an hour, talking about 

what those amendments may be and what the impact on those 

amendments could be and are on the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the amendments, 

consequential amendments, being made to The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act, 1997, Mr. Speaker. So when you make 

amendments in The Northern Municipalities Act, we have to 

look at what impacts it has on other legislation. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it makes amendments to The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. 

 

And what does it do within that Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well 

in many places within The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997, it makes references to the current northern municipalities 

Act, Mr. Speaker. So anywhere within, contained within that 

piece of legislation where it currently makes reference to The 

Northern Municipalities Act, it now has to be amended to make 

reference to The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, there are several places within The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997, that in fact 

references the previous Act, The Northern Municipalities Act, 

that now have to be amended to make reference to the new Act, 

The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to understand what the impact on 

those particular pieces of legislation and these changes are, one 

would have to reference that piece of legislation in detail. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a process which officials in the 

Department of Justice undertake very carefully to ensure that 

there are no unintended changes, unintended consequences as a 

result of making the amendments and changes in the 

consequential amendment Act. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going to spend some time this 

afternoon going over this very important piece of legislation. 

Many people may think it’s unimportant, but it’s often pieces of 

legislation like this to make consequential amendments that can 

have unforeseen consequences, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to fully understand what those implications are.  

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, although my colleague just a few 

minutes ago talked at some length about this particular Bill and 

its impact on The Northern Municipalities Act, I’m going to 

deal with that later on in my speech. I’m first going to deal with 

the impacts on the three Bills that the consequential 

amendments impact directly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I indicated, the first one is The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act of 1997, Mr. Speaker. In four different places 

within the Bill, there are amendments made to The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. So in four places, after 

consideration of the current legislation in place, the current 

northern municipalities Act, it was determined that those 

changes were necessary to make in order to keep The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 current and relevant. But, 

Mr. Speaker, that is contingent upon, naturally of course, 

passing The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to spend a few minutes talking about 

the second piece of legislation that is amended here, and that’s 

The Education Act of 1995. It’s amended in, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, three places, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and again these are 

references to the current piece of legislation that need to be 

updated in order to be relevant and to be current if in fact The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 were to pass, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these particular references in The 

Education Act make reference obviously to schools in northern 

Saskatchewan, a very beautiful place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

where I hope the children enjoy their education. There are 

beautiful communities in northern Saskatchewan like 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, La Ronge, Creighton, Sandy Bay, 

Buffalo Narrows, just to mention a few, Pinehouse. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, these are communities where children in northern 

Saskatchewan go to school, that they depend upon changes in 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3899 

this legislation to ensure that they get a quality education in 

their communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The schools in northern Saskatchewan are represented by the 

Northern Lights School Division, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

school division that looks after schools in the northern part of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the exception of 

Ile-a-la-Crosse which has an independent and separate school 

division, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendments that are brought 

forward in this piece of legislation are to help ensure that the 

quality of education in northern Saskatchewan, for those 

residents, is being adhered to, that we are delivering the best 

quality education we possibly can in those northern in 

communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that in fact that the 

legislation remains relevant and current so that as amendments 

are made to The Northern Municipalities Act, the reciprocating 

and necessary amendments are also made in The Education Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it clearly indicates that there needs to be 

three amendments made in order to keep The Education Act 

relevant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to ensure that, in fact, the 

intent of the new provisions in the northern municipality Act 

apply within The Education Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also, we see a number of changes 

being made in The Interpretation Act — The Interpretation Act 

of 1995, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in this particular case, we 

see again the same changes being made that are being made in 

both The Education Act and The Alcohol and Gaming 

Regulation Act from 1995. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see in 

indications where the reference to The Northern Municipalities 

Act has been there in the past, now a reference to The Northern 

Municipalities Act of 2009. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Interpretation Act is a general 

piece of legislation that is used to interpret . . . to define how 

other Acts and pieces of legislation are interpreted and 

regulations are interpreted by government on a broad, very 

broad base, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So The Interpretation Act is a 

very important piece of legislation. So it’s absolutely important 

that you continue to ensure that it’s both relevant and updated 

and current. That as you make amendments to other pieces of 

legislation that would be reflected in The Interpretation Act, 

that in fact you would make those amendments in The 

Interpretation Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So as I started my speech some, you know, 10, 15 minutes ago 

talking about the importance of this piece of legislation and 

how some would see it as being a very simple and maybe 

irrelevant piece of legislation on the surface, it is actually a 

very, very important piece of legislation that demands that we 

take adequate time and consideration as we look at legislation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to understand those impacts on 

both those three particular pieces of legislation on the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan, in particular northern 

Saskatchewan, and the impacts on future . . . or the impacts on 

that legislation moving forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to, before I get back to 

talking specifically about these changes, spend a few minutes 

about the legislation, northern municipalities Act, that drives 

these consequential amendments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

it’s linked very clearly. And there’s a number of key provisions 

being changed in The Northern Municipalities Act, but there’s 

one or two I think that should have and do deserve some 

consideration. 

 

One is the issue of criminal record checks for those who are 

seeking public office in municipalities in the North, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that is a new direction, a new policy direction put 

forward by the government. That policy direction leaves a 

number of questions unanswered at this time, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. If it’s adequate and important enough to have for 

northern municipalities, why isn’t it just as important for those 

of us who sit in the provincial legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

or for that matter, all municipal officials across or individuals 

seeking municipal office across the province? Why so 

important in northern Saskatchewan? 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that people of 

Saskatchewan do have a right to know who’s running for them 

in public office. I do think they have a right to hold accountable 

those who have been elected to public office. And I personally 

believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we should have criminal 

record checks and total transparency on all those who are 

seeking public office. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things you have to understand 

when you run for public office is that you’re giving up some of 

your privacy. You’re giving up some of your ability to be, for 

lack of a better word, hidden or non-transparent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. When you seek public office, the people who elect you 

do expect to know and understand not only what you stand for, 

but what you’ve done in your past. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that criminal record checks 

are good for all citizens of the province who seek public office. 

I think there should be open and accountable public disclosure 

of any past criminal activity. I think that that should be a given. 

I think the citizens of the province have a right to know. I think 

the citizens of the province should know. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the introduction of this 

particular amendment in The Northern Municipalities Act is a 

foot in the door to a much broader and, shall I say, I think, a 

progressive step in public policy in addressing the issue of 

public disclosure. I think that public disclosure and 

transparency is important today. We live in a world that many, 

many of our citizens, particularly our younger citizens, our 

young adults, university graduates do most of their research on 

the Internet. They spend a great deal of time on the Internet and 

do a great deal of research and study about issues and topics 

before they come to conclusions or make decisions. 

 

Well it should be no different in deciding which way they want 

to vote. They should have the ability to look both at the policy 

directions and ideologies of the people they’re voting for. They 

should look at the accomplishments and the goals and what the 

individual stands for and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also should 

have the right to know what they have done in their past and 

what they, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe should be and have 

been held accountable for in the past. 



3900 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

So criminal record checks I think are a good thing. I think it’s a 

natural step in moving to an evolution of greater transparency, 

more accountability. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that we 

should all be both encouraging that and supportive of greater 

transparency and accountability, because good government and 

good public policy comes through greater transparency. It 

comes from being willing to accept that you don’t always do the 

right things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It comes from being willing 

to say that you’ve made mistakes. But when you’ve made 

mistakes, learn from them. Make sure you don’t make them 

again. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is nobody in public life who hasn’t, 

like every other citizen, made a decision they wished they 

hadn’t made the day after they made it. But unfortunately when 

you’re in public life that should be transparent. The public have 

a right to know. They have a right to know what you stand for. 

And in particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if that mistake was of a 

criminal nature, I think the population of the province definitely 

have a right to know. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Northern Municipalities Act is a piece 

of legislation and the Act before us, amendments to the Act, 

pardon me, are an attempt to update the legislation to make it 

relevant to the current situation of northern municipalities. It’s 

trying to reflect the requests and needs of the northern 

municipalities and their officials, who from time to time bring 

forward their concerns to government and asking for 

amendments. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the way it is. Governments 

are there for the people. Governments aren’t an entity unto 

themselves. They are there for the people. They’re there to 

reflect the needs of the people. And they’re there to attack on 

behalf of the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it’s very, very 

appropriate that today we’re talking about a piece of legislation 

that in fact has been brought forward on behalf of northern 

municipalities, making amendments. And then, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as in the case in Bill 111, the consequential 

amendments to other very important legislation to northern 

communities, to northern citizens. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

those northern citizens are very, very important citizens and 

people in our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of their proximity to the seat of 

government here in Regina, many of them feel that often we 

forget about them, that we don’t care enough, or we aren’t 

concerned about the issues of northern Saskatchewan. Well I’d 

like to share with the people of northern Saskatchewan, you 

have two very, very fine representatives — my colleagues both 

from the constituencies of Cumberland, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

My colleague from Cumberland very, very clearly works hard 

to represent his constituents. And I can tell you, day in and day 

out, the representative from Cumberland brings forward the 

concerns of his constituents to our caucus table. The 

representative from Cumberland cares very deeply for the 

people of the North and the things that affect the people of the 

North. 

 

And that very same sentiment is shared by his colleague and 

mine, the member from Athabasca, who has served in this 

legislature for more years than I have but has served the 

northern communities which he represents with enthusiasm, but 

with determination as well, to ensure that their best interests are 

brought forward on a day-to-day basis, both within this 

legislature, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and outside this legislature 

when they’re talking to others about the importance of people 

understanding the issues of northern Saskatchewan and the 

impact of decisions we make within this Chamber on the people 

of the North so that we’re not making decisions without 

understanding what those implications are, what the impacts are 

on the people of the North, and that we take into consideration 

the importance of the impact on the people of the North. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this legislature is served by 

two very capable and confident and competent members of the 

legislature, both from Cumberland and Athabasca. And on a 

daily basis they undertake to ensure that myself and other 

members of this legislature understand, understand the impact 

of the decisions we make in this room on the people of the 

North. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should more be done? Most 

definitely. Can more be done? I’d say most definitely. We 

happen to have a government today that’s ignored the North. I 

know that my northern colleagues bring concerns on a daily 

basis to our caucus about things that the government is ignoring 

in northern Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

undertake to raise those issues in this legislature. We do it when 

we talk about pieces of legislation like this. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I know for a fact that in one of the communities in 

northern Saskatchewan today, they’re concerned about a 

number of things. They’re concerned about no cellphone tower 

that they were promised. They’re concerned about the quality of 

the road that they were promised would be fixed and isn’t fixed. 

I know they’re also concerned about the availability of 

long-term care beds for their parents and grandparents, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They’re concerned because these are very 

vitally needed services in northern Saskatchewan that the 

government’s ignoring. 

 

So my colleagues from the constituencies of Cumberland and 

Athabasca are bringing up those concerns. They’re here to 

ensure that those concerns are being met, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I just want to . . . If anybody from those communities of 

the North, at Ile-a-la-Cross, La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Sandy 

Bay, Creighton, La Ronge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, understand 

that these members — the two northern members of the 

legislature from the constituencies of Athabasca and 

Cumberland — do care, do raise their issues and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, work on a daily basis to try to improve the lives of 

their constituents in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to now spend a few minutes 

talking about this particular piece of legislation, Bill 111, and a 

little bit about the processes that a Bill would go through, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in its development. Because Bills that deal 

with consequential amendments are unique in the sense that 

they are the result of another piece of legislation. They are not 

necessarily . . . They are not designed, as an example, to make a 

policy change or implement a policy decision. They are 

consequential to a policy decision and the implication of that 

policy. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bills like Bill 111 often get very little 

or no discussion in the legislature, often get little or no debate, 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3901 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. So for that reason, my colleague, the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview and myself and previously 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, want to make sure 

that on Bills that are important to the people of northern 

Saskatchewan, that we’re spending adequate time, adequate 

consideration of the Bill prior to its passing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And for that reason, we are spending what some 

people may think is an exceptionally long period of time on a 

very minor Bill. But it may be minor in some people’s 

estimation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but its impact is significant. 

 

As I had indicated earlier, this Bill amends three other pieces of 

legislation. It amends The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 

1997. It amends The Education Act, 1995. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it amends The Interpretation Act, 1995. The 

amendments on the surface may seem to be minor. It may seem 

to have little or no impact but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the 

furthest thing from the truth. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these particular amendments, as are many 

amendments in legislation dealing with consequential 

amendments, are important because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

are important to the people of northern Saskatchewan because 

they directly affect the application of services and benefits 

provided by government to those citizens in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen in the last number of 

months a government that many in northern Saskatchewan 

believe has forgot them. As I indicated a minute ago, a single 

community in northern Saskatchewan, represented by my 

colleague from the constituency of Cumberland, is concerned 

about three very important things. They’re concerned about 

they were promised a cellphone tower in their area, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; it’s not been delivered. They were promised, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that they would have long-term care beds. Not 

delivered, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

were also promised that they would have their road improved. 

 

And these things in northern communities can be extremely, 

extremely important, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That road can be the 

lifeline to hospital services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It can be a 

lifeline to perhaps the only place in which to buy groceries and 

other vital staples that they need to live. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan there are fewer 

roads than there are in other parts of the province. Many people 

live at the road’s end with only one access in and out, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and they may be two or three hours from 

available services and have to drive for a considerable period of 

time to reach those services. So many of us in the South don’t 

fully understand or appreciate the impact of decisions made on 

northern communities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated earlier, my colleagues have 

spent considerable time trying to educate people in this 

Assembly about some of the challenges the communities in 

northern Saskatchewan face because of their unique geographic 

isolation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the difficulty they have in 

recruiting professional services to communities that are by and 

large a great distance from a large centre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and that the children that live in those communities are every bit 

as important as any child in the city of Regina or Saskatoon, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And my colleagues from both Cumberland and Athabasca have 

worked very, very hard to try to ensure that the members of our 

caucus and the members of the legislature fully understand the 

implications. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I indicated earlier, one of the 

Acts that the consequential amendments are made is The 

Education Act. And in northern communities, education is 

every bit as important — in fact maybe more important — than 

it is in some southern communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because like smaller communities in southern Saskatchewan, 

often your centre of your community is around your school. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, therefore consequential amendments 

to The Education Act in this particular Bill are very, very 

important to the community. 

 

Many of the community’s sports activities and sport teams 

centre around the school. It provides activity for children both 

during the school day but also it becomes the centre of activity 

both in evenings and weekends, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And in 

many northern communities, the options that children have for 

recreation are not . . . When I say recreation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’m talking about structured recreation. There are 

many things to do in northern Saskatchewan. It’s a very 

beautiful part of the province with great forests, lakes, and 

opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But structured activities, 

many of them are structured around the school, so making the 

education system, your school, so vitally important in your 

community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can’t forget that. And as we look at 

this particular piece of legislation and amendments to The 

Education Act, we have to be sensitive to what those impacts 

may be on the education in those very remote communities in 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those children in 

those communities should have every right to a quality 

education as any child in either the city of Regina or Saskatoon 

would have. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to conclude my remarks over the 

next five minutes or so talking about the impact of this 

legislation in a broader context of The Northern Municipalities 

Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have before the legislature 

amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act, The Cities 

Act, and the rural municipalities Act as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all these Acts are very, very important. 

But in particular, The Northern Municipalities Act is of utmost 

importance at this period of time in our development because, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is reaching its own 

potential. We’re seeing huge economic development in northern 

Saskatchewan. We’re seeing opportunities for jobs and growth. 

We’re seeing development in the oil industry in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the uranium industry, and 

gold development, gold mining. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all these things not only offer opportunity 

and jobs to northern communities, but in fact it offers 

opportunities for northern Saskatchewan that haven’t been there 



3902 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

in the past. It offers both financial opportunities, but it also 

offers opportunities to improve their social structures within 

their communities. These things are regulated, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, by their northern municipalities, by their communities. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the North is unique in some ways in 

that in many communities you have both an urban municipality 

and you may have a reserve right down the middle of a 

community. The rules are different in the division sometimes 

right within a community. As an example, in the community of 

Sandy Bay, you will have lots owned by the village of Sandy 

Bay and next door you’ll have lots that are owned by, or across 

the street, by the reserve. And those children have different 

rights and provisions based on which lot the house that their 

parents own is on. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why it’s very important to 

have progressive legislation for northern municipalities so that 

those children, regardless if their parents live on a lot owned by 

the reserve or a lot owned by the municipality, those children 

should have access to the same opportunities within that 

community. They should all have quality of education. They 

should all have the ability to have the recreation that’s available 

through that educational facility, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And so for many reasons, because of the uniqueness of northern 

Saskatchewan, it’s important to have very relevant legislation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s kept up to date, that is reviewed on 

a regular basis, that is reviewed regularly and consulted with, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, those various communities that have to 

live by that legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time after taking a few minutes 

to consider Bill 111, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I understand 

that many of my colleagues want to spend a considerable period 

of time talking about this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker — I 

would take my seat to allow others . . . Pardon me. I would like 

to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 111, The Northern 

Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 112 — The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise today to talk about Bill 112, The Justices of the 

Peace Amendment Act, 2009. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

justices of the peace are integral parts of our justice system in 

Saskatchewan. They’re not technically judges but they perform 

many roles that are extremely important in our judicial system. 

And I think it’s important that we understand what it is that 

we’re trying to do here and understand the role that the justices 

of the peace have within the judicial system. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, let me go through and outline some of the 

duties that justices of the peace have. And I’ll give a fairly 

extensive listing of this, but not an absolutely conclusive list. 

This’ll be some of the things that they do. One of their first 

roles is administering oaths for criminal charges laid by the 

police or the public. And so this is a role where they are 

assistants in initiating criminal charges and most often this is 

done when police officers would lay charges. 

 

Another area where they have responsibility is confirming or 

cancelling police-issued process. So, for example, if somebody 

enters into a promise to appear or appearance notice or 

something like that, these can be dealt with by justices of the 

peace and revised or eliminated or dealt with in some other 

fashion. 

 

Another area where justices of the peace have an important role 

is in reviewing and signing court-issued process. So that could 

be a summons or a warrant for arrest or an undertaking. And so 

you will often see a signature of a Justice of the Peace on these 

types of documents and many of these people who function in 

that role actually are people who work within the court system 

and also have a role as a Justice of the Peace. 

 

Justices of the peace also have a role of reviewing and issuing 

subpoenas compelling witnesses to attend court. And obviously 

the issuing part is the fairly straightforward part. It’s reviewing 

the information and the evidence that’s available that would 

allow for the subpoenas to be issued which is the important 

role. And this takes people who have a sense of fair play, but 

also a sense of good judgment and an understanding of 

circumstances, and making sure that processes are properly 

followed. 

 

Justices of the peace also have a role in administering oaths for 

affidavits, affirmations, and declarations. And this is a role that 

can be used in many different places. 

 

Another area where they have a role is in considering 

applications for search warrants. And once again this is an 

important role in our society, where we value privacy but we 

also value the ability of investigation of criminal activity. And 

so in considering and balancing the interests there, clearly 

justices of the peace have an important role. 

 

Another important area is where justices of the peace can 

release people under conditions after they’ve been arrested and 

are being held in custody. And this is often the role of the 

justice of the peace that is quite demanding, especially in rural 

communities. They may get calls in the middle of the night to 

go to the jail to find out or listen to see whether it’s possible 

that somebody could be released after they’ve been arrested — 

or they may have that role in the following morning or on a 

Monday morning — but dealing with people who are held in 

custody and assessing whether they should remain there or 

whether they should be released into the community. 

 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3903 

Another area where they handle some fairly difficult issues 

sometimes relates to conducting show-cause hearings, or bail 

hearings as they’re more commonly called, to see if somebody 

should remain in custody until they’re dealt with by the law. So 

these are some of the duties that justices of the peace have. And 

as you can see, they’re clearly an integral part of a criminal 

justice system. 

 

Justices of the peace also have a role to perform in the absence 

of a Provincial Court judge. And this can be quite crucial in a 

province like Saskatchewan where we don’t have Provincial 

Court judges in every corner of the province. And so often the 

justices of the Peace will handle some of the judicial activities 

that are there. And examples of this would be accepting guilty 

pleas from an accused person and then ultimately sentencing 

them with an offence that would be punishable on summary 

conviction. So they’re able to deal with summary conviction 

offences and accept guilty pleas. Obviously on the indictable or 

more serious offences, they are not in a position to do that. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Another thing that the Justice of the Peace can do is receive an 

accused person’s election of their mode of trial. This is often 

the second or third stage in a criminal proceeding where a 

person has received legal advice, and there are some choices as 

to whether it should be a trial by judge, a trial by judge and jury 

is one example, or some other things. And so practically, that 

decision has been made and it’s a procedural step. Then often a 

Justice of the Peace can do that in the absence of a provincial 

court judge. Another thing that they can do is grant 

adjournments of matters where the provincial court judge is not 

available. 

 

Now these are activities that are especially true when taken 

outside of Regina and Saskatoon, and I think you can say in 

many ways the whole criminal justice system in Saskatchewan 

would have difficulty functioning without justices of the peace, 

especially in rural parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

In Regina and Saskatoon, there’s another role that justices of 

the peace serve. And these are specially designated ones and 

also they’re specially trained. And these are senior justices of 

the peace who effectively act as the decision makers on a 

number of specific types of offences. So for example in Regina 

and Saskatoon, you may appear before a Justice of the Peace 

where there’s a trial where the offence is under a provincial 

statute like a traffic Act or liquor licensing or wildlife offences, 

all of those kinds of things which are provincial offences. It is 

possible that you would have this case heard by a specially 

designated and trained Justice of the Peace. 

 

Another area — and this may be the area where most people 

actually run into justices of the peace — is related to offences 

under various municipal bylaws. And so that’s traffic tickets, 

parking tickets, noise, and domestic animal violation kinds of 

issues. Those are held before a Justice of the Peace. So you get 

a bit of sense of this role of a Justice of the Peace. 

 

What we have in Saskatchewan, and I guess in Canada, is an 

interesting situation under our constitution where provinces are 

not authorized under the constitution to enact criminal law. And 

that has many advantages for us in Canada in the sense that we 

have the same Criminal Code for the whole country. Just have 

to go to our neighbours to the South and understand that they 

have state crimes and federal crimes, and it often ends up being 

a little more complicated. 

 

But one of the aspects of this is then which kinds of matters are 

dealt with by the various courts and by the various judges. 

Justices of the peace fit into that system, and over many years, 

we have developed mechanisms for responding to changes as 

they develop within the administration of justice. 

 

Now I want to quote from a recent book that has come out, I 

think, just a little earlier this year, 2008. I guess it was the end 

of last year, and it’s called Saskatchewan Politics: Crowding 

the Centre and edited by Howard Leeson. But in this book, 

there’s quite an interesting article written by John Whyte who is 

now teaching at the law school in Saskatoon and Thomas Gusa 

who I think is now a practicing lawyer in Edmonton. And 

they’ve written an article on the administration of justice in 

Saskatchewan. And I want to read this, not because it 

specifically goes, talks about justices of the peace, but it talks 

about why one changes aspects of the judicial system in 

response to how the community is changing. And so I’ll just 

read from page 95: 

 

Our legal system’s prestige — perhaps even its majesty 

— rests on its transcended quality, existing above, and 

avoiding corruption by, the exigencies of daily demands 

and passions. Its constancy is its strength. Its content and 

its processes have developed slowly over time and are not 

to be battered by the demands of our current situation. 

And, yet, it seems that our legal system responds to our 

needs, including our need to see justice done, so 

imperfectly. The administration of justice faces no greater 

challenge than to preserve the rigor and impartiality in the 

way that law works in our society while subjecting it to 

the changes that will make it an effective social 

instrument for all people in all their vastly different social 

contexts and with all their vastly different social needs. 

Certainly two places where this adaptation must take pace 

is in having the legal system available to all on a more 

equal footing and in the response to social disorder 

through the administration of criminal justice. 

 

Law, after all, is manifestation of the self-determination 

ideology that has shaped both our political system and our 

sense of personal entitlement. Both as individuals and as a 

political community we can make choices with the 

confidence that when those choices are expressed in law 

they will be honoured and that these attempts to shape our 

future condition will be vindicated. But if law is in this 

way so closely tied to our public and private integrity it 

must itself have integrity. That is to say that law — the 

mechanism of justice — must itself meet the underlying 

conceptions of justice which are: the right of all to be 

treated with dignity (with respect for personal capacity 

and not to be enslaved through poverty, poor health, low 

status, or dispossession) and the right to equal treatment. 

Law’s challenge is to reflect in its operation the political 

values that led to its development, values of respect, 

dignity and equality. These values ground the connection 

between people in our political society and govern the 

way we act and develop as a political community. When 



3904 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

law is not serving these values, either because it is not 

available to some or because it is detached from the 

reconciling and restorative function it is meant to 

perform, then it has become hollow and sterile and our 

political community is vulnerable to the diseases of low 

commitment, resentment over tyranny and bitterness over 

being rendered invisible and insignificant. When we 

worry about inadequacies in the administration of justice 

we are doing nothing less than worrying about the future 

of our community. 

 

Now I’ve wanted to make reference to that particular long 

quotation to explain why it is that we are so careful when we 

make changes to our justice system because as John Whyte and 

Thomas Gusa say, when we are concerned about the integrity of 

how our justice system works, we’re then also concerned about 

how our community works. And it’s very important when one 

makes changes to any piece of the judicial system that we are 

doing it with that in mind. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we are looking at changes to how 

we function as it relates to the justices of the peace, whether 

they be minor changes or more major changes, we always have 

to keep in mind that what we are affecting is the integrity of 

how we treat each other as citizens in our community and how 

we are setting up the proper protections for them in the 

processes that we use. 

 

Now this particular piece of legislation is quite interesting and 

in some ways straightforward, but it does make some changes 

that we need to talk about a bit before we allow it to proceed to 

another stage. And I’m sure there’ll be some of my colleagues 

that may actually want to add some comments as well. 

 

But the minister when he introduced this legislation, he 

basically said it was about a simple point of increasing the age 

of retirement of justices of the peace from 65 to 70. Now this is 

not uncommon legislation in these ages as we end up having a 

much longer life expectancy. And also, I think, roles for people 

in the community who have developed wisdom and sort of 

sagacity are basically to be revered and honoured. In a way, 

we’re making use of some of our elders and making sure that 

they get a chance to use their life experience or the experience 

they’ve had in a particular profession to assist in the overall 

justice system. 

 

And I think all of that does fit with the points that I made from 

the quote, which is what we’re concerned about . . . is the 

integrity of the overall justice system. 

 

So what we have here — and I think it’ll be important to go 

through and look at some of the clauses — is that we are 

making amendments to The Justices of the Peace Act. Now one 

of the sort of . . . amendment goes through all of the clauses that 

are here, relates to eliminating the word “presiding justices of 

the peace” or “non-presiding justices of the peace.” Basically 

we’re going to talk about all the justices of the peace in the 

same way, and get rid of that term throughout the legislation. 

 

I think that’s probably a reasonable thing to do given that there 

appears to be much more direct supervision now as set out in 

section 10 of the amending Bill. This section talks about section 

13 of the Act itself and that which is The Justices of the Peace 

Act, 1988. And section 13 is repealed and replaced, and it ends 

up then talking about the role that the chief judge of the 

Provincial Court has in providing the general direction and 

supervision over the duties and sittings of the Justice of the 

Peace. 

 

And this is not necessarily a dramatic change, but it is clarifying 

the roles and the responsibilities within the judicial system. 

What happens by eliminating the word “presiding” and the 

other clause of “non-presiding justice of the peace” also, I 

think, further clarifies the responsibility and the 

interconnectedness of the whole judicial system. So we have a 

number of clauses that do that, and you’ll see if one goes to the 

legislation that some of the references are basically making sure 

that that effect is shown right throughout the Bill. 

 

I’d also point out that — and I think I’m correct in saying — 

that in this discussion now we’re also looking at the French 

version of the Act because this is a bilingual Bill, and there are 

basically the same changes being made in both the French 

version and the English version as we proceed. 

 

Now another area that one gets into is I think one that is 

interesting and probably has some historical background, and 

that is basically section 5. What happens in this amending Bill 

is that section 5 says that sections 5 to 7 of the existing Bill 

from 1988 are repealed, and some new sections are placed in 

their stead. And so basically the new sections do this. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The old section had a very direct statement, or the old section, 

the existing section, the one that’s in effect right now. It said 

that: 

 

Unless otherwise provided by law, no barrister or solicitor 

shall be appointed or act as a justice of the peace during 

the time he continues to practise as a barrister or solicitor. 

 

So effectively what we had was a practising lawyer was not 

allowed to be a justice of the peace. 

 

The new legislation ends up making some changes on this, and 

it effectively removes the prohibition on practising lawyers 

acting as justices of the peace. But it does go and, I think quite 

logically, sets out some of the things that a justice of the peace 

cannot do, which effectively removes the kinds of conflicts that 

the previous, or the existing provision is concerned about. 

 

So the new legislation will make it clear that a justice of the 

peace, while they’re in their office as a justice of the peace, that 

they’re not allowed to practise criminal law, they’re not allowed 

to act as a lawyer, legal counsel for or against the Government 

of Saskatchewan or the Government of Canada, or that they’re 

not allowed to be in a position of conflict with their duties as a 

justice of the peace. 

 

And once again, this goes back to the integrity of the whole 

judicial system. The point being that as individuals who may 

come into a situation dealing with especially the criminal justice 

system, it has to be not only justice done but has to be justice is 

seen to be done. And so any kinds of conflicts are to be 

eliminated. 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3905 

Now there are further restrictions on who is actually in a 

conflict of interest and — this is important to note — the kinds 

of people that cannot be justices of the peace under the new 

plan that is going to be set out when this particular Bill takes 

effect. 

 

And so some of those people who would be deemed to be 

ineligible because of a conflict would be an employee of the 

Government of Saskatchewan or a Crown corporation, so those 

people cannot be justices of the peace. Or you can’t be an 

employee of a police service within the meaning of The Police 

Act, so in other words Regina, Saskatoon, Weyburn, Moose 

Jaw, P.A. [Prince Albert], a couple other places in the province, 

or the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 

 

Also you’d be in a conflict if you’re a member of the Corps of 

Commissionaires. And you’re also in a conflict if you’re a 

member of a board as defined under The Police Act — so in 

other words one of the municipal police boards in the province 

— or if you are a member of a council of a municipality. So that 

means you cannot be a Justice of the Peace if you’re a 

councillor in one of our cities or towns or if you’re a reeve or a 

councillor in a rural municipality. 

 

And it makes it quite clear once again, to preserve the integrity 

of the system, that any person who might be a Justice of the 

Peace and then is elected or becomes one of these other 

conflicted positions, the appointment may be cancelled 

immediately. And so those points of integrity of the system are 

preserved. 

 

Now it is also set out clearly in the new legislation that people 

who are court officials under The Court Officials Act can be 

appointed as justices of the peace. In other words, the 

traditional role of court clerks being also justices of the peace to 

allow them to do various steps within the judicial system, that 

role is being preserved and . . . But clearly those roles have to 

be done within the regulations that are set out within the various 

court Acts and The Court Officials Act in Saskatchewan. 

 

So we have a change here which is allowing for practising 

lawyers to do this role, but it quite clearly adds many 

restrictions. And there probably wouldn’t be too many 

practising lawyers who would qualify without getting into one 

of the conflicts that’s mentioned. So it ends up being a 

interesting change, but I think one that is positive. 

 

Now the next section in some ways is the core of this 

legislation, and that relates to the term of office. And basically 

section 8 is repealed and they put in a new section 8, and it ends 

up setting out when a person can reach the age of retirement. 

And the old legislation had the term, 65 years. This one has the 

age of 70 years as being the retirement time. And so that will 

obviously add some more years of experience for people who 

are still able to provide this service. 

 

I think it also reflects the fact that sometimes people get into 

these roles of justices of the peace as they’ve retired or gone 

into some second career, and they’ll end up doing this as a 

contribution to their community, especially in some of the rural 

areas. And often they gain experience, say from age 55 to 65 or 

from 60 to 65. And under the present system, all of a sudden 

when they really feel comfortable in the role, their role is 

finished. And so what this legislation I think will do is allow for 

another five years of experience from people who have the 

energy and the wisdom to continue in that role. And so I think 

that’s a good idea. 

 

It’s also a reflection of the changing community that we live in, 

which is that our elderly population can serve great roles within 

the community much longer than what we had thought in other 

generations. And so, so this will end up with a continuance of 

the role until age 70, if a person is able to do that. 

 

Now I think the other changes that we see in the legislation 

make changes around gender issues so that it’s got gender 

neutral language throughout the legislation and that’s obviously 

an important factor as well. 

 

And then I think practically, we end up with legislation that 

effectively modernizes some aspects of this 1988 legislation, 

extends the retirement age to age 70, and also I think adds some 

new ability to administer the whole area effectively. 

 

One other or a couple other areas that I’ll comment on that I 

think it’s important to look at. One of the areas where they do 

make some changes is in clause 15(d) which . . . clause 15 is the 

regulatory or the regulation-making clause and subsection (d) 

relates to, right now, prescribing a schedule of fees and 

allowances that may be paid to justices of the peace. 

 

This has been somewhat of a difficult situation as more and 

more is being asked of the justices of the peace within local 

communities. Some of the original ways of remunerating the 

justices of the peace were — what would I say? — I guess they 

were somewhat parsimonious. They would end up costing the 

people who were involved more money to actually drive to a 

community to actually get somebody out of jail or do that, than 

what they were getting paid. And so this made it harder and 

harder to recruit people to do the job. 

 

And so what this change will do in section 15(d) is that it sets 

out the way of allowing for the chief judge, obviously with 

some advice from the minister and staff, the methods of 

remuneration so that people are properly paid for what is being 

done. And so I think this is a positive step. It gives some more 

flexibility. And it possibly can recognize that in certain 

communities, the ways that justices of the peace are paid need 

to be changed to reflect that fact. 

 

It’s kind of like, sometimes they would pay per document 

signed or per appearance of an accused in their presence. And 

that might have worked if you didn’t have to travel very far and 

if there was quite a volume of them so that you would end up 

getting paid an appropriate amount. But in some areas where 

you might only handle one or two or three cases, that method of 

remuneration was not fair at all. And so this will allow for that 

kind of a change. 

 

Another provision that they’re making in this legislation is just 

to, I guess, make it clearer how a retiring Justice of the Peace 

transfers their records and documents to somebody who 

succeeds them. And I think once again that’s important, because 

as the roles and responsibilities of justices of the peace are 

increased or expanded, then the records that they have and the 

information that they have needs to be protected in a more 



3906 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

formal way. And what that does is, once again, preserve the 

integrity of the overall system and provide, to those of us in the 

community who are concerned about our rights, another piece 

of confidence in the system. 

 

So we know, we also know that any of the changes that are 

going to be made in this new legislation will continue the roles 

of the existing justices of the peace, because it’s obviously 

important that the experience that they have is brought forward 

as we continue to make changes that, once again, preserve the 

integrity of the judicial system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was my pleasure as minister of Justice to work 

with justices of the peace and with the judicial system in 

general for quite a number of years. 

 

And I want to end my comments here. And I will, I think, 

adjourn debate when I finish these comments because I know 

some of my other colleagues may want to speak to this another 

time. But what I would want to say is that the individuals who 

put their names forward as justices of the peace within our 

system in Saskatchewan have done a very good job in 

responding to the pressures that are on them in their local 

communities. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And I know it’s often a bit of a difficult task. We ended up 

eventually in the Justice department advertising for these jobs in 

the local community because sometimes it was hard to find 

enough people who would volunteer. And even with 

advertising, it wasn’t always that easy to get people to do the 

job because often they would be called in to deal with their 

friends or their neighbours in some very, very difficult 

situations. 

 

But I guess what I would want to say is that the people we have 

in Saskatchewan who have stepped forward to do these jobs, 

right on the front line of the criminal justice system primarily, 

have done very good service for all of us. And anything we can 

do to enhance their jobs, protect their jobs, make sure that 

they’re an integral part of the system, but that they also preserve 

the community integrity — that’s the kinds of things that we 

want to support. 

 

So I know that some of my colleagues also want to comment on 

this legislation. And hopefully some of the comments that I’ve 

made here will assist as we move forward. And so I will 

adjourn the debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment on debate on Bill No. 112. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 113 — The 

Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it gives me a great deal of pleasure to have the 

opportunity on behalf of the fine folks of Regina Northeast to 

take part in the debate in this House, and to do so on this 

particular Bill, Bill 113, An Act to make consequential 

amendments resulting from an enactment of The Justices of the 

Peace Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at first glance you can see that the Bill is a 

fairly short Bill, a Bill of only nine clauses. And that would lead 

one to think it’s probably really not having a huge effect on the 

operation of a government or the delivery systems of justice to 

our fine folks in Saskatchewan here because it’s a short Act. 

But it is I think kind of an important Act because it does affect 

seven other Acts. So it’s the old case, as many of us in 

government have realized, the longer we’ve been here, the more 

we realize that all the legislation of government in one way or 

another is hooked together. It interacts with each other. And in 

this particular case, when you’re making one small change in 

the Act, it affects several other Acts. 

 

So it’s sort of like the, somebody once said, the domino effect. 

You make one small change here and it affects various Acts 

throughout, down the system here. So this is why when those 

changes take place, it is very important that they be well studied 

before they are implemented, and to ensure as much as possible 

that the effects on the other Acts are not negative effects but are 

positive effects. 

 

Or if there is going to be the negative effect on, somewhere 

along the line, on an Act somewhere, that there’s the 

opportunity for government to address that and make the 

necessary changes within that Act, so that it cushions that 

effect, cushions the negativity of it. Perhaps changes can be 

made to where it can actually be made neutral so it doesn’t have 

a negative effect on Saskatchewan people. Or perhaps, even 

more fortunately, going into the Act even deeper, the necessary 

changes can be made so it doesn’t have a negative effect any 

more but it has a positive effect. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, it is very important for the 

opposition members to have access to these Bills as early as 

possible so that we can do the due diligence, do the study to 

ensure that these are nothing but positive effects as it works its 

way through the system. And in order to do that, you need to 

talk to those who are affected by those changes. 

 

And in this case, it was having an effect on seven Acts — fairly 

broad then. It’s fairly broad and a number of various 

individuals, a number of groups may be affected by this change. 

And it’s the responsibility of the opposition, once they receive a 

copy of the Act from the government, to contact these various 

groups, contact these individuals out there as best that we can 

identify and share this with them as to whether or not this 

particular change is going to be negative upon them or upon 

their group. Or do they see this as perhaps a positive change or, 

at the bare minimum, sort of a neutral change and it’s basically 

not too much more than housekeeping. 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3907 

And I note, Mr. Speaker, one of the Acts here that’s being 

affected is The Emergency Protection for Victims of Child 

Sexual Abuse and Exploitation Act. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

raises some memories in my mind of times gone past when I 

had the opportunity as a government member to serve on the 

committee that did the consultations across this great province 

in regards to that particular issue. 

 

And that committee, Mr. Speaker, was co-chaired . . . It was an 

interesting committee because it was an all-party committee. 

But the committee was co-chaired by Mr. Peter Prebble, the 

then NDP member from Saskatoon Greystone, and Arlene Julé 

who was a Sask Party member from Humboldt. And they were 

the Co-Chairs of the committee that I, along with a couple of 

my colleagues here and a number of members of the 

government, then opposition, also participated in that 

committee as we did a very thorough job of reviewing that 

particular issue. At least in my opinion very thorough, because 

we certainly held meetings here and hearings here in the 

Legislative Assembly, and we had various individuals from the 

community, various groups come down and testify before the 

committee on this particular issue. 

 

And we, I think the committee generally, were in total 

agreement that we wanted to do a thorough job reviewing the 

particular issue that we were entrusted with, so we certainly 

advertised. I know we advertised in all the daily papers 

throughout the province that these hearings were being held, 

and the time that these hearings were being held, and the 

method of contacting the committee through the Clerk to set up 

appointments and opportunity to appear before the committee 

and provide evidence or statements before the committee. 

 

And that was certainly taken up by the community. It was very 

well done. The community certainly reacted to that opportunity. 

And we had a good turnout of witnesses from the community 

before the committee here in the legislature. I know that we sat 

a number of days. And we heard a lot of information coming to 

us, to the committee members, from folks, from the front-line 

folks, that experienced this issue. Some victims, certainly my 

hat’s off to them for having the courage to come forward and to 

share with the committee some of their experiences and some of 

their stories. 

 

But the committee wanted to ensure the fact that we had ample 

opportunity to everyone or gave ample opportunity to everyone 

in the province here to have access to the committee. Now we 

realized that not everyone had the financial ability to travel 

down to Regina, to maybe stay here for two or three days while 

they waited their turn or while they provided evidence and 

statements to the committee. So we felt it was necessary that the 

committee should go on the road and take our hearings to the 

people, rather than waiting for the people to come here because 

simply it wouldn’t be fair, but in many cases it wouldn’t be 

possible, for those folks to come to the hearings here. 

 

So we went on the road, and we held several meetings 

throughout the province. Certainly we held meetings here in 

Regina and we had a good turnout here, but we also went to 

Saskatoon. And we had hearings in Saskatoon where local 

people from the community of Saskatoon were able to appear 

before the committee and give us their testimony, give us their 

witnessing. And certainly that was informative and was, for me 

as a member, it was educational. 

 

But we also wanted to see what effect may be in northern 

Saskatchewan, so we had hearings in La Ronge and then we 

travelled the rest of Saskatchewan. I know we had hearings in 

Fort Qu’Appelle and in Yorkton. I’m just working from 

memory here, I think North Battleford, if I remember right and, 

I believe, in Lloydminster. So we travelled throughout the 

province. And we had plenty of opportunity, I suppose, for 

folks to come forward and provide us with their experiences, a 

testimony of their experiences, the witnessing of their 

experiences on this particular issue. 

 

And it was very, very well received, I think, by the people of 

Saskatchewan. And as a result of that, the government was able 

to put together with the co-operation of the opposition, because 

as I said it was an all-party committee, a committee that worked 

together very, very closely and I think very co-operatively. 

 

It was an issue which was, from my own personal point of 

view, and I think all the members that were on that committee 

would agree, that it was a very emotional, emotional issue. 

Because quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, it was a part of society we 

heard about and a part of society that I suppose we all knew was 

out there, but we just really didn’t pay much attention to it 

because it was something that was easy to put out of mind. But 

it was a very emotional issue. 

 

And I think all the committee members were touched by many 

of the people who came forward, many of the victims who 

came forward and offered testimony, but also many of the 

people who work on the streets each and every day out there. 

And they shared with us some of their experiences and some of 

their thoughts and some of their concerns and, thankfully, many 

of their recommendations. 

 

And I know that the government took, and the committee took 

these recommendations to heart, put it into a report, and tabled 

the report here in this House. And from that, the government 

was able to take the information that was included in that report 

and put together a Bill that was supported by both the 

opposition at the time and the government members. And it was 

a Bill that was an example, I think, of what can really happen 

when both parties, both opposition and government parties, 

work together for a common cause. 

 

And there’s no question that that was a meaningful process, and 

a process that I think was really appreciated by the people of 

Saskatchewan, particularly those who participated and those 

who gave witness, because it was done in an air of co-operation. 

There was no political bickering back and forth. Certainly there 

was issues to be decided, and we often had in camera meetings, 

but those in camera meetings resulted in a decision where we all 

agreed to. 

 

And it was an experience that I will carry with me all my life 

because it was something that I learned a lot from. And it was 

an experience that I think it shows — for those of us in this 

Assembly here, often we see this as a bit of a competition back 

and forth — but it shows that when there’s a greater cause at 

hand, that elected people can work together for that common 

cause and find a solution that works in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people and do so collectively in a co-operative 



3908 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

atmosphere. 

 

So I think that, Mr. Speaker, was something that was 

accomplished. And I’m pleased to say that I was a part of that. 

It was a very emotional issue. I know it was one that would 

cause you — cause me, at least, on occasions — to lay awake at 

night. And in a lot of ways to thank my lucky stars for the good 

fortune of the life that I had been given, and to wonder what I 

could do as a human being to help those others who maybe find 

themselves less fortunate, and if there was a role that I could 

play in some small way to improve their lot in life. And I’m 

sure that there is, and I think probably on an ongoing basis 

there’s roles that we could all be playing. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this, as I said, this particular Bill has an 

impact upon seven other Bills. And it is one that we need to 

review quite closely to ensure that these impacts are not that of 

a negative nature, and that the people of Saskatchewan who 

may find themselves impacted by these Bills don’t find 

themselves on the wrong end of it and find themselves being 

hurt or being victimized or being misplaced in some manner, 

shape, or form because of the changes to the Act. 

 

Now I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, that the government has done 

its homework before it introduced these amendments. And I 

would hope the government has at least. And I’m kind of 

hoping that at some point in time here before this Bill is passed 

into law, that we’ll get that assurance from the government that 

they did carry out a meaningful consultation process, and that 

they did talk to good folks out there to ensure that those who are 

involved in the implementation of certainly the Bill, The 

Emergency Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and 

Exploitation Act, those people who are implementing this 

program on a daily basis on our streets, have they been 

contacted? And do they see . . . These changes here, do they 

have any impact upon their ability to continue the 

programming, continue the good work that they do? 

 

[16:30] 

 

And I would hope the government had that consultation, had 

those discussions with those people and those groups out there 

to ensure that these changes don’t have a negative impact upon 

their ability to continue to do the work that they do. Because 

that work is very, very important to us as a society and certainly 

to us as a province because they provide some very valuable, 

valuable support to people out there who find themselves in 

need of that support. 

 

And it goes on to say that the designation of the justices of the 

peace here in section . . . Like well the, “Section 15 is repealed 

and the following [is] substituted”. And it says: 

 

Designation of justices of the peace [and] 

15(1) [of the Act] Notwithstanding subsection 13(2) of 

The Justices of the Peace Act, 1988, the chief judge of 

the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan may designate a 

justice of the peace to hear and determine applications 

pursuant to this Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that in itself is something that, you know, we 

need to ensure that that system is in place and that system has 

been certainly working. If it is working, is it working well? And 

is there any ways and means that we could improve upon that 

system to ensure that the justices of the peace have the tools 

that they need in order to complete their work, to do their work? 

Is there a way we can streamline that so we can lessen any 

backlogs perhaps of cases that they may have or the work that’s 

before them? Is there a way to improve that system so that it 

can flow much easier through the system here and we can have 

perhaps a quicker turnaround on these cases? That’s some of 

the questions I would have. 

 

I mean have we given the justices of the peace the tools that 

they need to work with? Or is this an opportunity perhaps . . . 

Here’s an opportunity now that the Act is open, here’s the 

opportunity to have those discussions with the justices of the 

peace and make those changes now that the Act is open. Make 

those changes so that they do have the tools, they do have the 

tools that they can facilitate their roles in our justice system in a 

manner and shape so that we can perhaps speed up the process. 

 

We can perhaps reduce the backlog, or perhaps even, if we’re 

lucky, eliminate them so that when they’re called upon to do 

their jobs, the justices of the peace have the tools to be able to 

do them in an efficient and an effective way. 

 

And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the government officials 

had looked at this as an opportunity, with the Act being open, to 

be able to fix those things. Sometimes they’re just small things. 

Sometimes they’re just little things. But if they’re fixed, they 

make life so much easier for those officials who have to carry 

out their responsibilities as designated through our court 

system. 

 

And it says if the Chief Justice designates a Justice of the Peace 

to hear applications pursuant to this Act, the Chief Justice shall 

specify “. . . the place at which and the period during which the 

justice may hear those applications.” 

 

So there you go, Mr. Speaker. Is this an opportunity here to 

streamline the system, to make it operate smoother? Is there an 

opportunity here to ensure that the — once this Act is opened 

— to ensure that the changes made here are the right changes 

that give the proper tools? I would even go so far as to say 

modernize tools to ensure that our justice system works 

efficiently and effectively with our justices of the peace. Are we 

giving them what they need — the support that they need, the 

resources that they need — in order to effectively carry out their 

responsibilities? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the questions that we here in 

the opposition are wondering and are asking and I really need 

the time in order to talk to the people who are on the front lines 

of this particular issue to find out if this couldn’t be an 

opportunity to make the necessary changes as they see them, as 

they recognize them because they’re the front-line people. 

They’re the ones with the issues. They’re the ones that have the 

answers to those issues. And perhaps this is an opportunity to 

make those necessary changes to streamline the system, make it 

work more efficiently and more effectively for all people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Chief Justice may: 

 

. . . delegate the exercise of the power to designate a 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3909 

justice of the peace to hear applications pursuant to this 

Act to a supervising justice of the peace appointed 

pursuant to The Justices of the Peace Act, 1988, and the 

exercise of that power . . . [may be supervised by justices 

of the peace] is deemed to be an exercise by the . . . [Chief 

Justice]”. 

 

There you go, Mr. Speaker. Once again, is this a smooth 

operating system? Is this the most efficient way we can do this? 

And perhaps it is. But has those discussions been carried out? 

Has the officials of government looked into this and have they 

asked those people, those people who work in the justice system 

each and every day, is this the best way of doing it? Is this the 

best way of doing it? Or can there be changes made to make it 

more efficient and more effective? 

 

And that’s the role, I think, of government, is to make things 

work in the smoothest, quickest, most efficient way possible, 

yet effective and fair. But we want to make sure that we can do 

it as efficiently as possible because we want to (a) certainly be 

able to meet the needs of those people who find themselves in 

the justice system. 

 

But we also want to be able to meet the needs of the taxpayer to 

ensure that they’re getting full value for their tax dollar being 

spent, they’re getting the services that are required, and they’re 

getting it in a manner and shape that is efficient and effective — 

and they’re doing so because we are giving them the tools to 

provide that service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if those tools aren’t there, if the justices of 

peace feel that they don’t have the powers — this is perhaps the 

powers that they need to be effective and efficient in their jobs 

— this is perhaps the opportunity to take a look at that. Here’s 

the opportunity. 

 

We have the Act open. We’re making changes to the Act now. 

The government’s making changes to the Act. And this is an 

opportunity to make sure that those changes are the right ones, 

the correct changes, so that it provides efficient and effective 

services to give the tools to the justices of the peace so that they 

can provide and do their job to the best of their ability and do it 

in a very efficient and effective way. And this, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t think can be repeated too many times because this is what 

I think we want to achieve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we go on, as we look at section 7 as amended 

— it’s clause 3 in the Act — it’s The Homesteads Act, 1989. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it is being repealed, or a section of it is 

being repealed, and the following is being substituted: “a justice 

of the peace appointed or continued in office pursuant to The 

Justices of the Peace Act, 1988”. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, The Homesteads Act is a long-standing Act 

in this province. I believe it was brought back in probably by, I 

think 1944-45, something like that, the first version of the 

homestead Act was introduced. And it is a very valuable piece 

of protection. As you know, Mr. Speaker, it protects the 

homestead or the home quarter. As far as farmers is concerned, 

it protects the home quarter. And it doesn’t allow a farmer to, 

without consultation of his spouse, to be able to go out and 

mortgage it or put it up for security for loans that may be at risk. 

The homestead Act requires that the spouse give consent before 

that happens. And I think that’s a very valuable tool because I 

think to some degree it protects the family. It gives second 

sober thought before the home quarter, the very home that 

people live in and the family’s in, could be put up for risk. 

 

And I think that’s certainly an Act that is a very important Act 

in this province and has served this province well over the last 

number of years. And does it need to be reviewed every once in 

a while? Yes, it does. Like all of our Acts, we need to review 

them every once in a while to make sure that they’re relevant 

and they pertain to the situations of the day. And as our 

economies change and our society changes, we need to review 

these Acts to make sure that they’re still relevant. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we want to 

lessen the intent of the Act. We want to make sure that that’s 

not the case. And that would be one more of the questions I 

would have of government. 

 

Have they done this study? Can they give the opposition the 

assurance that these changes to The Homesteads Act certainly 

doesn’t change the intent of the Act, and doesn’t change the 

level of the protection the Act provides to families across this 

great province? If they can, then I would like to know how they 

arrived at that assurance. What comfort level do they have that 

it hasn’t changed the Act and hasn’t changed the intent of the 

Act? And how did they arrive at that comfort level? And by 

what vehicle did they obtain that information and how much 

time was spent gathering it? Who did they talk to? How was the 

consultations done? 

 

Those are many of the questions that I would like to have 

answered and, Mr. Speaker, and if we can’t get those answers 

from government, I guess we’ll have to get it from the groups 

that are affected by the changes or potentially affected by the 

changes to The Homesteads Act. 

 

As we go on, Mr. Speaker, we look closer at the Act, we notice 

clause 4 is The Local Government Elections Act and as it is set 

out, the amendment is in the manner set forth in this section 

and, Mr. Speaker, once again we look at the local government. 

 

Local government’s a very, very important part of our 

governing system of this province, and I had the opportunity to 

spend 10 years in local government as the councillor in the RM 

[rural municipality] of Clayton, 333. And certainly every level 

of government has its role and has its responsibilities and I 

think that local government certainly has that, certainly has that 

responsibility too. They have certain services and certain 

responsibilities that are entrusted upon the local government to 

be able to address on a local level. Quite frankly I think it’s fair 

to say that nobody knows the local areas and local issues as 

well as the people who live there. And that’s because they are 

experiencing those issues on a regular basis. 

 

And one example, Mr. Speaker, was this government’s 

introduction of a bounty on coyotes. I think that was ill thought 

out, Mr. Speaker. I think it was one of, once again, it was the 

government’s knee-jerk reaction to an issue. Is there areas of 

our province that have problems with coyotes? Yes, there is — 

there’s no doubt about that — but there’s other areas of the 

province that don’t have. 

 



3910 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2009 

So this would’ve been an issue that would’ve been much better 

handled by local government. Certainly the municipalities 

would’ve been in a much better position to be able to determine 

what was the effect of that coyote problem in their area. Were 

the people in their area, the ranchers or farmers in the area, 

being affected in a negative way by the coyote population? If it 

was, they would have the tools under their powers to be able to 

deal with it. And they would have been able to put on a bounty, 

or they would have been able to arrive at some mechanism to 

address the overpopulation of the coyotes in that municipality, 

whereas in other municipalities it may not be the case. The 

coyotes may not be a problem. 

 

And yet now we have a bounty right across this great province 

of ours that simply doesn’t balance off with the need. We have 

areas that don’t have a coyote problem but there’s a bounty on. 

We have areas that have a coyote problem that there’s a bounty 

on them too. So is there a level to ensure that those producers 

out there who perhaps are experiencing that coyote problem, is 

there a way of ensuring that they are being able to be provided 

with the information necessary so that they can address their 

problem? 

 

And there’s probably the same thing could apply to gopher 

problems and who knows what else? Coyotes, there’s all kinds 

of things that can fall into play here. 

 

So what we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is make sure that the 

changes this Bill brings to The Local Government Election Act, 

how does that affect, how does that affect the local government 

and their ability to carry on their duties and how does that affect 

their election process? 

 

I’ve had the experience of going through an election process on 

— what was it? — five occasions, I guess it was, in municipal 

government. And it was a two-year term. As a councillor, you 

were elected for two years, and I suppose that there are pluses 

and minuses to that. There will be those who say that two years 

aren’t really long enough because, as a councillor, two years 

doesn’t give you much time to start to receive some of the 

results of the work that you’ve put in because in a lot of cases 

you invest time. You invest work. You invest ideas. And it 

takes more than two years before you see the turnaround or you 

start to see the effects coming back. 

 

So there will be those who say, well two years isn’t long 

enough for a councillor, that the term should be longer than 

that, and that it would give then the councillor the opportunity 

to be able to receive, start to reap some of the rewards, I guess 

you would say, of their efforts that they’ve put in in the first 

couple of years. 

 

And that’s true, Mr. Speaker, but I think you’ll see, when you 

take a close look at rural Saskatchewan particularly, that you 

won’t see too many times where a councillor only serves two 

years. If that is the case, there’s a real reason for it, I would 

think, because my experience is that the general population are 

willing to give a councillor a little time to prove him or herself 

and to see if their willingness to work and their willingness to 

improve the area — in this case a division, municipal division 

— if that is the case, then they were willing to give them the 

time to be able to invest the thoughts, invest the processes, 

invest the time into the process to reap some positive rewards, 

not for themselves but for the people that they represent in their 

district. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So I would think, Mr. Speaker, that a two-year term is a 

reasonable amount. That’s something that we have become 

accustomed to. And you know, I’m certainly open to the idea of 

the discussion, of looking at changes to that. But I would want 

to hear from those people who are today serving in our local 

governments before I would move in that direction. 

 

And that would be one thing I’d like to know, you know, what 

is the changes here in this amendment? What effect do these 

changes have on The Local Government Election Act? And does 

it have a positive effect or a negative effect? How is it seen by 

the people who are serving today in our local governments, 

whether it be in municipal or whether it be in urban? This 

probably would have, probably would — does — have an effect 

on both of them. And I’d like to know how they feel about this 

effect. I mean, is it a meaningful effect? Or is it an effect that 

they see as being disrespectful and not being supportive of their 

particular role? 

 

The question is, were they consulted? Did this government talk 

to the local government officials out there? Did they talk to the 

local government officials or just their superstructure? Did they 

talk to just the leadership or did they actually talk to people who 

serve on a day-by-day basis on our local governments? That’s 

one of the questions I would like to have an answer to is, to 

what extent was the consultations carried out with local 

government. And in what way were those consultations carried 

out? Were there meaningful discussions by groups of people? 

Or was it a letter sent out, perhaps looking for information? Or 

is it just an assumption? Or was it just information passed down 

from the governing body, their leadership, the governing body? 

 

Those are some of the questions that would bear asking, and 

those are some of the questions that I would like to have 

answers to because those, as I say . . . and maybe I’m, you 

know, a bit biased because I have served on municipal council. 

But I really believe strongly in the role of local government 

because there is a meaningful role for local government to play 

in our system, in our society. I think it could be enhanced. I 

think there’s a lot more responsibility local government could 

carry. And I think they could carry it very efficiently and very 

effectively. 

 

And I think that’s something that perhaps here’s an opportunity. 

Here was an opportunity with the Act being opened up and 

certainly The Local Government Election Act being opened up 

to accommodate the changes here. 

 

Perhaps this was an opportunity to look at . . . can we expand 

the roles of local government? Can we expand the roles of the 

reeves? Can we expand the roles of the councillor? Can we 

expand the roles of the aldermen and the mayors? Can they be 

more effective in doing their job? Is there tools that we as a 

provincial government could provide them and give them the 

opportunity to be able to become a larger player as far as 

providing the services to their constituents and to their 

ratepayers. 

 



December 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3911 

And I’ve often wondered, Mr. Speaker, why we don’t sit down 

in a meaningful way with local government leadership 

particularly and explore those possibilities. Open that door. 

Let’s take the top off the box and say, let’s think outside the 

box for a minute. Is there some legislative changes that we can 

make? Is there some opportunity that we can provide greater 

levels of powers or greater levels of authority to the local 

government that would give them the ability to make decisions 

on their own and be able to finance those decisions and be able 

carry out those decisions that are their decisions? And quite 

frankly they may be in the position to make that decision 

because they are the local people; they are the local 

government. They’re right there. They’re right on the front 

lines. 

 

And I’ve often wondered why that wouldn’t take place. I think 

if the officials, the leadership of local government was 

approached with the ideas . . . Let’s take a really good time, to 

take a meaningful time to take a look at the role of local 

government, the role of the provincial government and how the 

two work together, but how changes could possibly be made to 

improve the role of local government, to improve the ability for 

local government to be able to make decisions that are in their 

best interest, their decisions, and be able to finance those 

decisions and implement those decisions with their own 

financing without having to rely on government grants and 

government handouts from all levels — both provincial and 

federal levels. 

 

I often wondered why we wouldn’t be willing to look at 

empowering the local governments with a greater ability to 

raise revenue, to be able to finance the issues, finance the wants 

and the desires of their community. And that’s something that I 

wondered when I was in local government, I wondered when I 

was in . . . part of the government and now of course in 

opposition. Why wouldn’t we do that? Why wouldn’t we 

provide the local government with some type of secure, 

long-term funding that they could rely on so that when they’re 

making their plans for their future, they could plan beyond just 

next year. They can plan into the future. They can make a 

5-year or a 10-year plan and work towards it. 

 

And they would be able to do so with the knowledge and the 

security of knowing that they have a certain level of income that 

they’d be able to rely on that because it’d be difficult to make 

decisions — program decisions and capital decisions — if you 

don’t know what level of income you may have in the future. 

And I think we’ve all experienced that in some manner, shape, 

or form. But if you have an idea, if you had an idea at least of 

the level of income that you can expect into the future, then you 

can make those decisions long term and in most cases in the 

best interests of the local taxpayer because you can make those 

decisions in an efficient way and that you know that you’re 

going to have that level of income. 

 

For example, when the government made a commitment to the 

local government to fund them at 1 per cent of the PST . . . that 

is something that I noticed in a story in today’s paper. There’s 

some suggestion that government may be backing away from 

that promise now, maybe breaking that commitment that they 

made to local government. And I noticed that our mayor here in 

the city of Regina said that he expects the government to live up 

to their commitment. They had made that commitment in good 

faith, and the local governments have based their future plans 

on that commitment, and he does expect the government to live 

up to that commitment. And I would hope the government 

would because, as I said before, local government is a very 

important mechanism, is a very important vehicle that provides 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s the same constituent, whether it be the constituent to the 

city, the constituent to the province here. It’s the same 

constituent. In this case, it’s the same taxpayer. So we want to 

see, Mr. Speaker, that the government fulfills that commitment 

to local government to ensure that local government has a stable 

flow of financing, so that they can make those long-term 

decisions based on that security of knowledge, that they will 

have that level of income on a regular basis here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of other, number of other 

parts to this Bill that certainly needs close examination. But I 

see the Government House Leader is anxious to move things 

along, so with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 113. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the Standing Committee on House Services, 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice, Crown and Central 

Agencies, and the Economy to meet this evening, I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that, in order to accommodate the working of committees, the 

House do now stand adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The House stands adjourned until tomorrow 

afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:54.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3881 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3881 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3881 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3881 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3881 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3881 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3882 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3882 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3882 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3896 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3882 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3882 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3883 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3883 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3883 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3883 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3883 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3884 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3884 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3884 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3884 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3884 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World AIDS Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3885 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3885 

 Support for Producers 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3885 

 Brain Injury Association Recognizes Volunteers 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3885 

 Volleyball Championships Held in Ile-a-la-Crosse 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3886 

 Saskatchewan Book Awards Gala 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3886 

 Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3886 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Big Sky Farms 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3887 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3887 

 Supply of Physicians in Rural Saskatchewan 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3888 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3889 

 Education Capital Spending 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3889 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3890 

 Funding for Boards of Education 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3890 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3890 

 Municipal Operating Grants 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3891 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3891 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Canine Drug Unit in Saskatchewan Jails 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3891 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3892 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3892 



 

 Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3892 

 Bill No. 128 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3893 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3893 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3893 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 111 — The Northern Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3893 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3898 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3902 

 Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3906 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


