




















































Hansard: December 03, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 25A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3945 

 December 3, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature, I‟d like to introduce the spouses of APAS 

[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 

representatives who are in town for the APAS mid-term 

convention. They had a tour of the building this morning, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I‟d like to introduce Edie Marshall from Semans, Lillian 

Kurtz from Stockholm, Richard Weetman from Stewart Valley, 

Gail Boser from Reward, and Vicki Briggs from Whitewood. 

And I‟d ask all members to welcome them to their legislature 

this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to request an 

extended leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for an opportunity for 

extended leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure, great pleasure 

to introduce guests in the gallery that have travelled here from 

Stanley Mission. Perhaps they could stand as I introduce them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to introduce Chief Tammy Cook-Searson, chief of 

Lac La Ronge Indian Band; Brian Hardlotte, Stanley Mission 

band councillor; John Roberts, Stanley Mission band 

councillor; Sol Charles, health district at Stanley Mission; 

James Crawford, Stanley Mission resident; Elder Joe Roberts; 

also Jennifer Proulx, executive assistant to Chief Tammy 

Cook-Searson. These individuals work tirelessly on behalf of 

their community, which has proven itself in many 

accomplishments that they have achieved. One of such . . . 

[inaudible] . . . is the hard work that has been done to build the 

Stanley Mission hockey arena. 

 

The idea first originated with a group of parents that used to 

take their children to La Ronge for hockey games and practices. 

They decided that our youth deserved such a facility in their 

community. 

 

Meetings began in 1993 at which time the indoor rink 

committee was formed. With help of a big group of volunteer 

base from the community, fundraising activities began. This 

consisted of snowmobile rallies, fish derbies, summer and 

winter festivals, and Nevada sales. In 1997, Lac La Ronge 

Indian Band generously committed 50,000 a year for 10 years. 

With fundraising money in place and the commitment from the 

band, the rink committee successfully got a 10-year loan from 

the bank. 

 

Construction began in the spring of 1998 with a lot of in-kind 

help. Carle Service acted as project manager. Graham 

Construction did the concrete and metal work, and the interior 

work was done by a volunteer base from the community. The 

grand opening was on January 29th, 1999. Thanks to the band 

and the continued fundraising efforts of the volunteers, the loan 

is now paid off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 

tremendous community effort of these individuals and welcome 

them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, it‟s a pleasure to 

also acknowledge in your gallery the presence of Chief Tammy 

Cook-Searson and the delegation from Stanley Mission. And 

we join the member opposite in congratulating them on this 

very, very important project and its completion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the province is well served by leaders 

like Chief Tammy Cook-Searson who, in addition to the 

leadership she provides for that First Nation, she‟s also 

obviously an active mother and a marathon runner. And the list 

is long in terms of the chief‟s achievements. And so we want to 

welcome her to her Assembly as well as the delegation from 

Stanley Mission. 

 

And while I‟m on my feet, if I may, Mr. Speaker, there‟s also a 

constituent of mine in your gallery here with the APAS 

delegation. He taught me something called Boys‟ Brigade when 

I was a very young man growing up in Swift Current, through 

church. And he and his family are friends of ours as well as 

being a constituent. I‟d just like to welcome and acknowledge 

Richard Weetman, who is with the APAS group in your gallery 

as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‟s my 

pleasure to rise today and present a petition on behalf of 

concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned over the 

condition of Highway 123. Mr. Speaker, Highway 123 is about 

133 kilometres long and it‟s an important link to the outside 

world for the communities of Cumberland House and 

Cumberland House Cree Nation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the 

only land link to those communities. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to stop denying the money that 



3946 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

was allocated for this highway and to commit to 

immediately providing the repairs to this highway that the 

people of northeastern Saskatchewan were promised. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good 

folks of Cumberland House. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan that 

speaks to the need and the issue that renters are facing in a 

combination in our economy of rising rental rates and low 

vacancy rates in many, many communities. And there are a 

number of constituents of mine that are facing severe rental 

increases that is beyond their ability to afford. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

petitions in support of people with autism. And these people are 

feeling disadvantaged by living in Saskatchewan with 

inadequate autism spectrum disorder strategies and funding. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to commit to 

providing a comprehensive provincial autism strategy that 

is based on proven best practice, evidence-based research, 

treatments, and programming; and given the complexity 

of the disorder and its treatments, the individualized 

funding concept be adapted for parents and guardians of 

autistic individuals. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is the fourth of a series of hundreds and hundreds and 

hundreds of petitions that are coming in. And these are from 

Weyburn, Kronau, Regina, Yellow Grass, Langenburg, 

Churchbridge, Yorkton, Hanley, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, 

Shaunavon, and several others. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

they are paid on average 8 to $10 per hour less than employees 

performing work of equal value in government departments. I‟d 

like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity 

with employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Unity, Wood 

Mountain, and Mossbank. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 915 in Stanley Mission, and the prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to upgrade and repair Highway 915 as 

soon as possible. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion of the graduate 

retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water and who as of not yet had a commitment of 

assistance. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3947 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the residents of 

Duck Lake, Black Lake, Carlton, Prince Albert, Beardy‟s, 

Saskatoon, Chanté Lake, Prince Albert, Perdue, and so on. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

who are concerned that we need a greater whistleblower 

protection Act in our province, Mr. Speaker. Since November 7, 

2011, there has been a greater concern raised. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

That we request the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan pass Bill No. 609, The Whistleblower 

Protection Act, in order to ensure the safety, security, and 

protection of any employee who acts as a whistleblower 

by disclosing information for the greater public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Moose Jaw, 

Regina, Saskatoon, and around the province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992 has 

provided for us a stable environment. The people are concerned 

here about apprenticeship. They‟re concerned about the labour 

relations environment and the quality of work and the safety. 

Now the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009, Mr. Speaker, which dismantles the proud history of 

the building trades in this province, creates instability in 

the labour market, and impacts the quality of training 

required of workers before entering the workforce. 

 

The petition is signed by people from Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, 

Regina, Indian Head, Balgonie, Waseca, Cut Knife, 

Lloydminster, Paradise Hill. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to rise and present a petition in support of 

affordable housing and rents for The Battlefords. The prayer 

reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all from the city of North 

Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. People are 

concerned by the billion dollar fiscal hole, the billion dollar 

deficit created by the Sask Party. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 

so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — I request leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Sutherland has 

requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you. To you and through you to all 

the members of the Legislative Assembly, today I‟d like to 

introduce a friend of mine sitting in the west gallery, Mr. 

Robbie Picard. Mr. Picard I met when I was in the drug unit 

looking into raves and the use of drugs at these raves. He was 

very helpful. And we had lobbied the government of the day to 

bring in legislation to control these parties and unfortunately a 

young woman passed away before any legislation was passed. 

So thank you, Mr. Speaker. Welcome to his Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

 



3948 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Reaction to Budget and Mid-Term Update 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member from Carrot River Valley wins the blue ribbon for the 

most colourful quote of the session. A few weeks ago, Mr. 

Speaker, he was so pleased with his government‟s budget that 

he said he was “. . . happier than a hog with a fresh pail of 

slop.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if slop makes him happy, the mid-term 

financial update must have made him ecstatic. That‟s right, Mr. 

Speaker, because this member once said, and I quote again: 

 

. . . this budget is not only a fantastic and historic budget 

for Saskatchewan but also the best budget in all of 

Canada and probably the best in North America. Oh heck, 

let‟s go a little further, Mr. Speaker. I think it‟s going to 

be the best in the whole world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only words people would agree with today are, 

“oh heck.” 

 

This member, Mr. Speaker, once said that the budget was based 

on a philosophy called get „er done. And he‟s right, Mr. 

Speaker. When it came time to break their promises, what did 

they do? Get „er done. When it came time to cut programs, what 

did they say? Get „er done. When it came time to run the 

biggest deficit since Grant Devine, what did they say? Get „er 

done. That‟s right, Mr. Speaker. And what the people of 

Saskatchewan will say when it comes time to replace this 

government in 2011, they will say, get „er done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 

to rise today and bring to the attention of this House that 

December 3rd is the United Nations International Day of 

Persons with Disabilities. This day was first proclaimed by the 

United Nations in 1992. The goal is to increase awareness and 

understanding of disability issues and promote the rights of 

persons with disabilities. According to the United Nations, Mr. 

Speaker, almost 1 in 10 around the world live with some form 

of a disability. More than 145,000 in our province live with 

disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To help those with disabilities, our government created a 

separate income support program and the new Saskatchewan 

assured income program. Mr. Speaker, nearly 2,400 people 

have enrolled in this new program in just a few short months. 

And we have invested $76.9 million over four years to 

eliminate the 440-person wait-list for residential care for those 

with intellectual disabilities in our province. To date over 260 

people have been taken off that wait-list. 

 

More work is to be done, Mr. Speaker, and this day serves as a 

reminder that we must be diligent and dedicated to the cause of 

promoting inclusiveness and accessibility for all members of 

our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Rules 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this is a Chamber where 

proceedings are governed by many rules. There are rules about 

what we can say, Mr. Speaker, and rules about what we can do. 

There are even rules about what we have to wear. There are no 

rules though, Mr. Speaker, against keeping members from 

doing something in this Chamber that is different from what 

they said they would do in a government press release or on the 

campaign trail. 

 

For instance no rules against campaigning on NDP [New 

Democratic Party] greenhouse gas targets and then abandoning 

your commitment. No rules against pledging to warn people 

about offenders at large and then launching a witch hunt to 

cover up your incompetence. No rules against promising to 

balance the budget and then running a $1 billion deficit. No 

rules against making a rock-solid vow to keep the rainy day 

fund full and then draining it. No rules against negotiating a fair 

revenue-sharing agreement with cities and then tearing that 

agreement up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on. But the Premier recently 

commented in the public rules of this place, and he identified 

another problem with those rules when he told Maclean’s 

magazine — and I couldn‟t have agreed with him more, Mr. 

Speaker — when he told Maclean’s magazine, and I quote: 

 

One of the problems with the rules of our legislature is 

that you can be kicked out for calling a member a liar, and 

yet you can lie. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we couldn‟t agree more. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

northeast. 

 

Turn That Frown Upside Down 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise in this 

House and state that Saskatchewan is still the best place to live 

in Canada despite what the members opposite say. Here‟s why, 

Mr. Speaker. Our economy continues to be one of the strongest 

in Canada, with Saskatchewan having the best job creation in 

the nation. We‟re expected to lead the nation in economic 

growth in 2010, and our province is experiencing the fastest 

pace of population growth in over 50 years. 

 

As a matter of fact, as recently as this morning the Fraser 

Institute says that Saskatchewan is gaining on Alberta‟s 

long-standing claim to having the best investment climate in 

Canada. Saskatchewan is second only to Alberta in the 

institute‟s ranking of the best investment climates in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has delivered the largest income 

and property tax cuts in the history of this province, reduced the 

provincial debt by 40 per cent, made a record investment in 

Saskatchewan‟s infrastructure, and we still have 600 million in 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3949 

our savings account. 

 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, since he came back from Calgary, all the 

Leader of the Opposition has done is run down Saskatchewan. 

Despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, he says our 

economy‟s in a bust. To that member opposite and his 

colleagues I say, turn that frown upside down. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Quiz Show 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, everybody loves a good 

game show — Wheel of Fortune, Jeopardy, Family Feud, the 

Liars Club. Mr. Speaker, allow me to congratulate the Sask 

Party for adding a new quiz show to the season‟s lineup — who 

wants to remain a minister? 

 

The government is still tinkering with the format, Mr. Speaker, 

but basically this show sees celebrity contestants — sitting 

cabinet ministers — try to hold on to their portfolios by asking 

skill-testing questions, challenging questions like, what‟s going 

on in your department? Or, how much are you borrowing? 

 

This show‟s pilot episode, Mr. Speaker, aired a few days ago 

when the Minister of Finance chose the category budget 

blunders, and had to respond to a real puzzler: this Municipal 

Financing Board member missed a budget overrun of 100 per 

cent. We can forgive him for being stumped by this trick 

question, Mr. Speaker. After all, the right response was, who is 

the Minister of Finance? 

 

Tuesday night‟s episode featured the Minister of SaskPower as 

he tried to answer the $64 million question, was his debt going 

up or was it going down? Was it (a) 598 million; (b) 516 

million; (c) 663 million; or (d) all of the above? Unable to 

answer, he used a lifeline, Mr. Speaker, and asked a few friends 

to help him out. No luck, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With who wants to remain a minister, this government is 

running a worthy successor to The Gong Show. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Christmas Greetings 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure to bring 

Christmas greetings during the most wonderful time of the year. 

Singer-songwriter Andy Williams captured the true magic of 

the holiday season with his . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Cypress Hills. He may start his statement over. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

bring Christmas greetings during the most wonderful time of 

the year. Singer-songwriter Andy Williams captured the true 

magic of the holiday season with his popular, feel-good tune 

where it said, and everyone‟s telling you, be of good cheer; it‟s 

the happiest time of the year. 

It‟s important to remember, celebrate, and enjoy everything that 

makes this season the most wonderful time of the year. A 

Christmas tree symbolizes family gatherings and traditions. 

Gift-wrapped presents symbolize giving and gratitude. 

Carolling provides for the spreading and sharing of cheer and 

holiday spirit. Turkey dinner offers an opportunity for prayer 

and thanksgiving, storytelling, memory sharing, and laughter. 

Santa Claus symbolizes that one person that can indeed make a 

difference by showing generosity and kindness that transcends 

borders, languages, and cultures. 

 

Perhaps most importantly, Mr. Speaker, we remember the birth 

of the Christ child whose humble arrival heralded the promise 

of peace and joy in the hearts of millions of individuals down 

through the ages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope everyone‟s holiday season is full of 

fun-filled activities, and I hope that we all cherish the true 

symbols of this happy season with family and strangers alike. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

The Night After Session 

 

Mr. Furber: — 

 

‟Twas the night after session and all through this House 

Not a creature was stirring — not a cat, not a mouse. 

The Premier in his kerchief, his deputy in his cap 

Had just settled in for a Treasury Board scrap. 

When up from Finance arose such a clatter 

That the Ag minister leaped to see what was the matter. 

When what to his wondering eyes should appear 

But the Minister of Finance pleading, poor potash here. 

More rapid than eagles, his cuts then they came. 

He dodged and evaded, wouldn‟t call them by name. 

He cut Health and cut Justice, Education, police. 

He cut job training, forced a big tax increase. 

But at mid-term the minister came in with a bound 

In the rainy day fund there was cash to be found. 

His eyes how they twinkled, his dimples how merry. 

Delaying a child‟s hospital, now that is the cherry. 

With a wink of an eye and a twist of his head 

Soon gave us to know we had everything to dread. 

And laying his finger aside of his nose 

He admitted the truth and his deficit rose. 

But I heard him exclaim as he kept his cuts out of sight 

Happy cheerleading to all and to all a good night. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Management of Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as the session draws to an 

end, the opposition and the public of Saskatchewan, professors 

at the university have exposed the provincial budget as the most 

irresponsible budget in the history of the province, a 

fantasyland budget that was wrong on most of the estimates for 

income, runaway spending, taking money from the Crowns that 

is unaccounted for, as well as spending down the rainy day 



3950 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

fund. 

 

My question to the Minister of Finance is this: why in the world 

won‟t you answer the questions about the cuts that are coming, 

the cuts that are the responsibility of this government‟s 

mismanagement and incompetence? Can we get answers, even 

at this late date, to the cuts that are coming to the people of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well it 

is obviously true that the government faces an unprecedented 

challenge in terms of revenue because of the lack of potash 

sales. And that‟s why, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve outlined for the 

people of the province our plan to make sure that the budget 

remains balanced in Saskatchewan, perhaps the only such 

balanced budget in the country, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve outlined 

measures for deferrals of some important capital projects and 

they will be just deferrals, Mr. Speaker. There has been 

belt-tightening on the part of the government as we tabled the 

mid-term financial report. We also tabled a plan to deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is the fact of the matter though. Even after 

the mid-term report, even after this loss of revenue, the 

following is the truth, remains very true. When the 

Saskatchewan Party took office, the province had $6.8 billion in 

debt and $1.2 billion in the savings account. Today the province 

has $4.2 billion in debt and $600 million in the savings account 

— a net benefit in two years of $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I‟m very pleased that the Premier 

qualified this statement as being the truth. I find that interesting. 

 

In 2007, we know that the government, this government, took 

over a booming economy, $2.3 billion in the bank, and we‟ve 

gone from that to a recession and a billion dollar deficit in six 

months. And what the people of the province are asking is, why 

doesn‟t this Premier have the decency and the common sense to 

stand in front of the people of the province and apologize for 

the mistake and admit that he‟s made a mistake and give us the 

definition of the mistakes and how that will affect families in 

this province? Why doesn‟t he do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, very frankly, very 

frankly, the admission that a mistake was made in terms of 

projecting the revenue for potash, Mr. Speaker, it was hidden, 

Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne which members on 

both sides have been debating, including that member opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. With respect to what happened when this party 

took office, here‟s what . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The members have asked the 

question looking for an answer, were given the opportunity to 

ask the question without interference. I ask that the same 

courtesy be applied to the Premier. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we took 

office from the NDP, the province had $6.8 billion in debt and 

$1.2 billion in the savings account. Today the province has $4.2 

billion in debt, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve paid off 2.6 billion in the 

provincial debt and 600 million in the bank account. Again I 

say to that member and to the people of the province, and this is 

why the people of the province are actually happy about the 

state of affairs in the province today, that is a net benefit to 

Saskatchewan of $2 billion. And the only source of gloom and 

doom you‟ll find in Saskatchewan today, notwithstanding the 

potash challenge, are in the benches opposite. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier may have been 

away when the people wanting a little extra money for autism 

for treatment and for plans and to help them with that issue, he 

may not have been here for that day‟s question period. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members are aware of the rules 

that you‟re not to refer to the presence or absence of members 

in the Chamber on a sitting day. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Let me reword. Maybe the Premier didn‟t 

hear the words of the autism people when they were here asking 

for help in the programming for their children and their 

families. Maybe the Premier was not here when the farmers 

who were being affected by big sky country . . . Big Sky Farms 

were here asking for help and asking to be paid for the grains 

they hauled to the hog farm. Maybe he wasn‟t aware that they 

were unhappy. Or maybe the people from Big River who were 

here yesterday asking for the minister in charge to help them get 

the forest that they need to run the mill in Big River. 

 

The fact of the matter is there are many people in the province 

concerned about the finances of this province. Many people are 

saying, the problem with governments running up deficit and 

debt, like the Devine government and like this government, is 

they don‟t take the debt when they go. It‟s left for the people of 

the province to pay. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: we have asked hundreds of 

questions about the cuts that are coming to the people of the 

province and we have no answers. Would the Premier make the 

commitment that, even at this late date, he would answer the 

written questions, the many questions we have put, to tell the 

people of the province how they will be negatively affected by 

the cuts coming as a result of their mismanagement and 

incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat again, I repeat again 

for members of this House, and particularly for that member, 

that in two years of this government, this provincial government 

has reduced the debt of the province by 38 per cent. All the 

while dealing with the infrastructure deficit left behind by 

members opposite, all the while dealing with agriculture issues 

ignored by members opposite, including property tax reduction, 

including crop insurance programs. All the while reducing taxes 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3951 

on property, all the while reducing income taxes, Mr. Speaker. 

These are the measures this government has taken. And we 

have also achieved a 40 per cent reduction in the debt in the 

face of the most significant global recession the world has seen 

since the Great Depression. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s why there is a disconnect between that 

member, those members, and the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. He says this economy‟s in a bust. There‟s only 

one thing in a bust in this room, that‟s that member‟s approval 

ratings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, question for the Minister of 

Finance. That government‟s billion dollar deficit has become its 

excuse for breaking promises and commitments. The children‟s 

hospital — cut. The Academic Health Sciences centre — cut. 

The nursing homes — cut. The promise of predictable funding 

for municipalities — broken. The promise of permanent 

property tax reduction — broken. The promise of predictable 

funding for school boards — broken. 

 

In light of these broken promises and commitments, why should 

anyone in Saskatchewan believe any future promises of this 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the answer 

is because over 100 promises made in that campaign have 

already been kept by this government, Mr. Speaker. That‟s why, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because we‟ve made a promise to deal with the education 

property tax issue over four years of our government, and we 

are keeping that promise. That‟s why. Because we made a 

commitment to deal with municipal revenue sharing, long 

ignored by that party, over the four years of our government, 

and we will keep that promise. That‟s why, Mr. Speaker. In 

addition to the promises we‟ve kept with respect to taxes, in 

addition to the fact that we campaigned on a platform of 

actually fixing our highways instead of talking about them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They should take heart with respect to this government because 

it has a track record, Mr. Speaker, of doing exactly what it said 

it would do. That will be the case when we have an election in 

two years. And we look forward to fighting that campaign on a 

record of promise keeping and growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Ministry of Health Expenditures 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 

Minister of Health, the government‟s cut the health budget by 

$192 million. 122 million of that is to cut 13 long-term care 

nursing home projects across the province. That leaves another 

$70 million in health care cuts the government has yet to 

account for. 

Can the minister advise whether these cuts include family 

health benefits and supplementary health benefits to programs 

which provide health care protection to low-income people? 

And if those programs have not been cut, where are the other 

$70 million in health care cuts that have not yet been disclosed 

to Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the deferral — and that‟s what it is — the deferral of 

long-term care facilities through 13 communities. Mr. Speaker, 

the deferral of the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize . . . 

Order. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The deferral 

of the long-term care facilities, the deferral of the children‟s 

hospital is exactly what it is, Mr. Speaker. Finances will be 

there as the projects are ready to go. The communities aren‟t 

ready to go. Their 35 per cent share isn‟t ready to go. The 

planning hasn‟t been complete, Mr. Speaker. When that is 

complete, those projects will move ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I would say, it‟s a larger investment in two years 

under our government than under any years under the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they should be absolutely ashamed of the 

way they left the health care facilities in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Drinking Water Standards 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the budget for the Environment 

Department has been cut by nearly $10 million. The 

government claims that much of that cut was from lower than 

expected forest fire costs, but that does not account for the total 

cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than 100 Saskatchewan communities do not 

meet Health Canada‟s guidelines for drinking water quality. 

Can the minister confirm that her department has cut its budget 

for assisting communities with drinking water quality, and if 

not, what has the department cut from environmental programs 

and services? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the members 

opposite had submitted a written question which we responded 

to. And 104 communities that didn‟t meet the Canadian water 

standards have actually been on that list since 2002. It is not 

new, Mr. Speaker. And the reason that they are on that list is 

because the government of the day, they did the right thing. 

They adopted more aggressive standards for drinking water and 

gave communities an eight-year timeline under which to 

comply, Mr. Speaker. 



3952 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

So these 104 communities are in non-compliance. We are 

working with them to get them into compliance. But I would 

remind the member opposite that they have been on that list 

since 2002. And the difference between our two parties, Mr. 

Speaker, is that the NDP in their last two years gave $9 million 

for water projects. In this government‟s first two years, we gave 

$76 million. 

 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing Expenditures 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing, the 

budget for his ministry has been cut by $1.6 million according 

to supplementary estimates. Can the minister explain which 

public safety inspections have been cut or privatized as a result 

of their budget decisions, and if the Sask Party claims these 

public services have not been cut, then which services have? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well of 

course our priority for Saskatchewan people is public safety. 

But I think what the member is referring to is a deferral again 

because the remand centre, the remand centre proposed for 

Saskatoon, the request for proposals has just been completed. 

And so that money is not required for this period of time. And 

that money is deferred until the next year when the money is 

required once the shovel goes into the ground, and then the 

money will be there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Ministry of Education Expenditures 

 

Mr. McCall: — The cuts that are deferrals. It‟s like listening to 

George Orwell over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the Minister of Education. The Education budget has been 

cut by more than $31 million. We are told the government is 

trying to cut the number of educational assistants in 

Saskatchewan. EAs [educational assistants] provide support to 

students with special needs, and school divisions find their 

work very valuable. Many employ more educational assistants 

than the bare minimum recommended under provincial 

guidelines. But this government is pressing school divisions to 

cut educational assistants. 

 

Why is the government cutting support for students with special 

needs by trying to cut the number of educational assistants in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the boards of education in this province, all 29 boards of 

education, deliver a model for education in their area. Mr. 

Speaker, this year, this year we have added $241 million 

additional revenue to the boards of education. 

 

These budgets have been approved, Mr. Speaker. These budgets 

are in place. The member knows that the school year budget is 

from September 1st of 2009 to August 31st of 2010. Mr. 

Speaker, the budgets are in place. The school boards are 

working within the parameters of that budget, just like they 

have in the past, Mr. Speaker. We have enhanced the amount of 

dollars to boards of education by $241 million. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next question, I just 

want to remind members again that in order for people to hear 

the response, I would ask the members who are placing the 

question to give people the opportunity to hear by allowing the 

minister to speak without interjection. I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 

Ministry of Agriculture Expenditures 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, agriculture funding has been cut 

by more than $40 million in the supplementary estimates, but 

yet no public accounting of these cuts has come forth from the 

minister. Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Agriculture confirm 

that these cuts include cuts to the crop insurance program for 

Saskatchewan farmers, and if not, then where are these cuts 

being made? Where? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, $15 million of the dollars that weren‟t going to be 

utilized in the Crown land sale program is a big part of those 

dollars. Crop insurance, as the member asked, is about a $9 

million discount there that‟s not going to be utilized. We project 

at the beginning of the year where we think crop insurance 

would go, and we know the members opposite wouldn‟t 

understand this because they never fully funded the programs in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also remind the member opposite that the 

budget for Agriculture stands today at $443 million. That is the 

highest budget in the province‟s history for agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker. In fact in the research I did, the last time the 

Agriculture budget in this province exceeded 400 million was 

1991. Not once under the NDP did the ag budget in this 

province come anywhere close to where it is today, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Northern Highways and Cellphone Coverage 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, leaders from Stanley Mission 

came here looking for answers today. They believe northerners 

are entitled to the same standard of safety as people in other 

parts of our province. But Highway 915 north of La Ronge 

presents a serious risk to the public safety. The condition of the 

highway is terrible and there are sharp turns that have resulted 

in a number of serious accidents. In fact, locals call parts of the 

highway suicide curve. 

 

To the minister: does he believe northerners should have the 

same standard of safety as people elsewhere in the province? 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3953 

And if he does believe that, when will Highway 915 be fixed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this government is addressing the massive infrastructure deficit 

left behind by the members opposite in northern Saskatchewan. 

We began by holding multiple consultations in the North with 

First Nations, Métis, and industry association representatives. 

Together we created the northern transportation strategy, the 

advisory committee to provide recommendations on 

transportation infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, this group has held a 

number of meetings and will be providing recommendations on 

the prioritization of future investments in the North. 

 

The people of northern Saskatchewan are working with this 

government developing our plan. They share a vision for the 

future, and they‟re confident that this government will deliver 

on our promises. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s so wonderful to hear 

that all the northern leaders are taking part in these discussions, 

as the minister said. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, to add insult to injury, the people 

of Stanley Mission not only have to travel dangerous roads but, 

in the event of an accident, they also are unable to call for help. 

Why? Because on March 14, 2007, SaskTel announced the 

expansion of cell service to Stanley Mission. More than two 

years have gone; this promise has yet to have been kept. 

Community leaders want for this government to act now. 

 

To the Minister of SaskTel: how much longer do the people of 

Stanley Mission have to wait for cell coverage so that they can 

at least call for help if something happens on their unsafe 

highway, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m exceptionally pleased 

to be able to get up in the House today and advise the members 

of the legislature and the people of this province that we have a 

very aggressive plan at SaskTel to ensure that we‟ve got cell 

coverage on virtually all the major highways and throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a rollout plan on new cellphone towers 

that is being announced over the next few months. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to assure the members in the North, members in 

the South that we will do everything we can to ensure that the 

people in this province have some of the best cell coverage in 

North America, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Northern Skills Training Expenditures 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Minister of Advanced Education. We know 

that this minister‟s department has cut nearly $9 million from 

skills training programs, including the cuts to JobStart/Future 

Skills. What this minister has failed to do is account for the rest 

of his program cuts. 

 

Last budget year, in the middle of a labour shortage, that 

government cut northern skills training by $1 million. And this 

year, we know he has taken an additional $300,000 from 

northern skills training. 

 

Time and time again, we see the Saskatchewan people paying 

the price for this government‟s mistake. To the minister: the 

people want to know, the people of the North want to know 

what other cuts are being planned for the North as a result of 

your Sask Party government‟s fiscal incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to highlight, this year we‟re spending $92 million 

in training and employment programs, Mr. Speaker — $23 

million more than the previous government did as they were 

shown the door, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regarding the North, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to talk about the 

Aboriginal skills and employment partnership, a $33 million 

initiative with federal partners, the provincial government 

coming in, First Nations and Métis communities, and a number 

of private sector entities helping to train more than 1,000 people 

in the North stationed, headquartered out of La Ronge, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There‟s more to do. But this is just one example of the excellent 

work that‟s under way, being led by the people of this province 

and supported by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Finances of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Furber: — To help pay for its financial mismanagement, 

that government has stripped almost $1 billion in Crown 

corporation equity this year and it has increased the long-term 

debt of the Crowns by $800 million more. 

 

Will the minister finally admit that this is an attempt to hide the 

financial mismanagement from Saskatchewan families and 

amounts to nothing less than a back door tax increase? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments Corp. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting 

question from a group of people who stripped $2.2 billion from 

the Crowns in the last 10 years. And what did they do? They 

left an infrastructure deficit in the Crowns that couldn‟t be seen 

the same way it could be seen with holes in the highways. It 

can‟t be seen the same way as schools that have leaky roofs. 

You can‟t see it like emergency room shortages. 

 



3954 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

But we know that they only spent $500 million a year on 

SaskTel, SaskEnergy, and SaskPower. Last year alone, our 

government spent $750 million on Crown infrastructure, and 

this year, $1.25 billion, Mr. Speaker. That‟s what we‟re doing 

to the Crowns. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport Programs 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the budget for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport has been cut by nearly $11 million. The 

government claims much of the budget cut was from the 

building communities program. 

 

Can the minister tell this House the complete list of the 

community recreational projects cut or delayed by this budget 

decision? Just how many Saskatchewan families and 

communities have to suffer because of this government‟s 

financial mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member for her question. 

 

I can tell the member that there are a number of communities, 

five or six communities, that have programs that under the 

contract with the program, they have to meet certain 

requirements for the money from the program to flow from the 

provincial government, Mr. Speaker. And so we are waiting and 

we are hoping that those communities will move forward with 

their programs. And the money will be there under our 

contractual obligations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that the members know that 

one of the other areas that we have reduced in our budget is the 

active families benefit, Mr. Speaker. I want the members to 

know that the program remains intact. It‟s a program that 

provides a refundable tax benefit of up to $150 per child ages 6 

to 14, Mr. Speaker, a program that the NDP government were 

critical of when this party proposed it in the last provincial 

election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would urge the public and parents in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, that the program is still intact and that they submit 

their paperwork when they‟re doing their income taxes for the 

2009 income tax year in next year‟s income tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Ministry of Health Expenditures 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to 

health care, Saskatchewan families have already paid a huge 

price for this government‟s financial mismanagement. The 

children‟s hospital in Saskatoon, the surgical care centre here in 

Regina, and 13 nursing home projects right across this province 

have already been cut. 

 

However, more cuts could be on the way. This government has 

failed to budget for the costs of fighting H1N1. Manitoba has 

confirmed that it will spend $105 million on H1N1. How is this 

government going to pay for fighting H1N1? Will it add 

another $100 million to the billion dollar deficit, or is it going to 

force another $100 million in cuts on other health care 

programs and services for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the hon. 

member‟s question, I think we‟re looking at an estimate for the 

H1N1 of about $30 million. And the numbers have not been all 

compiled because we don‟t know all the costs as the rollout of 

the vaccine continues. I will also say this, Mr. Speaker, that this 

side of the House is very proud of the Ministry of Health and 

the officials who I think have led the nation in terms of the 

H1N1 vaccination rollout, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to continue to move this 

province forward in health care, Mr. Speaker. We are going to 

say to the people of this province within four years that waiting 

three months for surgery is long enough. That‟s the centrepiece 

of this session we‟re in right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And people should know that they can count on that 

commitment because, Mr. Speaker, this is also the party that 

said we‟d have 800 new nurses in the province. We‟ve already 

got 570 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It‟s Christmastime. The Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they‟re applauding the 

fact that we‟re already got 570 new nurses. Mr. Speaker, this 

government keeps its promises. This government right now is 

supporting an economy that is not just leading Canada, but is 

leading North America. And those members ought to just cheer 

up a little bit and be grateful as we all are to be living in a place 

like Saskatchewan today. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Value-Added Growth and Economic Momentum 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. As we know, Saskatchewan is forging through this 

ongoing international economic downturn better and stronger 

than many jurisdictions could ever hope for. Our resilience, 

diversification, and depth are the main reasons behind this. 

 

In spite of these strengths, Mr. Speaker, we also understand that 

we need to address the challenges that come with international 

fiscal issues and economic growth. Saskatchewan‟s competitive 

business climate is not immune to the effects of global markets. 

As such, we are committed to growing the Saskatchewan 

economy. And in order to do so, the cost of doing business must 

remain competitive with other jurisdictions. 

 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3955 

With this in mind, I stand today to outline two announcements 

that speak to this government‟s attention to ensuring that our 

business climate and our economy remain amongst the best in 

the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Energy and 

Resources, has announced that effective January 1st, 2010, a 

deduction in determining the profit tax portion of the potash 

production tax will apply to each new corporate office job 

located in the province. A lesser deduction will apply to 

positions already located in Saskatchewan. After five years, Mr. 

Speaker, each new job would be treated as an existing job. Mr. 

Speaker, the mining industry continues to be a primary engine 

of growth in Saskatchewan, with potash, to be sure, front and 

centre, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As the Minister of Energy and Resources noted, there are 

various expansion plans in the potash industry in spite of the 

cooling off of sales in 2009. Clearly this industry remains 

committed to the province and this government. And this 

government in turn remains committed to seeing all phases of 

their operations here in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan. 

 

As a result of this initiative, we fully expect to see an increase 

in value-added corporate presence in Saskatchewan from one of 

our key resource industries, Mr. Speaker. Corporate offices 

represent good jobs, stable employment, and a higher profile for 

our province and its communities. They bring even more 

economic multipliers — additional job opportunities for 

retailers, for professional services, construction, and property 

development. We can and we will facilitate and encourage 

corporate offices to establish themselves where they should be 

— here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The second announcement, Mr. Speaker, is the government‟s 

intention to introduce a five-year corporate income tax incentive 

for corporations undertaking the refining of minerals imported 

into Saskatchewan. This initiative will provide significant 

incentive for firms that import minerals and make significant 

value-added investments through processing new facilities in 

our province. 

 

In order to qualify for the incentive, an eligible corporation 

must operate exclusively in the processing of imported minerals 

or mineral concentrate to the prime metal stage of development, 

maintain a minimum capital investment of $125 million in the 

Saskatchewan operation, and maintain a minimum incremental 

employment of 75 full-time employees in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, the proposed incentive 

provides a break on incremental tax dollars and does not take 

from the general treasury as taxes are not reduced until after the 

incremental investment has been fully spent and the new jobs 

are in place in our province. 

 

In addition to the direct investment in the Saskatchewan 

economy, there is a significant ripple effect to this approach. It 

includes the economic activity resulting from capital 

expenditure due to construction, new employment for families, 

and the new income, fuel, and sales tax that is generated for the 

treasury, and the benefits which accrue to the supply chain for 

our provincial manufacturers and service providers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

I‟d like to note that the efforts of our Enterprise Saskatchewan 

board in bringing about this initiative with a minimum of 

economic distortions while still advocating for more 

broad-based tax restrictions. Our government will continue to 

target the business and industry sectors that provide the 

value-added growth and economic momentum which is so vital 

to our continued prosperity and competitiveness as a province. 

And we will continue to utilize innovative partnerships to do so. 

 

We are all partners in Saskatchewan, and we all have a stake in 

seeing that value-added growth continues in our province and 

that our province is enabled to maintain the momentum for 

economic diversification. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to rise today to respond to the remarks made by the 

Minister of Enterprise, the minister also responsible for trade. 

The minister makes a number of comments today with regards 

to potash and other matters, Mr. Speaker, and before I‟m done I 

will make a few comments about the success of the mineral 

sector in Saskatchewan and our continued support for the 

mineral sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

But before I do that, I just want to indicate my amusement at 

the announcement today, Mr. Speaker. During this session of 

the legislature, the government has been quite reluctant to talk 

about potash, Mr. Speaker. And is it any wonder that the 

announcement today involving the potash sector comes on the 

last day of the legislature, minutes after the last question period 

has taken place because, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the 

members opposite, including the minister who just spoke, have 

to be concerned that their budgeting process included a 

commitment to fund 20 per cent of the expenditures of 

government on the basis of a forecast for potash, Mr. Speaker, a 

forecast that called for 1.8 billion to be received from potash. 

And in fact this actual reception at this point, Mr. Speaker, is 

calculated at a little more than 100 million, Mr. Speaker — a 95 

per cent failure on behalf of the government to understand the 

global nature of the potash industry. 

 

And as a result, Mr. Speaker, every day the government has had 

difficulty answering questions about why this mismanagement 

is going to affect individual Saskatchewan residents, whether 

they‟re seniors or students or young people or immigrants 

coming to our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we do remember the debate that occurred shortly after the 

budget was brought down, Mr. Speaker, in which after the 

potash industry itself was indicating that we‟re going to have 

production reduced in this province, Mr. Speaker, and there 

were layoffs in the potash industry, the Minister of Energy and 

the now Minister of Enterprise and others were on their feet 

saying, it‟s not about production. It‟s not about production. It‟s 

all about sales, Mr. Speaker. Well not only did they not 

understand what the production side was telling them, Mr. 

Speaker, but they were still convinced, while all of this was 

going on, that the sales were going to take place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a result of their cluelessness on this, Mr. Speaker, what 



3956 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

we‟ve seen, what we‟ve seen is a reduction in services to 

Saskatchewan people. And we can only guess, Mr. Speaker, 

how they‟re planning to manage that in the future. They‟ve got 

a budget to put together for the spring session, Mr. Speaker. 

They have no idea what their revenues are going to be, but they 

have spending that increased by 32 per cent this year, Mr. 

Speaker — spending, a lot of which either continues into the 

new year and increases the deficit or results in further cuts to 

the programs that Saskatchewan people recognize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have always been very supportive 

of the mineral sector in Saskatchewan. We can go back a 

number of years to the report Industry and Resources put out, 

Partnership for Prosperity. Mr. Speaker, there was no doubt 

that that set the stage for a lot of what was to come. 

 

In 2005, the centennial year, the economic summit that was 

held in Saskatchewan, an economic summit to discuss the 

future of the corporate sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 

Sask Party, including the minister, boycotted that event, Mr. 

Speaker. But who participated to a great extent? The mineral 

sector, the potash sector in particular, Mr. Speaker. And as a 

result of that economic summit in 2005, the government at the 

time, led by then Premier Lorne Calvert, brought in changes to 

the corporate capital tax, Mr. Speaker. That resulted in the 

potash sector stepping up and announcing expansion in the 

province of Saskatchewan, expansion that is continuing to this 

day, Mr. Speaker. And of course the government of the day in 

2006 and early 2007 was complimented by the mineral sector 

for the efforts that were made on the corporate capital tax side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it can be argued, and correctly argued, that this 

was the beginning of the economic boom in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. So there‟s no doubt that there is a strong record of 

New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, supporting the potash, the 

mineral sector in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of matters that are raised. 

Again I have to say that one must be supportive of tax 

incentives that will bring development to the province. It is 

interesting that the government has chosen at a time when the 

potash sector is actually laying off workers in rural 

Saskatchewan that they‟re announcing an incentive to bring 

corporate head offices likely to urban Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We do not stand in the way of any new investment that 

comes to urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But it is interesting 

that this dynamic is taking place at this time. And we would 

welcome — no announcement, Mr. Speaker, from the 

government yet — but we would welcome an opportunity to see 

additional corporate head offices in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, the second part of the 

announcement talks about providing opportunities for the 

mineral sector to process a product in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly the Minister of Enterprise understands this. 

He was just, on behalf of Enterprise Saskatchewan, in 

Kazakhstan, Mr. Speaker. I‟m sure that he saw there a lost 

opportunity for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Party government missed out on an opportunity there. I‟m sure 

that the minister, when he went to Kazakhstan, came back with 

a message: we have to do something. And perhaps that‟s why 

this announcement is being in place. They‟ve recognized a 

failure on their part, and now they‟re trying to correct that 

mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see that my time is elapsing. Just one more 

comment, Mr. Speaker. I notice, in answers to written questions 

to the minister in which I asked a number of questions about the 

Enterprise Saskatchewan sector teams, it is interesting to note 

that the mineral sector in over a year has met four times, Mr. 

Speaker, and have provided the minister with two 

recommendations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have not seen those recommendations from the 

board, but I hope that the minister will release the 

recommendations that the sector team has made to him and 

some kind of response because we know that the Enterprise 

board has made a number of recommendations to the 

government that the government has already announced they 

will not be following. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mineral sector has done a lot of work. They‟ve 

made some recommendations. Let‟s see what they are, and let‟s 

see if the government‟s going to accept those recommendations. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Estevan has leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Estevan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all honoured members of this Assembly, I‟d 

like to introduce someone that is very special in my life. Seated 

in your gallery is my daughter, Trish. 

 

Trish, if you just want to stand up so people can see who you 

are. I don‟t mean to embarrass you. But I‟m very happy to have 

Trish in to Regina today, and we‟re going to do a little bit of 

shopping after. Mr. Speaker, as well as being my daughter, 

she‟s also my best friend. So I ask all members to join me in 

welcoming her today. Thanks. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Financial Support 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to be given the honour of rising today to introduce our 

government‟s motion. Throughout this session, the members 

opposite have constantly preached their gloom and doom 

theory, rambling on and on about the recession and how it will 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3957 

be worse in the future for the people of this province. 

 

Well we‟ve seen that some financial forecasters are predicting a 

much different story for Saskatchewan in the year 2010. We 

have seen that the Conference Board of Canada and the Royal 

Bank financial forecasters have said that Saskatchewan will 

either lead the nation or be second in GDP [gross domestic 

product] growth. Our government has said all along that the 

province of Saskatchewan is not immune to what is happening 

throughout the world. We have felt some of those negative 

impacts, particularly in the decline of potash sales. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion that our government will put forward 

today states: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the actions taken by our 

government to provide increased financial support for 

those less advantaged and maintaining those supports in 

the face of a global recession. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will lead you through many initiatives to assist 

the disadvantaged that our Saskatchewan Party government has 

moved forward on. 

 

Clients of the provincial training allowance and transitional 

employment allowance programs received offsetting increases 

to their home heating allowances. Saskatchewan assistance 

program clients will continue to have their actual utility costs 

paid based on billings. 

 

It is important that our government increase the training 

allowance to provide relief to students in basic education 

programs. This increase will reduce the burden incurred by 

students due to rising energy costs, enabling them to focus their 

attention on their studies and on achieving their educational 

goals. For provincial training allowance clients, rates will 

increase by $24 per month per household for single students 

living away from home and single parents, and $26 per month 

for married students. In addition rates will increase by $2 for 

each child in the household. Traditional employment allowance 

clients will receive an increase of $24 per month for the first 

person in the household and $2 per month for each additional 

person. Saskatchewan assists low-income adults in accessing 

basic education programs in order to upgrade their education 

and further their independence by moving into employment, 

post-secondary education, or training. Approximately 5,000 

students receive the provincial training allowance annually. 

 

Under the NDP, our young people left this province in droves, 

Mr. Speaker. Now they are getting an education in 

Saskatchewan and building their lives here. Our government is 

investing in the most important resource of our province, and 

that is our youth. This was unheard of under the previous 

government. 

 

Fifteen million dollars will be invested in the University of 

Saskatchewan residences program, and this affordable housing 

will help graduates to succeed in their studies. Even the NDP 

was excited to hear about our recent economic booster shot and 

the funding we‟re providing to student housing. To quote the 

member from Saskatoon Centre in the Hansard of the Human 

Services Committee on March 9, 2009, I quote: 

 

. . . that‟s very good news — I think everyone in 

Saskatchewan is excited to see student housing. That was 

one that I think that everybody thinks it‟s an important 

project. I mean all housing projects actually from my 

point of view is a very good thing. And so and clearly this 

has been a need that‟s the U of S has identified for many 

years and so it is good news. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Centre seems to be aware that the 

NDP neglected student housing for years, and now we have to 

play catch-up. 

 

$26.4 million will be invested at Great Plains College in Swift 

Current and St. Peter‟s College in Muenster and SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. The money 

will allow for facility upgrading and improvements to the 

learning environment that will pay many dividends, allowing 

our future generations greater access to quality education. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government announced the largest 

single-year income tax reduction in Saskatchewan‟s history. 

This tax reduction allowed the most disadvantaged people in 

our province to keep more of their money. This resulted in a 

saving of $440 per year for the individual and $1,320 per year 

for a working family with two children. 

 

The 2008-2009 budget included the following tax changes: 

doubled the caregiver tax credit, doubled the infirm dependant 

tax credit, doubled the supplement to the disability tax credit, 

increased the disability tax credit, exempted the registered 

disability savings plan income from social assistance 

calculations. A total of 80,000 low-income taxpayers were 

dropped off the tax rolls altogether. 

 

And those who pay no taxes now will benefit from a new 

low-income tax credit which replaces and significantly 

increases the Saskatchewan sales tax credit. This tax credit puts 

more money into the pockets of low-income people who pay 

taxes, like seniors and students and low-income working 

families. The maximum tax credits provided to eligible families 

with children is increased to $600 per year, twice as much as 

the old sales tax credit. We provided additional tax savings to 

over 300,000 lower income provincial residents. 

 

While the NDP claims to care about working families, our 

government is the one that has done the most to put the money 

back in their pockets, Mr. Speaker. And everyone should 

remember that it was the NDP that blindsided everyone in the 

province when they hiked up the PST [provincial sales tax] 

after the 2003 election. 

 

Saskatchewan residents will realize a further $22 million in 

provincial tax savings in 2009, as personal income tax brackets 

and personal tax credits are indexed to the national rate of 

inflation. Indexation protects us from what is called bracket 

creep, the automatic increases in taxes caused by inflation. The 

income tax brackets, basic and spousal credits, senior 

supplement, dependent child credit, disability related credits, 

medical expense credit, and the new Saskatchewan low-income 

tax credit are all subject to indexation. All of this means a 

working family with two children can now earn up to $42,220 a 

year without paying any Saskatchewan income tax. 

 



3958 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

[11:15] 

 

The NDP also never came up with long-term solutions to offset 

the effects of reassessment on municipalities and taxpayers. The 

property tax plan ensures Saskatchewan families and 

homeowners have relief from higher property taxes and more 

money in their pockets. Our government worked hard to 

develop a new property tax plan, unlike the NDP who did 

nothing to fix this issue. Even the hero of the NDP, Tommy 

Douglas, struggled with this issue. That‟s right, Mr. Speaker. 

The NDP knew something had to be done with property taxes 

since the 1940s, yet they never got it done. Our government has 

made more progress on the education property tax issue in two 

years than the NDP did in 60. 

 

The provincial debt has been paid down by over $2.6 billion 

since our government took office. This is a 40 per cent 

reduction and the largest paydown of debt in Saskatchewan‟s 

history. By reducing the debt, we are saving Saskatchewan 

people hundreds of millions of dollars in interest costs. By 

reducing and eventually eliminating the debt, we are creating a 

legacy for our children and our grandchildren. The money saved 

will be reinvested in schools, health care facilities, roads, and 

other infrastructure, improving the quality and affordability of 

life for Saskatchewan people. The NDP had years to pay down 

the debt, but they apparently did not see it as a priority. 

 

Our government is also working with organizations to help 

create jobs for First Nations people, Mr. Speaker. Education 

and training opportunities with Northlands College, combined 

with the employment opportunities, will empower First Nations 

people to take advantage of potential employment 

opportunities. These opportunities also have the potential to 

improve the quality and affordability of life for northern 

residents in this province. Saskatchewan‟s Aboriginal 

employment development initiative is focused on bringing the 

largely untapped First Nations and Métis workforce into 

Saskatchewan‟s growing economy. Education institutions can 

then develop and offer programs to give First Nations and Métis 

people the skills they need to compete successfully for open 

positions. 

 

All AED [Aboriginal employment development] partners work 

to identify and address barriers to training, hiring, and retaining 

First Nations and Métis people. Our government has committed 

to reducing barriers to the workplace for First Nations people. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government has continued to provide 

$2.375 million in assistance to municipalities who provide a 

paratransit program. Our government provided funding for the 

replacement of five vehicles in the ‟08-09 fiscal year in the 

amount of $275,000. This will allow municipalities to continue 

running this vital service for those who need assistance in 

getting around. Our government is committed to ensuring that 

all people are able to benefit from the province‟s growth. 

 

Last year we provided more than $3 million to northern 

communities through the northern residential subdivision 

program to provide serviced lots to meet higher demands for 

housing as the province‟s economy grows. $2 million was 

committed to La Loche and $1 million to La Ronge to build 

subdivisions with serviced lots. Our government is working 

hard to ensure that northern communities continue to benefit 

from our province‟s growing economy. 

 

Through our government‟s $500 million economic booster shot, 

we provided over $29 million in funding for affordable housing 

projects across the province, Mr. Speaker. These included: $12 

million to fund renovations at housing in Milton Heights, a 

non-profit apartment building operated by Regina Lutheran 

Care Society in Regina; $2.3 million in funding for a 12-unit 

seniors housing development put forward by the Prince Albert 

housing society for the Métis community; $400,000 for 

renovations and expansion of the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council Activity Centre in Maidstone; $100,000 for renovations 

to the Saskatchewan Abilities Council Activity Centre in 

Yorkton; $100,000 for the purchase of property in which to 

operate a group home for individuals with intellectual 

disabilities in Langenburg. 

 

This builds on previous initiatives by our government. In 

October 2008, our government announced the largest ever 

investment in the history of the province in support of citizens 

with intellectual disabilities. The $76.9 million investment over 

the next four years will address a wait-list of 440 individuals in 

need of specialized residential and day programs. 

 

Regarding the seniors‟ income plan, Mr. Speaker, we expanded 

that plan to include over double the amount of seniors who were 

previously eligible to receive assistance. The total number of 

eligible seniors is now over 18,000. And we also doubled the 

amount that those seniors can receive from the plan to a 

maximum of $190 per month for single seniors and $155 per 

month per person for couples. Seniors who qualify for SIP 

[seniors‟ income plan] also receive one free eye exam per year, 

free chiropractic services, home care subsidy, supplementary 

health benefits for those in special care homes, and loans on 

some low-cost devices through the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council. 

 

For 16 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP ignored the needs 

of low-income seniors by not increasing benefits under the 

seniors‟ income plan and I think that is absolutely shameful. In 

our first year of government, we doubled both SIP benefits for 

eligible seniors and the number of eligible seniors. And we are 

so proud to assist those who have done so much to build our 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Our government also provided funding to a number of 

affordable housing complexes across the province, including: 

2.9 million through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to 

fund Juniper Manor in Saskatoon; $3.4 million to help fund safe 

and affordable rental accommodations for 36 low-income 

families, many of them Aboriginal, who have a member 

attending SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology] Woodland Campus in Prince Albert; and 

support for a new group home in Wynyard for people with 

intellectual disabilities; over 1.7 million through the 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation to help fund Columbian 

Manor in Saskatoon. Our government is committed to ensure 

that life in Saskatchewan remains affordable for everyone. 

 

And I guess there‟s a huge comparison when you consider that 

the NDP, on the other hand, has a history of neglect when it 

comes to housing issues in our province. They did conduct a 

housing task force in the summer of 2007, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3959 

but the recommendations were kept a secret. 

 

We have support for low-income people with shelter rates and 

under the provincial training allowance and increased TEA 

[transitional employment allowance] benefits. The rental 

housing supplement has been increased, and you know, The 

Residential Tenancies Act will help ensure that everyone can 

have an affordable place to live so that the rent doesn‟t go out 

of control. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to stand in my spot today, 

and I‟m proud of our government‟s record. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is a . . . or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m sorry, that is a record 

that I will put up against the members‟ opposite any day of the 

week. And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I put forward this 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the actions taken by our 

government to provide increased financial support for 

those less advantaged and maintaining these supports in 

the face of the current global recession. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Estevan has 

moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the actions taken by our 

government to provide increased financial support for 

those less advantaged and maintaining these supports in 

the face of the current global recession. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and I am happy to enter into this debate. It‟s an odd one that this 

government would propose at this time, after a few weeks of 

actually getting some of the ideas of what‟s actually happening 

in the budget and the mismanagement we‟ve seen. And of 

course we‟ve got several quotes, and I‟ll refer to them as we go 

forward — especially from Dr. Eric Howe, the economist, what 

he‟s been talking about, how this province has been left in 

really a state of shambles. We haven‟t seen this kind of 

recklessness when it comes to spending. 

 

And of course today during question period, we had lots of 

questions about the cuts. We don‟t know what the cuts are. 

They‟re going to be coming. There‟s a chill right across this 

province. But for them to stand up, the audacity. And I had to 

think of the words this morning when the Minister of Health 

talked about the absolute shame. And I think this is what this 

government should . . . And as we go forward over the next 

while, we‟ll demonstrate this. 

 

But I have to tell you the shame of what‟s actually happening to 

. . . Those who find themselves in the lower income bracket 

here in Saskatchewan are really worried about what‟s going to 

happen over the next few weeks, months, and hopefully just a 

few short years when these folks will come to the election polls 

and be turned out. 

 

I think it‟s amazing what kind of things have been happening in 

this province, and yet this government doesn‟t seem to be in 

touch, in touch with what‟s going on. Just a few short days ago, 

I tabled several petitions from 40 different communities right 

across this province. 

 

And I‟ll talk about the actual stats from the member from 

Estevan, what‟s happening in her own riding. She gets up and 

she talks about the good things that are happening in Estevan. I 

don‟t know if she knows what‟s happening in Estevan. 

 

Here are the housing waiting lists for Estevan, for social 

housing. January 2008, it was 23. Now it‟s 42. I don‟t think 

that‟s good news. Here‟s Melfort. January 2008, it was 2; now 

it‟s 10. Moose Jaw, it was 21; now it‟s 88. 

 

What about the affordable housing numbers? How‟s that 

waiting list going for these folks? Well Estevan, the member 

who thinks they‟re doing a really good job, they‟re doing a 

really good job — 5 in January 2008; now it‟s 18. Tisdale 4; 

now it‟s 12. In the Premier‟s own riding, it was 8; now it‟s 43. 

And Moose Jaw again 11; now it‟s 45. Everywhere throughout 

the province it‟s going up. 

 

But here‟s a group that was really, that came and brought those 

petitions forward because they were deeply, deeply concerned. 

It‟s the seniors. It‟s the seniors who are having a hard time 

making ends meet. They‟re not getting support through utilities, 

and one of the basic needs we have is around housing. How‟s 

housing going for seniors in Saskatchewan? Well in January 

2008, we started out with waiting lists of 521. Where are we 

now? September 2009, it‟s 781 — a growth of over 200 seniors 

more on waiting lists to find affordable housing in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

How‟s it working for her in Estevan? How‟s it working for her 

in Estevan? Well it‟s grown from 11 to 20. How‟s it going in 

Yorkton — 36 to 74. In Moose Jaw, 28 to 68. And I think that‟s 

shameful. That‟s absolutely shameful. How can they take any 

claim in helping out people who find themselves on fixed 

incomes or lower incomes when those numbers are there on a 

very basic need of housing? 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s lots of indicators that we can 

go through, some of the problems that we see in Saskatchewan. 

Of course a year ago, we had the landmark study — the health 

disparities report — that came out of Saskatoon, that talked 

about the needs of people living in poverty, around health care, 

and how we need to know that‟s tied to housing and that‟s tied 

to income. And we need to act on it. Has there been any action? 

Not at all, except for this government self-congratulating on the 

piecemeal approach. 

 

And what about the YW [Young Women‟s Christian 

Association] story just a few short weeks ago? And they laugh. 

Three thousand women turned away. Three thousand women 

and children turned away, in a year, from a shelter in 

Saskatoon. That‟s mind-boggling and that‟s absolutely 

shameful. It‟s 3,000 women and children. That‟s 60 a week. 

Where do they go? Where do they go? Again a piecemeal 

approach to that. 

 

And then we have the Sask hunger count, and that too is 

shameful because we see the increase here in Saskatchewan 

right across the province. And we‟ve been out visiting some of 



3960 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

the food banks, and whether it‟s Wynyard or Humboldt or 

North Battleford, it‟s the same throughout the province that the 

hunger count is going up. 

 

But this is what the story was talking about, and I quote. This is 

from The StarPhoenix, November 18th, and this is Paul 

Merriman. Now this is what the story was saying: “However, 

one area of concern is that Saskatchewan ranked second 

nationwide in the number of children using a food bank.” 

 

Now I again use that term absolutely shameful — absolutely 

shameful that we should find ourselves with that kind of a 

reputation. And it goes on to say — this is Paul Merriman 

speaking: 

 

(More) immigrants and refugees are using the food bank, 

and we‟ve seen a slight increase in our single moms, as 

well as within our aboriginal community. The perspective 

from the city is not good — it‟s up 12 per cent . . . 

 

[11:30] 

 

This is really something else. And again, being second because 

of the number of children who find themselves there. 

 

And I‟ve talked about the waiting lists for affordable and social 

and senior housing right across the province. It‟s everywhere. 

 

Now what‟s really the worst number of all, and I find this truly 

amazing the government would have the nerve to stand up on 

the last day of the House, when we see the social assistance 

rates, the caseloads going up. And this is the minister in 

estimates the other night. And this is from November 23rd, and 

I‟ll quote: 

 

The budget was prepared for 21,100 social] assistance 

plan cases and 1,950 TEA cases. And this allocation will 

be for the increase . . . to 22,800 [that‟s 8 per cent 

increase] SAP cases and 2,800 TEA cases. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s an increase of 44 per cent for TEA. 

That‟s a transitional employment allowance, folks. It‟s 44 per 

cent. And we hear both from the Minister of Advanced Ed and 

Labour and from Social Services, there‟s no more help for those 

folks. They‟ll get their allowances, but there is no support — no 

support. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, time is so short to debate this topic, 

but the reality is the caseloads are going up. More children, 

more moms, and more dads are finding themselves on welfare 

in this province. And I can‟t believe this government would 

stand up and say, this is a good thing; things are going well. 

 

I‟m sorry, I have to say that I have some deep, deep concerns. 

And we are not getting answers about programs that are being 

cut. 

 

They like to talk about minimum wage. Will they index that? 

Will they index that? A simple request. And in fact, if I recall 

correctly, the member from Silverwood, when we made that 

announcement two years ago, thought that was a great idea. 

 

Now they like to talk about SIP. We could go into that. They 

talk about their $10 million they put into that. We put $50 

million, Mr. Deputy Speaker — $50 million into helping 

seniors. That would help over 100,000 seniors. We‟re not even 

in the same ballpark. They talk about 10,000; we were talking 

about 100,000. Not the same ballpark. 

 

And I have to tell you, one of the most shocking quotes I have 

to say is from the Minister of Social Services, where she often 

talks about . . . And this is from November 2nd, the Minister of 

Social Services and her response to the Throne Speech says, 

“Currently we have over 500 units in construction, over 600 

units in development and planning stages.” Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it‟s actually 320. It‟s not 600. And they‟ll go out and 

say it as if it‟s 600. It‟s 320. I think there‟s a little question 

about truth or fiction here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is there hope? Yes, there is hope. And we can do 

an awful lot — not by going with this piecemeal approach that 

this government is doing. We can have an anti-poverty strategy. 

Many provinces have it. In fact the only two provinces, major 

provinces — Alberta and BC [British Columbia] — don‟t have 

it, and they‟re seeing an increase in their welfare caseloads like 

ours, like ours. Other provinces are successful in working, 

fighting poverty because they have a plan. 

 

And I would call on this government to come to the table with 

community groups, talk about a vision where our communities 

do not have poverty, that poverty becomes history. That‟s the 

kind of thing that we need to talk about — where dignity is for 

everyone, where everyone can afford their housing. They have a 

right to afford their housing and a right to a decent job with 

decent pay. This is something that we‟ve all come to expect, 

and it‟s actually right in the United Nations, when they talk 

about human rights for security through economic activity. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will 

be speaking in support of the motion. Now our government has 

made significant investments towards helping the most 

vulnerable in our province. We have a plan to address 

immediate concerns, and we are putting in place long-term 

measures to strengthen those who are vulnerable in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is proud to support 

seniors as they are the people who helped build our great 

province. When we became government, we made a 

commitment to fully engage the people of Saskatchewan in 

developing policy. And we wanted to dispel the myth that 

government knows best, which was practised by the previous 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this fall I had the opportunity to travel across this 

wonderful province. I conducted consultations with seniors and 

senior groups and interested persons. We asked them to help 

formulate policy. Now our government‟s consultations are 

developing workable, practical policies. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will be even further 

opportunities for input needed to ensure that everyone in our 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3961 

province enjoys the benefit of our economy. While the previous 

government continued to talk about a plan for our seniors, our 

government is in the process of developing the plan for our 

seniors. 

 

One of our government‟s priorities is the creation of the senior 

care strategy. Now this strategy will focus on developing an 

intermediate- and long-term care facility, plans that address the 

care needs of our aging population, improving the coordination 

of long-term care beds to allow senior couples to stay together. 

We heard this over and over again when we went across the 

province. This is of great concern to the seniors in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We‟re also supporting non-profit agencies that provide 

long-term care and working with the federal government to 

increase long-term care capacities on First Nations reserve, 

planning to undertake a pilot project to provide government 

funding for level 3 and level 4 beds in personal care homes to 

reduce waiting times for long-term care beds. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is working with 

regional health authorities, community-based agencies, and 

senior organizations to create this senior care strategy for 

Saskatchewan. As our province moves forward, Mr. Speaker, 

our seniors are going to enjoy a better life. 

 

Our government recognizes that low-income seniors are facing 

challenges of higher living costs. To help them meet these 

challenges, we expanded the senior income plan to include over 

double the amount of seniors who were previously eligible to 

receive assistance. The number of eligible seniors is now over 

18,000. 

 

We have also doubled the amount that seniors can now receive 

in financial benefit from the plan to a maximum of 190 per 

month for single seniors and 155 per month for couples. Seniors 

who qualify for the senior income plan are also going to receive 

one free eye exam per year, free chiropractic services, reduced 

reduction on prescription drugs, home care subsidies, 

supplementary health benefits for those in special care homes, 

and loans on some low-cost devices through Saskatchewan 

Abilities Council — for example, walkers and commodes. 

 

Now we are glad to be able to assist those who have done so 

much to build our province. The previous government did not 

increase the senior income plan program benefits since 1992. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is looking forward to 

building a better life for everyone in Saskatchewan. We are 

working to reduce wait times, recruit more health providers and 

retain more graduates, and improve our long-term care 

facilities. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we aren‟t afraid of setting targets. We 

were not afraid to set the target of hiring 800 nurses in our first 

term. At this present time, we are over 70 per cent on our way 

to achieving that goal. Today, we have 570 new nurses working 

here in our province. And as our government moves forward, 

our seniors are going to enjoy a better life. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are helping those who can‟t fight for 

themselves, and those are our children. We are addressing the 

critical shortage of appropriate care spaces for youth across this 

province. And to help address this need, our government 

invested 4 million in Eagles Nest Youth Ranch Inc. to provide 

20 new spaces for youth at risk. Eagles Nest is one of the finest 

providers of youth services in the province, and our partnership 

will provide the much-needed additional space to support these 

youth at risk. 

 

Our grant will enable Eagles Nest, currently based in Prince 

Albert, to expand its services to Saskatoon, purchase property 

and necessary furnishings. This funding demonstrates our 

government‟s commitment to putting children and youth first, 

ensuring a better quality of life for the young people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at affordable housing, we 

see an area where the previous government ignored the problem 

for years, and we had to act. Mr. Speaker, we created the task 

force on housing affordability to ensure housing affordability 

keeps pace in our economy. 

 

When the report came out, our government responded by 

providing 12.4 million to adjust shelter rates in the income 

assistance program and to index shelter rates, allowances, and 

supplements. This enhancement immediately benefited over 

6,000 households across the province — that‟s 6,000, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Here in Regina, our government is expanding the Maple Leaf 

Estates to create an additional 53 units. And our government 

invested 12 million to renovate the 140-unit Milton Heights 

apartment buildings in south central Regina. Now this is an 

affordable housing unit. 

 

Now our government also invested 10 million in new funding 

for affordable housing for seniors, low-income families, and 

those most vulnerable within our province. This funding will be 

used to deliver a total of 20 quality, affordable home ownership 

units in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, 

and Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government also invested 3.8 million 

to develop a new 40-unit affordable, supportive housing unit for 

low-income persons; 32 units will serve people with serious 

mental illnesses, with the remaining eight units serving people 

with intellectual disabilities. This project is sponsored by the 

Ehrlo Community Service in collaboration with the Phoenix 

Residential Society. 

 

Now these projects in Regina are an excellent opportunity for 

our government to join with community partners in developing 

quality, affordable rental housing for those most in need. Now 

our government remains committed to ensuring that all 

Saskatchewan residents benefit from the opportunities and 

prosperity that we are experiencing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 our government has taken significant 

steps to move our province forward and we will continue to do 

so. We are focused on the future. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 



3962 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s with a certain sense of 

disbelief and astonishment that I rise in this debate today. I 

honestly don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, what planet some of these 

members live on. In terms of the poverty that grows in this 

province and in our cities and in the North, to hear them get up 

and do the back-patting and self-congratulating that we know is 

the hallmark of this government — but to sit there and to ignore 

the reality that people face in this province in terms of the 

inaction of this government, in terms of their inability to 

address the growing poverty in this province — to hear them 

get up and give the back-patting routine or to wail away on the 

scripts that are prepared for them by their caucus services and 

just sort of mellifluously tool their way through those scripts, 

you know, I‟d like . . . 

 

Sometimes about this House, Mr. Speaker, I think about how 

some of the speeches we give in this place, if we could give 

them in different settings, how that might affect the speeches 

that are given. I think about the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest and how he likes to get up and say, turn that smile 

upside down and sing it away. 

 

And while this is what‟s happening in terms of the actual result 

of their words, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like for them to go to the Food 

Bank. I‟d like for them to go to the Food Bank and deliver the 

speech on the doors to the Food Bank, on the doorstep of the 

Food Bank to the increasing numbers of children and seniors 

and new Canadians that are going to the Food Bank. You know, 

it would be great if they could go there and see what those 

people think of all the good things that they‟re patting 

themselves on the back for over there. 

 

[11:45] 

 

I‟d like them to go to the kids‟ Christmas parties that are put on 

by the different CBOs in our inner cities. And perhaps instead 

of, you know, helping out with the Christmas cheer, they could 

give a speech about all the great things they‟re doing and see 

what kind of reaction they get from those families that are there 

because this is the only chance at Christmas that they have, in 

terms of coming into the doors of these community-based 

organizations to have a little bit of that Christmas cheer that 

otherwise they‟re not getting. I wonder what the response to 

their speech would be in that circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like them to go and deliver their speeches to the people 

that are on waiting lists for not just housing, Mr. Speaker, but 

the thousands of people that are being turned away from the 

shelters in the province. You know, perhaps they could go 

down to Waterston House and deliver the speech about how 

great things are, and they could deliver it to the jam-packed 

room full of the people that are there because they have 

nowhere else to turn. And then they could maybe go out on the 

doorstep of Waterston House and deliver the same speech to the 

people that are lined up down the street in terms of not having a 

place to go because Waterston House is full. 

 

Or perhaps they could, you know, go to communities like 

Pelican Narrows and tell the people there what a great job 

they‟re doing. And how the road that is terrible going in, how 

that‟s no problem, you know. It‟s their lifeline on economic 

development, but don‟t worry about your road that‟s in terrible 

shape. 

They could tour the substandard housing and the houses that 

have families, sometimes two or three families, stacked up. 

They could tell them what a great job they‟re doing. 

 

They could go to places in my home community, Mr. Speaker, 

and tell the people that are living in very crowded conditions in 

houses that . . . You know, once upon a time we were getting a 

handle on the standards of housing in this province. There was 

great work being done with the communities in terms of things 

like the housing standards enforcement team. 

 

But the impact, a positive impact that that was having on a 

community like North Central, that‟s been put sideways, Mr. 

Speaker, because when the housing standards enforcement team 

goes in to conduct a survey of a house and tries to, you know, 

assess if they shouldn‟t be living there if it‟s substandard, if it‟s 

not up to the basic code, in terms of what happened before, 

there were places for those people to go if they needed to have 

the house placarded and in some cases actually bulldozed, Mr. 

Speaker. Now we have a circumstance where those people don‟t 

have anywhere to go. 

 

So the housing standards enforcement team, what do they tell 

these people? Do they tell them that they should move out into 

the snowbank and there‟s nowhere for them to go, but we‟ll get 

the standards fixed up? Or are people suffering through these 

circumstances because they have nowhere to go? And you 

know what, Mr. Speaker? More and more the people are 

suffering through these conditions that nobody should be 

putting up with. But because they have nowhere to go, they‟ll 

put up with that rather than nothing. 

 

I think of the increase in Saskatoon, 300 per cent increase over 

the past two years in terms of people being turned away from 

the women‟s shelter. And these are families that, you know, 

mothers and children that are in a terrible circumstance of 

domestic violence, they‟ve got to get out of the situation they‟re 

in. They need a safe place to go. That we‟ve got an 

astronomical increase to the number of those people being 

turned away, Mr. Speaker, in a province that is as rich and has 

as many resources going for it as Saskatchewan, I find that hard 

to understand. 

 

I find it hard to understand that in the first two years of this 

government, the first budget they brought in, there‟s a housing 

crisis on then. What happened in the first budget, Mr. Speaker? 

They cut $8 million out of Sask Housing. And then because 

there was obviously a housing crisis going on, they responded, 

not with replacing the funding for Sask Housing, not with 

increasing the other funds that were there that built projects like 

Juniper Manor, that built projects like Maple Leaf Estates, that 

built projects like the Regina Rescue Mission Souls Harbour 

safe shelter. 

 

They didn‟t increase those funds, Mr. Speaker. What they did 

was cut 8 million and then replace the activity with a task force. 

And you know, the task force did its work. They came out with 

some pat answers to say there‟s some undeniably good things 

that came out of that. But did it solve the crisis? It did not, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

So in terms of the adequate funding that needs to come forward 

to address housing, this government‟s fallen down. In terms of 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3963 

the increasing social assistance caseloads that we see that‟s, you 

know, we get the numbers, chapter and verse, just the other 

night in committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, perhaps they‟re just numbers on a page to some of 

the folks over there, but they‟re the people that come into my 

office on 5th and Retallack. They‟re the people that have 

nowhere to go. They‟re the people that have to take their 

meagre income assistance and pay it off towards rent. Or 

they‟re the people that get to double up and triple up, in some 

cases, or in the case of one grandmother, live in a tent in the 

backyard of her children‟s family for 11 months, Mr. Speaker. 

This was brought forward by Dr. Marc Spooner this past 

October in some great work that he‟s done around the housing 

crisis as it affects Regina. But if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, 

a grandmother living in a tent in your kid‟s backyard for 11 

months. And we‟ve got a cold day today, Mr. Speaker. Last 

year was especially cold. That we‟ve got people that are putting 

up with the kind of conditions that they‟ve got, and this, it again 

blows my mind. 

 

So we get the self-congratulation sermon from the members 

opposite about what great things they‟re doing. But it‟s no 

response. It‟s not even barely adequate in terms of responding 

to people who ask, where do we live? How do we put enough 

food together? How do we pay the energy bills? It‟s in terms of 

the crisis that‟s out there . . . And this was in the good times, 

Mr. Speaker. This is before the budget‟s . . . 

 

The thing is about the ‟80s is that we paid for it through the 

‟90s. And the members opposite like to check into their refrain 

about 16 years. Well what did we do for 16 years, Mr. Speaker? 

We paid off the mess that they had racked up in the ‟80s. 

 

So here we go again, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not two years into their 

regime and we‟ve got a billion dollar deficit at the mid-term of 

this budget. And the problem with that is, they make a mistake 

and the people pay. The people pay through increased utility 

rates. You know, it goes quite nicely with the doing away with 

the low-cost utility bundle that benefited seniors, that benefited 

poor people, that benefited working people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that we get the litany of self-congratulation and, you know, 

in some cases actual back-patting from the members opposite in 

the face of what is a crisis and what is going to be a hard 

Christmas for many seniors and children, First Nations and 

Métis people, for a lot of people in this province, for women. 

It‟s hard to understand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support our 

government‟s motion and our initiative to help out with the 

more vulnerable people of this province. You know, we‟ve been 

working hard to try and get a handle on this, and we haven‟t got 

everything fixed, but we are working hard. 

 

Twice this year our government has raised the shelter 

allowances administered by the Ministry of Social Services. 

The increases took effect October 1st for allowances provided 

under the Saskatchewan assistance program transitional 

employment allowance, and the Saskatchewan rental housing 

supplement as our government continues to assist those most 

affected by the escalating housing costs that we have in this 

province due to our growth that we have. 

 

Since these changes to the program were made, shelter 

allowances for Saskatchewan‟s major urban communities have 

now increased by nearly 12 per cent overall, Mr. Speaker. 

Furthermore in Regina and Saskatoon, the combined increases 

have been more than 25 per cent. The Saskatchewan rental 

housing supplement, available for families with children and 

people with disabilities, also increased for more than 300 

families. And people with disabilities in the communities such 

as Prince Albert, Yorkton, Melville, Weyburn, Kindersley, 

Rosetown, Macklin, Creighton, La Ronge, and La Loche, this 

program covers up to 30 per cent of the average market rent for 

families, and up to 40 per cent for people with disabilities. 

 

As the province of Saskatchewan moves forward, Mr. Speaker, 

our government will ensure that our most vulnerable are not 

being left behind. We‟re going to try and work with that. Mr. 

Speaker, this government is committed to putting vulnerable 

people first. As part of our promise, we have increased 

assistance to low-income seniors by doubling the seniors‟ 

income plan benefit. And, you know, that wasn‟t done since 

1992. 

 

The other thing that‟s very important, Mr. Speaker, is taking 

80,000 low-income people off the tax rolls in this province. 

This is very critical because these are the lower income people. 

These are the people that really need help. And that was a 

tremendous asset to the low-income people of this province. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, nearly 25 million has been set aside to 

improve the child welfare system, as well as implementing a 

new electronic case management system to provide better 

monitoring and protection of children and youths in its care. 

 

Roughly one year ago, Mr. Speaker, our government announced 

the single largest investment in Saskatchewan history for 

supporting people with intellectual disabilities. It began as a 

four-year, 76.9 million initiative to eliminate the 440-person 

wait-list for programs. By the end of this fiscal year, 264 people 

with intellectual disabilities will have received the help that 

they require. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 264 more people receiving the 

services that they need to live more fulfilling and independent 

lives. 

 

And on that, Mr. Speaker, we actually have something right in 

my home constituency, and that‟s the Oasis Centre that I‟ve 

happily visited a few times over in Nipawin. Now I‟ll just 

explain a little bit about the Nipawin Oasis Community Centre. 

It began as a project for a student through a vision of a mental 

health nurse in Nipawin with a self-help program for people 

diagnosed with schizophrenia, depression, bipolar disorder, and 

other chronic mental health challenges. 

 

It began actually in 1992 with a small group of individuals and 

now, 17 years later, it has grown to provide an enhanced draw 

in programming, home support, vocational opportunities, 

advocacy support, and regional summer camp for adults with 

chronic mental illness living in the Kelsey Trail Health Region 

and the Prince Albert Parkland Health Region. It‟s a great 

facility. It provides nutritional education program for vulnerable 



3964 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

families and children, and it has its own kitchen in there. As I 

said, I‟ve been through the facility itself and it is. It also works 

very well with the Aboriginal communities up there and their 

workforce. 

 

It‟s getting its money or a portion of its money through funding 

from the Ministry of Advanced Education minister and Social 

Services, the Government of Canada, and they also raise their 

own money over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This centre provides informal — non-formal and transitional — 

to formal education to support individuals who are vulnerable 

due to many layers of barriers as lack of financial resources, 

low budget and planning skills, and people who are struggling 

with drug and alcohol addictions, lack of education, low 

employment and various different things. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Today the centre is also putting some of these people . . . or 

providing them with employment. They go out and they bid on 

different jobs. They bid on janitorial services, mail delivery. 

And this is a great centre for these people who are intellectually 

disabled and have chronic mental health problems. One 

example of how our government has really helped out is, there‟s 

about $9,000 came from the Ministry of Government Services 

to provide a government mail delivery service in Nipawin. And 

this helped create a couple jobs for individuals with disabilities. 

 

We also are receiving, at the Nipawin Oasis Centre, $30,000 

from the Ministry of Education to assist in providing nutritional 

education programming for approximately 50 vulnerable 

families. There also is approximately $47,000 from the Ministry 

of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour to assist in 

providing bridging-to-employment programs for individuals 

faced with multiple barriers to employment. The majority of the 

participants are Aboriginal youth between the ages of 15 and 30 

and individuals with disabilities. Also there is about $20,000 

came from the Ministry of Social Services to work with 

individuals with complex caseloads. There‟s also $55,000 

coming from the Kelsey Trail Health Region. 

 

In total, Mr. Speaker, this government is providing $161,000 

dollars to assist those people at the Nipawin Oasis Centre. Mr. 

Speaker, this is one example, this is one example just in my 

area alone where our government is committed to helping 

people, the disadvantaged of Saskatchewan. 

 

Another one is putting money into Cumberland community 

college up there. The Minister of Advanced Education and 

Employment this year has announced a $5 million program to 

increase the size of Cumberland community college in Nipawin. 

Now this college also helps a lot of the more vulnerable people 

within the area that can‟t get away, can‟t get the education, or 

maybe they don‟t have their grade 12 and they want to move 

forward. They give them training spots. This is something else 

that our government has worked hard on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are great things, great things accomplished 

by this particular government, things that needed to be done to 

move, to move forward, to move to help the people to be able to 

help themselves to move forward within our province and go 

into meaningful employment and become great members of 

society. Therefore I really support this motion, Mr. Speaker, 

and I thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to speak to the motion put forward by the member from 

Estevan. I wish I could say I was happy to be speaking to this 

motion, but honestly it‟s more of with a sense of amazement 

that this motion is before us that I‟m on my feet. I‟m not a big 

fan of self-congratulations and cheerleading at the best of times, 

but especially not when it‟s coming from a government in a 

province with the third highest child poverty rate in Canada and 

no real plan for eliminating poverty, let alone even addressing 

it. 

 

Even the language used in the motion, even the language used 

in the motion itself clearly demonstrates this government just 

doesn‟t get it. They‟re wanting to commend themselves for 

providing increased financial support for those less advantaged. 

Yes, raising SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan] rates and 

rental supplements for those on assistance is important. But the 

reality is most people living in poverty don‟t want financial 

supports. They want financial independence. They don‟t want 

to be part of a program. They want to be making a living on 

their own. They want to be able to earn a fair wage, so they can 

put food on their own table and a decent roof over their heads. 

If they work full-time, they expect they shouldn‟t have to live 

below the poverty line. 

 

This is a government that boasted about its record of supporting 

the most vulnerable citizens in our province, and they have 

made a few positive changes. But this is also a government who 

has a habit of giving with one hand and taking away with the 

other . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You bet. They may have 

removed some of the lowest income earners from the income 

tax rolls, but these people are no further ahead when rents 

skyrocket without control and utility rates jump, which have 

under this government. 

 

And in fact in light of our current fiscal circumstances and this 

government‟s inability to manage the finances, I‟d be a little 

concerned about all these programs the members opposite have 

talked about and whether or not they‟re going to continue or 

come to fruition for all those that have been announced. 

 

Although the constituency in which I grew up and still live in 

and have the privilege of representing has some of the poorest 

citizens in this province, poverty is by no means just an issue of 

Saskatoon Riversdale. We know there are citizens from around 

the province, whether it‟s Estevan or Swift Current or 

Saskatoon Riversdale, are having a harder and harder time 

making ends meet. I heard my colleague from Saskatoon Centre 

talk about some of . . . or how well people around this province 

are faring in this economy. Instead of bragging and patting 

themselves on the back, this government needs to reflect long 

and hard about how we support all citizens to become active 

participants in their communities and their economy. 

 

I heard the member from Estevan talk about education. And 

education and training is critical, but if you don‟t put in the 

supports in place to make sure you can finish your education, 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3965 

it‟s of no use. You need housing. You need food security. You 

need child care. If those things aren‟t there, you can fund as 

many educational institutions as you want, and people won‟t be 

able to complete what they need to do to become fully 

participating citizens. 

 

People don‟t want hands out. They want a hand up, and this 

doesn‟t come in the form of cutting programs like the 

neighbourhood home ownership program. This is a program 

that over nine years allowed 110 Saskatoon homes to be 

purchased, upgraded, and turned over to co-ops of low-income 

earners who, over time, assumed the mortgages to themselves. 

 

The Minister of Social Services was quoted as saying, it‟s very 

difficult to come up with a program that is going to work well 

in the market of Saskatoon right now. Well that might very well 

be the case and governing is difficult. But the reality is, if it‟s 

difficult for government to come up with a way to support 

programming and housing, try being the single mother trying to 

scrape together enough money to buy a house. 

 

The neighbourhood home ownership program, I have first-hand 

experience with that. I have a very good friend who left an 

abusive relationship, a single mother of two kids, who had the 

opportunity to go to university. She put herself through 

university, but owning a home was a big goal of hers and she 

now has a home in the core. She‟s finished two degrees. She‟s 

working on a master‟s. She‟s employed with the federal 

government. And she wouldn‟t have owned a home had it not 

been for this program. And she‟s still a single mom with two 

kids who are now getting closer to university age. And without 

this program and the ability to have a home, especially in light 

of how the market has increased in Saskatoon, she may not 

have been able to be where she is today and be looking forward 

to supporting her kids in their educational endeavours. 

 

Food security is absolutely critical. I heard, having read 

Hansard, the Minister of Health, when Station 20 West . . . 

When the money was pulled back from Station 20 West, the 

Minister of Health said that this government would be putting 

its funding into food bank support and child hunger programs, 

which are all important things to do. But the goal should be on 

supporting self-sufficiency, not band-aid solutions. 

 

Station 20 West, food security again . . . if you‟ve got a hungry 

belly — whether or not you‟re a child attending elementary 

school and trying to learn or you‟re a parent who‟s fed your 

children all the food in the house, and you have to either try to 

apply for a job, complete your education, or go to work — it 

doesn‟t work when you have an empty belly very well. Food 

security is critical. 

 

I had the privilege on Friday night of being at the annual 

general meeting for the child hunger and education program 

which just celebrated 20 years in Saskatoon. CHEP [child 

hunger and education program] was one of the partners in 

Station 20 West. And some of the things that CHEP does to 

address food security issues, which they will continue to do but 

could have done at Station 20 West in much better capacity . . . 

collective kitchens. Collective kitchens are about people 

coming together, people who maybe don‟t have the skills and 

knowledge about good food and how to cook good food. 

They‟ve never had those things modelled for them. Collective 

kitchens allow you to buy in bulk and come together, connect, 

and have some community, but also to be able to go home, take 

some healthy meals home with you that you can use over time. 

 

CHEP also does something called the Good Food Box which I 

buy. Seventeen dollars a month allows you . . . or $17 every two 

weeks, you get a wonderful box filled with mostly local 

produce. And this allows people the opportunity to eat good 

food for much cheaper than they can purchase at their local 

convenience store in my community. 

 

So CHEP was a really important partner in Station 20 West, and 

is still doing good work. But having Station 20 West would 

have been very advantageous. And I hope that this government 

somehow sees its way between now and February and somehow 

miraculously comes up with some money for this very 

important initiative in my community. 

 

Child care‟s a huge issue in being able to achieve your goals, 

being able to finish school, being able to work, being able to 

rise out of poverty. On the doorstep, I met a woman who — 

during the Saskatoon Riversdale by-election — I met a woman 

who had to . . . She was working. She was a single mom but had 

to turn down a really good job because it had weekend work, 

and her subsidized child care was only offered Monday through 

Friday, basically eight to six. 

 

And the job that she was going to take which would improve 

the lives of her kids and her life and help her take one more step 

out of poverty . . . There was no child care. Subsidized child 

care isn‟t available on evenings and weekends. This is 

something the government, if it wants to look at supporting the 

more disadvantaged people, really needs to focus on — not only 

creating spaces, but spaces that work for people who need them. 

 

Oh I could go on and on and on. Well St. Mary‟s School. So St. 

Mary‟s School is a very important project in my community. 

When this government cut the funding to Station 20 West to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame. Shame. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I know it‟s a surprise. When this government 

took the money from Station 20 West, just a few short months 

later we heard about St. Mary‟s School being funded, which is 

great. I‟m very glad to hear that St. Mary‟s School is going to 

be going ahead. It‟s not just a school; it was meant to be a 

wonderful community area. 

 

If Station 20 West wasn‟t going to happen, well the community 

would accept that this is maybe the next best thing. But what 

did we learn in the fall? We learned that this school . . . that the 

Ministry of Education had been dealing with the school board 

in Saskatoon and telling them that they needed to scale back the 

size of this school. And some of the parts of the school . . . It 

just wasn‟t about, it just wasn‟t about education during the day. 

It was about bringing community together and having the space 

for community programming. 

 

But I have some big concerns. I had an opportunity to ask the 

Minister of Education what was happening with St. Mary‟s 

School. And he didn‟t answer my question. I said, is St. Mary‟s 

School safe? Can the school board tender the project? And I 

didn‟t get an answer. I got to hear about all the wonderful things 



3966 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

that they‟ve done everywhere else, but not here in Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

So the reality is people in Saskatoon Riversdale and around this 

province — people living in poverty — don‟t want charity. 

They want opportunity and they need the supports in place to 

become active citizens. And to be patting yourself on the back 

for a job that‟s not done or not even close to being done, I think 

is shameful. And I can tell you I will not be supporting this 

motion. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

find the members opposite and their feigned indignation about 

how this government is sharing the economic prosperity of 

Saskatchewan‟s people laughable. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite are proud of the amount of money that they 

supposedly had stashed away. And if you listen to their Finance 

critic, he says all the time that this government inherited $2.3 

billion, Mr. Speaker. That was in the bank and there was a 

booming economy. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. We were still in debate 

but time has now elapsed and I‟ll take the member‟s question 

from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question here for the government side. I don‟t know if they read 

the written questions — 491 talks about how many recipients of 

the Saskatchewan seniors‟ income plan lost benefits. Do they 

know in 2009, in the first 10 months, 3,981 seniors were thrown 

off SIP? And I want to know what the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley is telling seniors when they are worried 

about their pensions. On the one hand the government is talking 

an awful lot about SIP and all the great things. Almost 4,000 

seniors have lost their benefits. What‟s she telling seniors now? 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In my 

consultations across the whole province, seniors shared with us 

their concerns but also their wishes of what they would like to 

see in a long-term plan for seniors. 

 

And we were more than happy to be able to spend the time 

listening to them. This is something that they said that the 

previous government had never done. They had never gone out 

and listened to them. They went out, they talked to them, they 

talked above their heads, but they never ever went out and 

asked them what did they have — what were their concerns. 

And we were very pleased to be able to listen to them and we 

will then be able to share with them our findings. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve heard from the members opposite about how they had 

$2.3 billion stashed away in the bank some place, Mr. Speaker, 

but we also hear all the time, Mr. Speaker, from them, that they 

didn‟t have any money to do all the things they‟re asking for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about the seniors‟ income plan. Well the 

seniors‟ income plan funding remained the same for the 16 

years they were in government. It didn‟t change. This 

government increased it. 

 

They talk about the need for the North Battleford hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. The former minister of Health was from North 

Battleford — did nothing for 16 years. Long-term rural care, 

Mr. Speaker, they talked about. They did nothing for 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why all of a sudden, when the NDP didn‟t care 

about the people of Saskatchewan in government, now all of a 

sudden they think we should be spending money, Mr. Speaker? 

To the member from Saskatoon Centre: why didn‟t they care 

about people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I appreciate the question and I found it very 

interesting. And of course this member will remember the ‟80s. 

And I just want to talk about what Eric Howe had to say about 

the behaviour of this cabinet who don‟t seem to have any kind 

of strategy about how to move forward to help people who are 

in poverty. And in fact here is a quote that Eric Howe said 

about Grant Devine, and I‟ll quote here: 

 

So he recruited candidates for his party that had really 

good name recognition, and consequently won the 

election. But then he had very little control over the 

people he got into the party. He had very little control of 

cabinet, and the cabinet was madly off in all directions, 

spending money on all sorts of things as though there 

wasn‟t a budget constraint. 

 

And we see that, and people in this province are worried today, 

Mr. Speaker. They don‟t know about the other shoe that‟s going 

to fall over Christmas. And I can‟t believe the member would 

talk about . . . Again to use the quote from the Minister of 

Health, they should be absolutely ashamed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, my question‟s to the member 

from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. If they‟re doing such a great 

job for the disadvantaged in this province, how is it that food 

bank use rates are on the rise? How is it there are more women 

and children being turned away than ever from the shelters of 

this province? Can she answer that for us, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I know affordable housing is a concern of people in 

Saskatchewan. Here in Regina, our government is expanding 

Maple Leaf Estates to create an additional 53 units. Our 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3967 

government invested 12 million to renovate the 140-unit Milton 

Heights apartment building. This is an affordable housing unit. 

 

Our government also invested 10 million in new funding for 

affordable housing for seniors, low-income families, and those 

most vulnerable within our province. This is a good example of 

how, in Saskatchewan, we can partner. We can partner with a 

place like Habitat for Humanity. And this funding will be used 

to deliver a total of 20 affordable homes in Saskatoon, Regina, 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, Lloydminster. Mr. 

Speaker, our government is investing in the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 

committed to providing better monitoring and protection for 

children and youth in our care, which is why we have set aside 

nearly $25 million to improve Saskatchewan‟s child welfare 

system. When the members opposite were the government of 

the day, they had ample time to make the system more efficient 

to better deal with our children and youth, but they didn‟t. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: why did the 

members opposite fail to implement an electronic case 

management system, and by extension fail the province‟s most 

vulnerable children, during their 16 years in power? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m glad to hear $25 million has 

been set aside. But on matters of fiscal issues here, this 

government has no credibility and the reality is, who knows 

what‟s going to be next to be pulled back? So I wish you well in 

getting that set up, but I don‟t have a whole lot of faith. 

 

The Speaker: — Okay. I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again to the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle 

Valley. I‟d asked her a question: if they‟re doing such a great 

job for the disadvantaged in this province, how is it that the use 

at the food bank is going up? And I guess that was in last year 

when of course we were in relative boom times. 

 

Now that there‟s $1 billion deficit at the mid-term, now that 

we‟re in recession, and now that we know that the Sask Party 

budget wasn‟t worth the paper that it was written on, how much 

does she think food bank usage is going to go up next year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

last year our government announced the largest single-year 

income tax reduction in Saskatchewan‟s history. And this 

resulted in a tax saving of $440 per family of individuals and 

1,320 per year for a working family with two children. Now 

that‟s the highest level of any province and it‟s one more reason 

that Saskatchewan is the best place to earn a living and build a 

life in Saskatchewan. 

 

Our government plans to lower taxes will benefit every income 

filer in Saskatchewan and even those who pay no income tax 

currently. The basic personal exemption and the spousal 

exemption will increase by $4,000, while the child tax credit 

amount will increase by $2,000 per child. This will mean a tax 

saving of $440 per year for an individual. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

in the debate I heard one of the members talk about a poverty 

strategy for the province. And I would suggest that one of the 

best approaches to a poverty strategy is to provide a reasonable 

level of employment for the people of the province. 

 

And in this province at this time there are more people working 

than ever before, Mr. Speaker. Not only that, there are jobs 

going begging on the job sites that we run electronically on the 

Internet. But having said that, one of the other things that we 

can do as we commiserate with low-income earners is allow 

them to keep more money in their pockets. 

 

Now the Saskatchewan Party government is doing what 

members opposite, really, had 16 years to accomplish but never 

bothered. Today 80,000 people in Saskatchewan are exempt 

from paying provincial income tax because of changes we made 

through the largest ever increase in the basic personal 

exemption. 

 

To the member of Regina Elphinstone: why did the former 

government refuse to increase the basic exemption for the 

working poor? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, you know, we couldn‟t get an 

answer out of the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, so 

maybe the member from Cypress Hills would care to try 

answering. How is it that, if they‟re doing such a great job by 

the poor people of this province, that the food bank use 

numbers are up? How does that work? If all these great things 

that they‟re doing over there are having such a marvellous 

impact on the communities of this province, how is it that 

we‟ve got more people than ever going to the food bank? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — During the session, we learned of 3,300 

women who were turned away from one shelter under the Sask 

Party‟s watch. To the member from Qu‟Appelle Valley, why do 

Saskatchewan women and children have to pay for the price of 

the Sask Party‟s incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, and I appreciate the 

opportunity to answer this question. The member opposite had 



3968 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

an opportunity to enter into the debate. And as a new member, I 

know she probably enjoyed the opportunity to be able to stand 

up . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The 75-minute 

time has elapsed. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move forward on the agenda, I 

want to lay on the Table, pursuant to section 31 of The 

Ombudsman and Children’s Advocate Act, table the Children‟s 

Advocate annual report for 2008. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 609 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to speak on this 

Bill, Bill 609, An Act to Provide Protection, Rights and 

Remedies for Certain Employees. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be moving 

second reading at the end of my remarks on this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important Bill for our province, and 

long overdue, Mr. Speaker, on this Bill. But, Mr. Speaker, what 

this Bill . . . Perhaps better words may have been spoken by the 

member from Saskatoon Southeast, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

he brought forward this Bill, this exact same Bill. We‟ve left 

out a couple of sections, Mr. Speaker, but the Bill is similar to 

what the member from Saskatoon Southeast has done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s been two years now that they‟ve had an 

opportunity to bring in a Bill like this. The Bill, short title 

known as The Whistleblower Protection Act. And there is 

nothing but silence over there, Mr. Speaker. And you wonder, 

with the amount . . . And perhaps I should just give you a 

flavour of some of the, what to me at the end of the day, what 

this member was saying when he brought forward this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this is from Hansard, April 16th, 2004, Mr. Speaker. Now 

at that time, what this member was saying, and he said: 

 

It is an opportunity for the New Democratic Party to show 

willingness to work with the opposition. It‟s an 

opportunity for them to ask what they would do in this 

position and how they feel they can address a problem by 

working together with the opposition as well. 

 

More significantly [he went on to say] . . . it‟s an 

opportunity for members of both sides to show the public 

there‟s a willingness to work together and do something 

productive. It will show the public that the members of 

this House are willing to do something else than bicker, 

[Mr. Speaker] heckle, and an opportunity for them to . . . 

discuss something productive. 

Mr. Speaker, he went on to say as well, “We‟ve heard a lot of 

debate on issues relating to health and who‟s going to pay . . .” 

And the gist of this, the flavour of this, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

member was falling all over himself in trying to get this Bill 

through, get co-operation from the opposition, talking about 

how important it was for employees in this province to bring 

things forward. 

 

Now I don‟t know what‟s happened since that time, since these 

high words that the member spoke of, that he spoke that this 

was an improvement on the legislation that was in the labour 

standards since the 1990s. He talked about that. He talked about 

where you would report the wrongdoing to; where you‟d report. 

He had thought it through well. He didn‟t want to politicize it. 

He said they shouldn‟t go to the opposition or the media, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

And now what has occurred? What has occurred now, Mr. 

Speaker? And I‟m wondering, as I watched the other day on the 

ponies from the Bronson Forest, and the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast, the member from Lloydminster turned, 

and they had a discussion about an amendment that we were 

putting in. We were putting in an amendment, and the member 

there gave him some advice. And the member from 

Lloydminster stood up and he made arguments why the 

amendment should not go in. 

 

But before that was done, lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, there was 

a play sent in from outside, and they voted, Mr. Speaker, they 

voted for the amendment. Now I‟m wondering, I‟m wondering 

since the member from Saskatoon Southeast is so close to the 

member from Wood River there, if that‟s what happened in the 

instance where the member from Wood River disciplined an 

employee, Mr. Speaker, disciplined an employee or suspended 

and sent an employee home after that employee brought 

forward information, information that was then that they 

accused us of using in this House. 

 

And I‟m wondering if the member there from Saskatoon 

Southeast reached over or leaned over to the member from 

Wood River and said, you know, I don‟t think this is the thing 

to do. I don‟t think it‟s the thing to do because, you know, we 

believe in whistle-blowers‟ protection. We believe in all these 

things I said in 2004. It‟s in the record, Mr. Speaker, in 

Hansard. We believe in those things, and I don‟t think this is 

right. 

 

But maybe what happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the member 

from Wood River overruled that member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. Maybe he overruled him as he was overruled when 

he gave advice to the member from Lloydminster. Now this is, 

perhaps the member from Saskatoon Southeast is feeling rather 

lonely over there, in terms of nobody is listening to him when 

he was bringing this Bill forward. So is this a policy of the Sask 

Party government? Or is this simply some musings of the 

member from Saskatoon Southeast, because he does go on here 

in very clear language, of how his Act would be the solution to 

the problems of how people should feel, how employees should 

feel safe. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the things that we are hearing 



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3969 

now. At that time he was talking about receiving brown 

envelopes from people concerned and, Mr. Speaker, this what 

drove this member to put forward this Bill, to put forward his 

Bill. And that time, Mr. Speaker, it was Bill 201, The 

Whistleblower Protection Act, he was calling it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now we see a complete reversal, a complete 

reversal of actions, because no sooner, Mr. Speaker . . . Also the 

member, the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety was also 

making gestures. And I sit by the member from Regina 

Dewdney, and it was quite clear to me each day the questions 

that were being asked, have the police come to see you yet? 

Have the police come to see you yet, and making gestures with 

his hands as if he was going to be in handcuffs. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon Southeast, I wonder what he 

was doing when that was happening. Because in 2004 . . . And 

they loved to, Mr. Speaker, they loved to go on about the 

NDP‟s record. They love go on about the NDP‟s record and this 

was done and this was done. But here was a Bill. Here was a 

Bill. Here was a Bill, Bill 201, that the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast had brought forward. And he spent considerable 

amount of time, Mr. Speaker, and if I had enough time, I would 

read all of this into the record because we should all hear the 

words that he said here. 

 

But I wonder what is happening over there because, Mr. 

Speaker, the word hypocrisy comes to mind. The word 

hypocrisy, because there‟s a lot of talk, but where‟s the action? 

Where do we see the action? Where‟s the action here on this 

Bill? There are people now who are too frightened to come, 

after they saw what the member, what the Minister of 

Corrections has done. There are people frightened to speak up. 

They‟re frightened and they‟re coming to us to do that. And we 

are putting in a Bill now, Mr. Speaker. We‟re putting in a Bill. 

 

And I wonder what that member from Saskatoon Southeast who 

sits so close to the member from Wood River, perhaps he could 

just say, you know we should talk about this. We should talk 

about this because I‟m really concerned about that. And I 

wonder if he has. Maybe he has talked to him. But the same as 

the member from Lloydminster, when he tried to help the 

member from Lloydminster, he got shut down. He got shut 

down, and they said, we‟re not going to follow what you‟re 

saying. So perhaps that‟s a lonely member over there amongst 

the rest of them. 

 

Now this Bill is an important Bill. And I would like to on the 

record go, instead of using that member‟s words. It is an 

important Bill because we need this Bill so that people can 

come forward. So that people can come forward and not feel 

that there will be reprisals. But I‟m not certain. I‟m not certain, 

now that there is a chill out there. There is a considerable chill 

out there from what that member, what the minister from public 

corrections has done — on the record, on the record having to 

apologize for that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is important because the Minister of Public 

Safety and Corrections is the province‟s . . . he is the minister 

that stands for the police. He is the minister that stands for that 

area. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a sad day. It‟s a sad day for us all 

here. It‟s a sad day. 

 

So we have these words on paper here, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

not so long ago. We‟re not talking about many years ago. This 

is in April of 2004, so not a lot of time has passed since this 

member was talking about. 

 

Some of the other things, and these were . . . He criticized, he 

criticized the former government at that time that there was no 

strength in the legislation as it existed in labour standards. He 

went on to say how important that was and that people should 

be protected. At the heart of this, this is about to take away the 

fear. 

 

But what they have done, Mr. Speaker, is instilled fear, instilled 

fear in the Public Service Commission, in the public service of 

this province. That‟s what they have done. And they‟ve sent a 

message out. They‟ve sent a message out to everyone. If you do 

this, here‟s what‟ll happen. And the facts speak for themself. 

 

We had an employee who was on suspension, on suspension. 

And not only, Mr. Speaker, on that, there was also an issue of 

not . . . And this is a clear issue of public safety, Mr. Speaker, a 

clear issue of public safety that that party, and I would dare say 

all conservatives across the land, that rally. And I wondered, 

Mr. Speaker, at that time, had we been in government and there 

had been a sexual offender on the loose, what outcry there 

would have been from that other side. And I wonder what those 

people, what that government, and what their supporters 

thought. 

 

But not a word. Not a word. What did we get in reply? What 

did we get in reply, Mr. Speaker? What we got instead was 

gestures of handcuffs and have the police come to see you yet? 

Have the police come to see you yet? That was the reply. I 

wonder how safe public employees feel in terms of raising 

issues. I wonder how safe they feel. 

 

So my question, my question again is, when there‟s been two 

years now, two years — two years of talking, two years of Bills, 

and I still don‟t see a whistle-blower protection Act here now 

— was the member not sincere about this? Was he not sincere? 

Was the member not sincere when he put this Bill forward? Or 

has he been voted . . . Has the cabinet told him no way, we‟re 

not going to do this? 

 

And so I would encourage that member, I would encourage him 

to live up to the words that he spoke in April of 2004. Live up 

to, live up to what you said and put it forward. Put forward a 

Bill that deals with, that deals with, Mr. Speaker, deals with this 

legislation. Because he‟s got problems on that side; he‟s got 

problems on that side with ministers. And who else knows what 

else is being told to people when they raise issues? Who else, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

So at this, Mr. Speaker, we put this Bill in. And as that member 

from Saskatoon Southeast at that time said, we were trying to, 

we are trying to make it so that they can work with us to make 

this palatable for them. In fact, this is their Bill. This is his Bill. 

In fact he went on to say how this would not cost any money. 

This would not cost any money. And I think for those members 

opposite and for the Minister of Finance, this is important these 

days, that it wouldn‟t cost any money because they‟re broke. 

They‟re broke. 

 



3970 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 2009 

But I‟ll tell you, here‟s an Act. Here‟s something they could do. 

Here‟s something they could do and which that minister could 

do is bring forward The Whistleblower Protection Act so that all 

employees in this province . . . Because the signal that they 

have sent . . . 

 

And I think they would be very interested in bringing forward 

something like this to put to rest the notion, not only the notion, 

to put to rest their actions that they have taken, and to say to the 

people of Saskatchewan who are in the public service of 

Saskatchewan, you are safe to bring forward your concerns, 

safe to bring forward without being threatened that the police 

will visit your home, safe to bring forward your concerns 

without gestures of handcuffs. That‟s what you‟ll be safe to do. 

And they should do that. They should do that, Mr. Speaker, 

because this is a serious issue. 

 

And are those members concerned? Are they concerned with 

issues here of the public service being able to speak up? I don‟t 

think so because right now what we‟re left with is the actions of 

some ministers over there. Now I ask again, that member from 

Southeast, was this just some self-righteous rantings, or was he 

really serious about what he was saying? How is he squaring 

this one? Now I know they try and do some real creative math 

around the budget and how we are not in any difficulties. I 

know they will try and do that, Mr. Speaker. But how is he, I‟m 

interested to know, how is he doing it? 

 

So I‟m thinking that perhaps he has been voted down, voted 

down. And what is that saying about that Sask Party 

government? What is that saying about that Sask Party 

government who would say that it is okay to threaten, have the 

police visit at your home, and to make gestures regarding being 

handcuffed? Now that‟s the picture that is left, so I‟m 

wondering what they‟re going to do to remedy that situation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the Bill, and there‟s so much more that I 

would want to say, but I wanted to get particularly on the 

record, on the record the position of the member from 

Southeast, and my questions, I guess the questions. And I will 

be speaking more on this, Mr. Speaker, so perhaps the member 

will be given some time over the Christmas break and the 

months to reconsider, reconsider to have some times after 

listening to this and understanding that it is his Bill, his Bill that 

we are for. 

 

We are for that member from Saskatoon Southeast if he could 

just find the courage, Mr. Speaker, find the courage and tell that 

Sask Party government that this is not on, that it‟s not on. He 

should be front and centre to say this is not on, and I‟m putting 

forward this Bill, even if he has to do it by himself. I think it 

would be the honourable thing to do. The honourable thing, Mr. 

Speaker, to do is go on the record and say, this is what should 

occur. Because it leaves the impression that for two years 

nothing has happened. Two years nothing has happened. 

 

People, to me, are starting to question when they say, ask the 

member from Saskatoon Southeast. He‟d probably support you 

in this Bill. He‟ll probably support you. So perhaps I‟ll be doing 

that, Mr. Speaker, and asking him to support me on this Bill as I 

bring this forward and attempt to help him out with that 

government, with the Sask Party government to get this Bill 

through. 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s so much more, so much more that we can 

say, that we can say. So much of this is an important area. It‟s 

an important area to not only us, but it‟s an important area to 

the entire public service and their families so that they would 

feel safe, so that they would not have to go home and sit and 

allow . . . Let the public service be proud of the work that they 

do, Mr. Speaker. Let the public service be proud of the work 

that they do so that they can speak out because they want to feel 

proud. 

 

They want to feel proud of the job that they do, Mr. Speaker. 

They want to feel proud of the job that they do. And when they 

see something wrong, they don‟t want to, Mr. Speaker, hide it. 

They become complicit in that hiding. That‟s what they become 

and nobody, Mr. Speaker, nobody wants to live that way. 

Nobody wants to do a job in that fashion. These are real and 

basic concerns of people. 

 

Now as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, there‟s so much more, so 

much more to say, so much more to do, but as I spoke earlier, 

when I began . . . I would now move second reading of Bill 

609, an Act to provide protection, rights and remedies for 

certain employers, the whistleblowers protection Act. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 609, The Whistleblower 

Protection Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, certainly we would take all the 

comments into account, and we will spend some time thinking 

and talking in our caucus about this Bill, but we don‟t have time 

today because the Lieutenant Governor is going to be coming 

in. So I‟d like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Biggar has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I believe His Honour is here 

for Royal Assent. 

 

[12:45] 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 12:45 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Please be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour‟s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

  



December 3, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3971 

Bill No. 116 - The Traffic Safety (Drivers’ Licences and 

Hand-held Electronic Communications 

Equipment) Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 99 - The Emergency 911 System Amendment Act, 

2009 

Bill No. 606 - The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the 

Bronson Forest Act 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty‟s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:47.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

ask leave to make some remarks about the season before we 

adjourn the House. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a few additional comments before House 

adjournment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker and colleagues, it‟s an 

opportunity and a special time of the year to express, I think, a 

special bit of gratitude to the people that are near and dear to us 

as we take our leave of this Assembly and return to our families 

and our constituents. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions in the past people 

have always said that their families are what makes it possible 

for them to conduct themselves and discharge their duties as 

members of the official opposition and of the government. Mr. 

Speaker, I think at this season of the year when we go home to 

our family and friends, it‟s particularly important to renew and 

put on the record our appreciation for our loved ones for 

helping us discharge our duties in the ways that we do. 

 

Very often we get in the heat of debate, and we say things that 

we sometimes have reason to regret. But I hope that, and 

sincerely, that when we do those sorts of things, we get 

ourselves grounded again when we go home to our families and 

remember why we‟re really here, which is in the service of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, at this special season of the year when we think of 

peace and joy, of Christmas, I think it‟s important to remember 

that that peace and joy was epitomized by a child in a manger 

who came to the world to give us that peace and joy so that we 

might move forward in service to our brothers and sisters. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, I wish all 

members a very blessed and a holy Christmas and have a very 

enjoyable time in the comfort and arms of your family. With 

that, Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

The Speaker: — Before placing the question, I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

ask for leave to make a statement as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has asked 

for opportunity to make a statement as well. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

join with the Government House Leader in asking all members 

of this Assembly to have a very merry and joyful Christmas. 

 

As he indicated, it‟s a very special time of year. It‟s a time to 

spend with our families and our friends to reflect upon the very 

important reasons why Christmas is the holiday that it is — the 

fact that others have sacrificed around the world to make our 

country as great as it is, the fact that this is a very holy period of 

time in our religious holidays in most people‟s religions around 

the world, Mr. Speaker. And it is a holiday that‟s celebrated by 

the majority of people throughout the countries of the world. 

 

It‟s a special time, and we all should take some time to spend 

with our families and friends, renew our own vows and beliefs 

in what we stand for, Mr. Speaker, and take the opportunity to 

share our feelings about the Christmas season with our 

constituents and those that are important to us. 

 

So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to wish 

everybody on both sides of the House a very Merry Christmas 

and a Happy New Year. 

 

The Speaker: — Before placing the question, allow me just an 

opportunity as well to extend my appreciation to the members, 

to extend greetings at this special time and, as well, the 

greetings to include those who serve us: the Clerks at the Table, 

the Pages who have been with us for this fall session, the staff 

in my office, the staff throughout the building. We certainly, as 

was indicated last night, had the privilege of having dinner with 

them and just letting them know how much we appreciate them. 

 

And so as a Speaker of the Assembly, I extend to each and 

every one of the members a very special and blessed Merry 

Christmas and a happy and healthy and prosperous New Year. 

 

Having said that, the member, the Government House Leader 

has moved adjournment of the Assembly. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until the call of the Chair. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:52.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3945 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3945 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3945 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3947 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3956 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3945 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3946 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3946 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3946 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3946 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3946 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3946 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3947 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3947 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3947 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3947 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Reaction to Budget and Mid-Term Update 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3948 

 International Day of Persons with Disabilities 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3948 

 Rules 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3948 

 Turn That Frown Upside Down 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3948 

 Quiz Show 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3949 

 Christmas Greetings 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3949 

 The Night After Session 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3949 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Management of Provincial Economy 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3949 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3950 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3951 

 Ministry of Health Expenditures 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3951 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3951 

 Drinking Water Standards 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3951 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3951 

 Corrections, Public Safety and Policing Expenditures 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3952 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3952 

 Ministry of Education Expenditures 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3952 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 3952 

 Ministry of Agriculture Expenditures 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3952 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3952 

 Northern Highways and Cellphone Coverage 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3952 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3953 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3953 

 Northern Skills Training Expenditures 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3953 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3953 

  



 

 Finances of Crown Corporations 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3953 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3953 

 Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport Programs 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3954 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3954 

 Ministry of Health Expenditures 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3954 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3954 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Value-Added Growth and Economic Momentum 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3954 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3955 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Financial Support 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3956 

  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3959, 3966 

  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3960, 3966 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3962, 3966 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3963 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3964. 3967 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3966 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3967 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3967 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3968 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 609 — The Whistleblower Protection Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3968 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3970 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3970 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3971 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3971 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3971 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


