




















































Hansard: March 16, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 33B  MONDAY, MARCH 16, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2307 

 March 16, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 9 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 7 p.m., debate will continue on 

Bill No. 9, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2008. I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

truly a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to continue in 

this debate. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when I was interrupted 

by the clock at 5 o’clock, I inadvertently forgot to mark the spot 

on my speech where I had left off, so I kind of lost track of that. 

So to ensure that I didn’t overlook anything and to help the 

members over there fully comprehend everything I had to say, I 

think I’ll just start all over again from the beginning, Mr. 

Speaker. I can hear the shouts of joy coming from the benches 

across there because I’m sure that there is so much more that 

they would like to hear on this particular Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a few moments just to 

summarize and capsulize what I have covered earlier on today. 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that’s 

quickly become known or nicknamed as the double-dipping 

Bill. It’s the Act to amend the superannuation Act and the 

amendments is what seems to be quite troublesome by those 

people who have looked at it fairly closely. 

 

It opens up the opportunity, the real opportunity, for individuals 

to find themselves in a situation where they can double dip, as 

far as the compensation is concerned for civil servants. It’s a 

situation where a civil servant could find the opportunity to 

seek retirement, perhaps after working for 30 or 35 years in the 

bureaucracy. They could find themselves the opportunity to 

retire at 70 per cent of their salary range, which suppose . . . 

let’s use, for example, a civil servant who was in the salary 

range of say 200,000 a year, seen the opportunity to retire at 70 

per cent of that or $140,000 income, which is fair for a 

retirement package — this is fair — but then be able to return to 

the civil service and hold the same position, doing the same 

responsibilities, and receiving full salary. That would put the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan on the hook for support for both the 

pension, the $140,000 a year pension, plus the $200,000 a year 

salary. So then we can end up in a situation where we have an 

individual who is receiving $340,000 for doing basically the 

same job they have been doing for 200,000. So it’s just one 

small example, Mr. Speaker, of what could happen. 

 

And there has in the past been provisions within the Act that 

prevented this. Section 27, for example, of the superannuation 

amendment Act, 2008 and all the other previous Acts all 

contained the ability to prevent an employee who was collecting 

superannuation from the Government of Saskatchewan from 

being re-employed by the Government of Saskatchewan, but 

continuing their employment without actually retiring, which 

would allow under this . . . which would be allowed under this 

provision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, preventing someone from double-dipping and 

preventing the taxpayers from paying twice for the same service 

is fundamental and it’s an important public policy position. 

 

But this Act, this Act changes that. It opens the door to the 

possibility of somebody within the system to double dip, to 

draw their pension while being re-employed by the government 

at full salary. That, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think is acceptable to 

people across this great province. When they fully understand 

what is at stake here, I think you will find that most people 

wouldn’t subscribe to that process. 

 

It also has a limiting factor. It limits the ability for young people 

to get into our bureaucracy, to get into the system, to get into 

our departments, which is I think very important. I think it’s 

important that we continuously recruit young, bright, 

well-educated, very capable people to our bureaucracy to 

continue to support the programs that are identified by 

government as important to Saskatchewan people. 

 

I believe it’s important to have a continuum of renewal. I don’t 

think that we want to have a wholesale turnover of personnel. I 

think we want to have a continuum of renewal. I think there’s a 

great deal of importance to having young people coming in with 

a fresh . . . fresh minds, I guess you would say, youthful 

enthusiasm. 

 

People who have reached their capacities within our educational 

system and bring those capacities to our bureaucracy I think is 

very much appreciated, I think, at the same time as being able 

to retain veterans of the workplace — those who’ve been 

around the bureaucracy for a while, those who have seen the 

highs and lows, I guess you would say, of working within our 

system in this province. Saskatchewan has been very fortunate 

in the past to have good quality workers working for us in our 

bureaucracy, and we continue to have that. I think that’s what 

makes Saskatchewan strong. 

 

I think there’s a uniqueness about Saskatchewan. I know it 

attracts people not only from this province, not only a lot of 

young people who are born and raised here in Saskatchewan 

who go on to become very, very strong workers within our 

bureaucracy, but it also attracts people from outside of 

Saskatchewan. I know that there’s some young people who 

have come to Saskatchewan for the opportunity to work here 

simply because they see Saskatchewan as a very strong and 

progressive province, progressive thinking. And we would like 

to see that continue. 

 

I had the opportunity here a while back, about a year, a year and 

a half ago now probably, to have a conversation with two . . . 

well a conversation with one of the two civil servants that have 

recently retired who live in my constituency. And I really 

enjoyed the opportunity to chat with them as we were able to in 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

fact to share a cup of coffee. 

 

And he was able to enlighten me of some of his experiences 

over the 35 years that he worked within the system here in 

Saskatchewan. And he had worked in various departments and 

had worked under various governments of different stripes and 

various ministers and really had nothing but positive things to 

say. His entire 35-year experience working in this province was 

a very positive one. 

 

I really enjoyed having the opportunity to share with him, to sit 

and listen to him share with me some of the stories, particularly 

those of a little darker days of the early ’90s when the 

government here in Saskatchewan was dealing with a 

tremendous debt situation, and each department had been asked 

to cut back and asked ways to identify savings, had been asked 

to make some of those tough decisions. 

 

And we had an opportunity to have a chat about that time. It 

seemed to be something that he found some pride in because the 

approach was a co-operative approach. It was an approach 

where everybody shared in the pain. And it wasn’t easy. It was 

tough decisions had to be made. There were some programs that 

had to be restricted, programs that he would have liked to seen 

move forward. They had to be, not necessarily eliminated, but 

shelved or postponed until the fiscal situation of the province 

was much improved. 

 

But that particular period of time was something that sort of 

stood out in his mind because much of our conversation was 

around that. And he took a great deal of pride in the fact that he 

along with many of his colleagues shared in those tough 

decisions. 

 

And they just didn’t make them helter-skelter. They identified 

what some of the options were. They talked about it. They tried 

to weigh the pluses and the minuses to those options and come 

up with the best solution — the best solution for their 

department, the best solution for the government, trying to 

identify ways and means of cutting back and saving some 

money — but also the best solutions for the people of 

Saskatchewan, people who at the end of the day were not only 

footing the bill for these solutions, but were also those who 

were going to have to live by them. 

 

And in some cases, they were tough decisions. There was 

programs, good programs that had to be not, like I said, not 

eliminated but simply shelved. But that I think maybe is what 

causes Saskatchewan workers — the people who work in our 

bureaucracy in this great province of ours, people who work in 

the rank and file and the field and across the service industry of 

this great province — that’s what causes them to really be loyal 

to Saskatchewan, to share in the Saskatchewan values as the 

values of co-operation, values of community, the values of 

looking out for your neighbour, making the best with what 

you’ve got in spite of the circumstances you might find yourself 

in. So I think that’s rather unique about Saskatchewan and 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

But as I noted, Mr. Speaker, there are parts of this Bill that are 

of concern to us. There are parts that we certainly support, but 

there are parts that are of concern to us. And one of them that 

jumps to mind is that quite frankly this piece of legislation is a 

fundamental shift in public policy. And what we would like to 

know is who was consulted before these amendments were 

proposed. Who did the government talk to, what stakeholders, 

what groups, even what individuals? Those are some of the 

questions that we are looking forward to having the answers. 

 

And perhaps when we get to committee, we will be able to 

delve into that a little further, and I’m hoping at that time the 

Minister will be forthright and give us the answers that we’re 

looking for. They’re just quite simply the questions that I think 

ordinary Saskatchewan people would like to know. There’s 

nothing wrong with those questions. There’s nothing wrong 

with wanting to know that. 

 

I mean, after all, it’s the Saskatchewan people who are the 

taxpayers who are footing this Bill and the outcome of it. They 

are going to be the ones that are going to be footing the 

double-dipping if that should occur and they’ll be footing both 

sides. They’ll be paying for the pension and they’ll also be 

paying for the salary. So I think Saskatchewan people have a 

right to know who was consulted, who was talked to, what 

stakeholders, what groups, what individuals, what companies, 

what organizations was a part of the consulting that the 

government obviously did or should have done. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, it’s the responsibility of the government 

to ensure that they bring forward the legislation that reflects the 

best interest of all Saskatchewan people, not just the fortunate 

few, but the entire good cross-section of Saskatchewan people 

deserve to have fair and equitable representation from their 

government. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, like I said there are a number of other 

issues that come to mind, and I believe that will need to be 

addressed. And I think we’ll need some time to talk to a broad 

cross-section of Saskatchewan people and just see how this 

affects them, how this may affect them, how this may affect 

even the people who are presently within our system, our 

bureaucracy system, our civil servants. I’d like to hear from 

them, those who are today on the front lines, but I’d also like to 

hear from those who have experienced it, who have had the 

opportunity of spending 30 or 35 years within our system, now 

retired. I think that they would have a great insight and be able 

to provide us with a lot of very useful information. 

 

So I’m looking forward to having that opportunity to talk to 

those constituents of mine who I know have retired from the 

system and I am sure that other members are wanting that 

opportunity too. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

adjournment of this debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 9. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 43 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 43 — The 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2309 

Trespass to Property Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand this evening and have an opportunity to speak to Bill 43, 

The Trespass to Property Act, Mr. Speaker. It’s also a pleasure 

to be the speaker on this Bill following the member from 

Athabasca. The last time this Bill was spoken to, I believe it 

was by the member from Athabasca. And I perhaps won’t be 

able to match his passion on this issue as he may stand alone in 

that field, and I might have some different ideas, but I hope to 

share a few of my thoughts this evening on Bill 43, The 

Trespass to Property Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it was identified by the minister in second 

reading when he introduced this Bill, that this is an Act that 

creates a new provincial offence of trespass. Essentially it 

would be an offence for an individual to enter a posted or 

enclosed area without permission. And the other part of it, Mr. 

Speaker, would be that even if it is not enclosed or not posted, if 

the individual’s given notice that an area is out of bounds, so to 

speak, that it is a no-trespassing area, that that individual could 

not go there any longer — the two aspects to this, two of the 

aspects of this Bill 43. 

 

There’s other legislation in place in the province, Mr. Speaker, 

that deals with other types of transportation, other types of 

mobility on land. As we know, in Saskatchewan we also have 

many people who are avid snowmobilers, avid ATVers, 

all-terrain vehicles, individuals that like exploring the many 

beautiful parts of Saskatchewan. And the issue of trespassing 

and the issue of access to land is a very important issue in 

Saskatchewan because everyone in the province has a deep 

connection to this place that we call home. 

 

We have for many years valued the ability to go and explore 

and to take in everything that Saskatchewan has to offer. For 

people that live in our non-urban centres, this is particularly 

important for them, Mr. Speaker, as it affects traditional ways 

and as it affects recreation pursuits, but it’s also important for 

city people as well who enjoy the opportunity to be out of the 

cities and enjoying the many beautiful parts of this province. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So in looking at this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, we have 

to examine, we have to take a look and see how this legislation 

might affect the types of behaviour and activities that have been 

going on in the province for some time. 

 

With any new piece of legislation, it’s always important to ask 

and examine what is the motivation for this legislation. What 

are . . . who are the people, is there an instance or a situation 

that’s causing a problem and that this legislation is trying to 

correct or speak to? Obviously legislation doesn’t come out of 

thin air, so there’s a process in place. One would expect that 

individuals are able to express concerns and government is able 

to see what problems there may be in a given situation, in a 

field, and respond accordingly. 

 

But I do think it’s a safe assumption, Mr. Speaker, to assume 

that no piece of legislation is created completely out of the blue. 

There obviously has to be a reason for it. There has to be people 

calling for it. There has to be a good sound argument made by 

government as to why a piece of legislation should be put in 

place. 

 

This is particularly true in the area of property and trespassing 

and of access to space because there is the ability to choose 

where we want to go and how we want to go, and to do this in a 

responsible and fair way and a respectful way really cuts to the 

heart of our democracy because it’s an aspect of living in 

Canada and living in Saskatchewan that we truly do value. 

 

So I did read in the minister’s remarks on this Bill that there is 

separate legislation for snowmobilers and ATVers, and I do 

think that is a positive thing. And I know in the minister’s 

remarks he commented that it is his hope that this piece of 

legislation strikes a fair balance in what needs to be 

accomplished in respecting the rights of landowners with the 

rights and the wants of individuals who want mobility on land, 

who want the freedom to choose where they want to go and 

when they want to go there. So this is putting into law some 

clear definitions and details around this issue. 

 

Going back to my earlier comments, Mr. Speaker, about how or 

what is the impetuous or the reason for a piece of legislation 

coming into being, clearly consultation needs to be a very 

important part of any legislation that is brought in. Consultation 

really, in the same way that mobility is so important for a 

democracy, consultation and the ability of legislators and 

government to be in touch with the public is very crucial. And 

in this situation, Mr. Speaker, we have to ask questions and see 

who has been consulted in this process. That ties into some of 

the transparency and the openness issues that we’ve been 

discussing in this legislature over the past weeks. 

 

It would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, perhaps that when this Bill 

goes to committee, to have a clear or a more open discussion on 

what is the impetus for this legislation and who has been 

speaking to this and wanting this legislation to come forward. 

Who was consulted before it was drafted? Clearly legislation 

can change along the legislative process and there can be 

amendments and it can be vetted and improved, but a lot of 

work goes in at the initial drafting phase and hopefully, Mr. 

Speaker, the initial drafting would be greatly influenced and 

determined by a lot of the consultation that went on, Mr. 

Speaker. So it’s very important to have a very clear and a very 

open detailing of who was consulted, when were they 

consulted, in what ways were they consulted in the explanation 

as to how this Bill came to be in its current state. 

 

There’s been a few members from our side, Mr. Speaker, who 

have had the opportunity to speak to Bill 43, The Trespass to 

Property Act. And the members on our side, they’ve spoken to 

different concerns, different problems that could come up 

through this legislation because with any piece of legislation, 

there are certainly the intended consequences. And now, those 

can be by design, and maybe sometimes those can be through 

the implications that weren’t . . . or perhaps they can be 

accomplishing things through the back door at times, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But there’s also the many unintended consequences when 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

bringing in legislation especially, especially on an issue that’s 

as important as the personal property and the issue of 

trespassing. It’s important to fully explore who are the groups 

and in what situations might this piece of legislation have 

unintended consequences — when might something be 

happening through this legislation that actually, through the 

consultation process, wasn’t in the cards to begin with. It wasn’t 

something that was the reason that was stated, at least 

publically, as to why a piece of legislation would be coming 

forward. 

 

So it’s very important to be upfront in the consultations 

because, Mr. Speaker, it’s through a detailing of the 

consultation process where you can see who has consulted. It’s 

a means to check off possible problems that might be coming 

out through the legislation. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, if we know that only group A was 

contacted on this issue, and group A has concerns around 

hunting, perhaps this Bill would properly speak to landowners 

and hunting. However group B might not be related to hunting 

or landowners, and they might have other concerns. 

 

And now who might the other groups be that perhaps haven’t 

had as thorough of a process for consultation as they would 

like, and as the opposition would like, and I’m sure that the 

government at the end of the day also would like. When dealing 

with land, especially in non-urban areas and remote areas, 

whether that’s in a rural context in southern Saskatchewan, 

central, or northern Saskatchewan, of course there are issues to 

consider with Aboriginal peoples in our province — with First 

Nations and Métis individuals, with traditional uses of land that 

have been occurring in those areas for many, many years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s very important to fully examine, to fully discuss with 

Aboriginal people, how this piece of legislation could in fact 

affect their traditional uses of the land; whether it is something, 

as the minister stated in his opening remarks, like berry picking; 

whether it is something more significant . . . not more 

significant, whether it’s something different like hunting; 

whether it is use of certain pieces of land for spiritual and 

ceremonial reasons as well, Mr. Speaker. These are certainly 

considerations that Aboriginal peoples would certainly want to 

be consulted on if it, in fact, it could affect their use of 

traditional spaces, their use of resources, and of traditional and 

cultural expressions that may have been occurring for many, 

many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So much of this, Mr. Speaker, also it comes down to the 

definitions. It’s important for us to examine and to look at how 

the definitions in a proposed Bill — how detailed they are; how 

a definition might be able to bring more clarity for groups that 

are thinking that perhaps this affects them; how a definition 

might set people at ease knowing, okay, I understand how this 

will operate, this makes sense to me — because it affects some 

of the group, Mr. Speaker, that would certainly have concerns 

about The Trespass to Property Act. I’ve touched on the role of 

Aboriginal peoples using land. 

 

Another area that’s very important, Mr. Speaker, for having 

freedom of movement, as I mentioned, when it comes to the 

core principles of our democracy, is the freedom to gather in an 

area and to protest peacefully, whether that is for a formal 

organization within the labour movement, Mr. Speaker; whether 

that’s an ad hoc group of individuals who are simply coming 

together around an issue; whether it is an issue to do with the 

economy. Maybe it’s agricultural producers that are protesting 

for some reason, Mr. Speaker, and doing this in a public space. 

 

It’s very important to define, to have very clear definitions in 

the Bill as to what is Crown land, what is not Crown land. It’s 

very important to clearly state what the areas of concern might 

be, how different areas will have effects on groups so that they 

can respond appropriately, so that the individuals in this 

province who might express concerns about this can look at the 

document for themselves, see the definitions, and see as to 

whether or not that would apply to their situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I know there have been some concerns expressed by 

members from our side who have spoken to this issue. And 

there’s been people in the public as well that have agreed with 

some of the concerns that we’ve been raising on this side, Mr. 

Speaker, recognizing that while there may be aspects to this Bill 

that have merit and that are addressing an issue, but individuals 

realizing that in fact when bringing in a new piece of 

legislation, especially on something so important as the freedom 

of movement and the issue of trespassing, it’s important to get it 

right and to ensure that there are not unintended consequences 

coming to pass because of the legislation. 

 

In an article that was presented, Mr. Speaker, on the CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Saskatchewan website on 

Thursday, November 13 — around the time that this Bill was 

being introduced to the Assembly on the first reading — some 

of the discussion that we’ve been having, Mr. Speaker, there 

were some comments by a U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

law professor, John Whyte. And in the article Professor Whyte 

agreed with some of the concerns that we’ve been raising or 

said that they were indeed legitimate concerns. Not saying that 

there are not other parts of this Bill that might be accomplishing 

things that need to be addressed — because again we don’t 

know what the consultation process was, so it’s hard for us to 

know exactly why this Bill was being designed in the way that 

it was — but Professor Whyte speaking of the unintended 

consequences that might come to pass because of this 

legislation. 

 

And this is a quote from the article, Mr. Speaker, from again 

from November 13. And the title of the article is, 

“Saskatchewan trespass bill generating debate.” And towards 

the end of the article, Mr. Speaker, the quote from Professor 

Whyte reads: 

 

Still, while the trespassing law was not designed to restrict 

people’s rights to protest, the NDP has raised some 

concerns that need to be discussed further, Whyte said. 

 

The concerns of possible unintended consequences and how 

different groups might be affected in a way that would restrict 

their traditional ways of activity and might restrict their ability 

to peacefully gather and protest or to express their views to the 

public. 

 

And within the blogosphere, Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously a 

huge spectrum of opinion that is presented on any given item. 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

There’s the people on the far, far right; people on the far, far 

left; people in the middle; and sometimes people on other 

planets, Mr. Speaker. But in the truly democratic blogosphere 

— in a way that people can provide comment, you know, any 

way that they would like, more or less, Mr. Speaker, within 

given responsibilities — there was one posting that an 

individual, that a reader to this article made online and that was 

presented the same time that this article was printed. 

 

And this blog post or this posting on the blog, Mr. Speaker, or 

the feedback from the article says: 

 

Well spoken sir. The need to make sure the peaceful 

protest is essential in a free and fair democracy. It would 

be really stupid to not allow protests on a public 

land/highway. I remember my dad peacefully taking part 

in a highway blockade with his combine about ten years 

ago and other people’s peaceful protests/picket lines must 

not be broken over this. 

 

Over this — speaking to perhaps the unintended consequences 

that might be coming about through a piece of legislation. 

 

So it’s fine and it’s appropriate for government to be addressing 

a particular concern that, through a process of consultation, 

would’ve been brought to their attention and would be seen as a 

concern. And, Mr. Speaker, that might be, as a lot of this the 

minister’s opening comments on this piece of legislation would 

indicate, would be addressing the use of land by hunters, which 

is a huge part of Saskatchewan life. For many people it’s part of 

childhood. It’s something you do as a family. It’s something 

you do in your old age.  

 

So it’s fine to design a piece of legislation around that, Mr. 

Speaker, but it’s very, very important to fully examine a piece 

of legislation and see how there may be instances where the Bill 

could be put to use, could be applied in a way that it was not 

originally designed to. At least that’s the comments on the front 

end of the Bill, with government saying that’s not what the Bill 

was designed to do. But I do think, as Professor Whyte has 

indicated, it’s fair to ask these questions about who else is going 

to be affected by this piece of legislation. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Who else might have the freedoms that they’ve always 

appreciated and always valued affected in a way that they do 

not feel is consistent with their democratic rights? Who else 

might have their traditional behaviours and activities affected? 

And we can think of First Nations and Métis people who have 

been using the land in Saskatchewan in a responsible manner 

for many, many years. How might this piece of legislation 

affect groups like First Nations and Métis peoples? 

 

How might it affect labour organizations and their right to 

picket? How might it affect organizations that do not belong to 

the labour movement, their ability to assemble in a public area 

and to state their points of view on any given topic, whether 

that’s a view and opinion from the far right or a view and 

opinion from the far left? The beautiful thing about living in 

Saskatchewan and Canada is the ability to gather and to present 

those views. 

 

How might it affect individuals that are having a particular 

issue with the economy, whether that is a farmer wanting to 

protest through the use of his combine, whether that’s a student 

wanting to have a march, whether that’s a pro-life or a 

pro-choice group getting together somewhere expressing their 

deeply held views on an issue? So it’s very important, Mr. 

Speaker, that when we look at the Bill, that we ensure that all 

the bases are covered, that the Bill’s designed properly, and that 

there are not unintended consequences that could have a 

negative effect on the traditions and the values that we have as 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know there are other members who 

in the future would like to be speaking to Bill 43 and I know we 

have a number of items on our plate this evening for other Bills 

for further discussion. So cognizant of the time and having 

expressed some of my basic and initial thoughts on Bill 43, I at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, would like to adjourn debate. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Trespass 

to Property Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 68 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Tell that Bill No. 68 — The Arts 

Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

very pleased this evening to enter into debate on a very 

important piece of legislation, The Arts Professions Act, 2008, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while this is a good first step, there are 

many, many things that should be in this Bill that are not there, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Where this Bill does put in place 

contractual obligations between artists and those that are 

purchasing the services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it fails to truly 

help artists in their need to seek and gain meaningful, Mr. 

Speaker, financial stability, Mr. Speaker. It does not in any way 

help enhance the financial stability of artists, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a Bill before the House about two 

and a half years ago. The previous government had a Bill that 

died on the order paper, unfortunately, and was never able to be 

renewed prior to an election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the new 

government chose to significantly diminish that piece of 

legislation and remove any provisions that would have helped 

those in the artist community make a meaningful step forward 

in providing a greater degree of financial security for artists in 

our community and in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

I want to talk today about some of the circumstances in which 

artists find themselves in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and in fact in this country. Mr. Deputy Speaker, today in this 

country a full 62 per cent of those who make their earning as an 

artist in our country, 62 per cent have an income less than 

$19,000. So 62 per cent of those in Canada who make their 

living as an artist have an income less that $19,000. That’s a 

shame. That is a shame in today’s world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, across this country artists are trying to 

fight to get a financial stability in their lives, to have greater 

recognition of their contributions to Canadian society and to the 

people of our province and to our country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And the Bill that we had before the House in early 2007 would 

have provided that financial stability, would have provided 

benefits that this Bill doesn’t. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, while this is a good first step perhaps, it 

falls far short of what our artist community in Saskatchewan 

need, in fact what they deserve. Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 

average earnings at about $22,000 and with 62 per cent making 

less than $19,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill does nothing to 

help them with those dire financial situations they face on a 

daily basis. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what’s different from this Bill? 

What’s different from this Bill than the Bill that was before the 

legislature in 2007? There’s one fundamental difference — 

that’s the right of artists to bargain collectively to get a fair 

remuneration for their services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

artists today deserve that. As many of us want to be fairly 

remunerated for our services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, artists want 

the same thing. They want nothing that the rest of us do not 

want. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other very serious 

anomalies in the financial stability of those in the artist 

community. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is interesting that the 

percentages of the actual workforce that make less than 

$19,000, those who are working, is 41 per cent; in the artist 

community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 62 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, within that artist community, women 

are even more financially at risk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than 

their male counterparts. Mr. Deputy Speaker, females in the 

artist community are making less than the males. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that’s shameful. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this particular Bill that’s before the House 

today does nothing to improve that very serious situation for the 

arts community in our country, and in particular the arts 

community in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the arts community still would like to see a Bill and 

still would like to see the ability to bargain collectively to 

enhance their own financial situation in the workforce of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And why wouldn’t they, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? They would like to earn fair, fair remuneration for 

their efforts, for their jobs, and for their livelihood, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

For those who work in the artist community, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, contribute to our economy. They contribute to our 

society, and they contribute to our province — as we all do. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it is shameful that the average is less than 

$22,000 Canada-wide, and that 62 per cent make less than 

$19,000 in this country. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to say that in this country 

since 1990, the average has actually been going down in 

comparison to other Canadians. As a percentage of other 

Canadians, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the income of those in the arts 

community is actually decreasing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what are we doing about it in this Bill to 

change that? The answer is, nothing. We are doing absolutely 

nothing for those in the arts community with this particular 

piece of legislation. It does nothing to help them with their 

financial situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now the Bill, the Bill that was in the legislature in early 2007, 

put in place fundamentally the right to bargain collectively, 

which would have resulted in an increase in the average income 

taken home by those in the arts community, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But this Bill doesn’t have that. It does have the 

provisions to enforce the fact that artists and those procuring 

their services would have to, in fact, enter into contractual 

agreement. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that allows them to enforce 

that contractual agreement, but it doesn’t do anything to raise 

the actual income of those in the arts community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to help those in the arts 

community to be recognized and to be given credit for what 

they do for our province, as we do for all other occupations, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a very small percentage of 

artists in our country that do well. You know, there is 2 per cent 

of artists, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who actually make over 

$100,000 a year. That’s 2 per cent — 2 per cent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And that is not very many in an arts community in this 

country that is more than 100,000 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Two per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s absolutely shameful. 

 

Now there are more female artists than male artists in the arts 

community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but as I indicated earlier, 

female artists tend to make even less than their male 

counterparts. We have not done a single thing as this 

legislature. As those of us vested with the responsibility in this 

province to work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, we 

haven’t done what we should have done to help those in the arts 

community. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite seem not to 

take this very seriously. They tend to be laughing and joking as 

I’m talking about a very serious issue. I’m talking about the 

well-being, I’m talking about the well-being of a segment of our 

population in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m talking 

about those who make less than $19,000 a year — 62 per cent 

make less than $19,000 a year. And the average in this country, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is only $22,000 a year. That is just slightly 

above the poverty level, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can do better. This is a province 

that has led in many ways. We had the first arts board in the 

nation. We led in this country developing Canada’s first arts 

board. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s now time again for us to lead 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

and show the artists in our province, people of our province that 

we can indeed lead, take bold new steps in a new direction. 

 

In 2007 we were attempting to do that. The opposition of the 

day, the current government, stonewalled that attempt, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker — then, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — we couldn’t get that Bill through, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And after the election what happened, Mr. 

Speaker, just after the election what did we see. We see nothing 

for a year, and then we see . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an important 

piece of legislation, but more importantly is what is not here. 

And as we’re talking about this, I know that there seems to be a 

few sore paws on the other side, and people a little bit 

concerned about me pointing that they cut out, cut out, 

eviscerated the major part of a Bill that was before the house in 

2007 and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, left the artists in our province at 

a financial disability . . . or disadvantage, pardon me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, artists today in Saskatchewan are not, are 

not getting the benefit of having an opportunity to bargain 

collectively for their services. Mr. Deputy Speaker, had that 

been there, had those provisions been there today, artists would 

be much happier. They would be seeing the benefit of a greater 

remuneration for their services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they 

would be paid more appropriately for the service they do for 

their province, for the people, and for themselves, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you know, the opposition can’t 

put forward provisions in a Bill that cost money. We can only 

appeal to the government to have some care and consideration 

for those who are making an average income of about $22,000 

for their services on an annual basis, for the 62 per cent that 

make $19,000 or less a year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, 43 per cent of the artists in Canada, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — this is a very important number — 43 per 

cent of those who make their living as an artist in Canada make 

under $10,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is just not acceptable, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s outrageous in today’s world that 

people who are making a living in the artist community are 

making less than $10,000 a year. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this clearly has 

got some of the members opposite worried or offended or . . . 

I’m not quite sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But they should be, 

they should be ashamed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to put forward a 

Bill that doesn’t deal with the fundamental need of the arts 

community in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I spoke earlier that we were 

leaders in the nation in this province with Canada’s first arts 

board; we were leaders in the nation in developing rights for 

artists; and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today, today when we need to 

step up to the plate, we need to do things for the arts community 

in our province, what are we doing? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we’re giving them half a pizza. That’s kind of a common theme 

over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They don’t give anybody the 

full deal. They give them half a deal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

they can’t even do that right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this 

half a deal or half a pizza, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they forgot the 

cheese. There’s nothing there to attract them at all. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a Bill that does not go far 

enough. It doesn’t help the arts community in the ways it 

should. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to reiterate what the 

arts community is saying: this legislation does not allow for 

collective bargaining in the arts community in Saskatchewan. 

But those who are involved in the arts community in 

Saskatchewan would still like to pursue the right to collective 

bargaining in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want the members of the 

government to hear that. They would still like to pursue the 

rights to enhance their remuneration in the province of 

Saskatchewan through a collective bargaining process, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And so perhaps if we can’t do it this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

perhaps they will step up to the plate next year and bring in an 

amendment that will allow that to happen. In fact, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s so easy because in 2007 we had legislation before 

this House that did just that. They don’t have to do an awful lot 

of work. They just have to go back and draw out those sections, 

put in an amended Bill in 2010, and we can deliver that. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite want to talk 

about delivering pizza, not about delivering programs to the 

people of Saskatchewan. That’s the problem, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, they want to give us all half a pizza and then they want 

to deliver it. But, Mr. Speaker, they always go to the wrong 

address with the pizza, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they 

didn’t come anywhere near to addressing this issue. They 

missed the whole thing. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill doesn’t cut it. It doesn’t do what 

the artist community in Saskatchewan needed. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, members opposite can be laughing over there, but this 

is a serious issue for those artists in our communities who don’t 

have enough, who make less than $10,000 a year. The 43 per 

cent that make less than $10,000 a year, do they think this is 

funny? No, they don’t think that’s funny. That’s about $850 a 

month they have to live on. Try to live on $850 a month. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you couldn’t and I couldn’t, members opposite 

couldn’t, my colleagues on this side couldn’t. So why should 

we expect somebody else to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The answer 

is, we shouldn’t. 

 

We should be willing to look at provisions and put legislation in 

place that would help these people because these are our friends 

and neighbours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are the people who 

live in our province. These are the people we work for. We’re 

here today representing the people in the arts community, all of 

us, and we have to be responsible in putting forward provisions 

that help the arts community. We need to work collectively to 

help those who are making less than $10,000 a year make a 

more appropriate remuneration or a more appropriate income, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to take this seriously. And 

this Bill, this Bill does very little to help those who are making 

that less than $10,000 a year. It does put in place contractual 

obligations but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the contract is still for 

what it was five years ago, it does very little to help. So, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, where this Bill does some of the things that the 

arts community likes, it does some of the things that I think we 

as legislators need to deal with, it doesn’t go far enough. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite, it’s nice to 

see at least they’re here, a number listening to this speech. It’s 

gratifying to see that at least they’re listening. It’s gratifying to 

see that they’re here. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being here isn’t 

good enough. We need to be judged on what we do while we’re 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this Bill, this Bill doesn’t do it, 

Mr. Speaker. This Bill does not do it. And we need to consider 

passing this this year, and then coming back with an amended 

. . . a new Bill next year that actually puts in place the 

provisions to collective bargaining for artists, the provisions 

that help with their financial situation. This doesn’t do it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in our society just want to be 

treated fairly. They don’t want more than they deserve, but they 

want to be treated fairly. They want to be able to work each 

day, but also to be able to live with the benefits of that work, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And today artists don’t have the benefits 

of pensions. They don’t have the benefits of health plans unless 

they pay for them themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s 

very difficult, very difficult to do with an income of less than 

$10,000. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite are asking 

questions, while it’s good to hear they’re asking questions, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but the tough questions they need to ask to 

their own minister. They need to ask their own minister why 

she refused, and why she wouldn’t put in provisions that would 

actually help, would actually help the artists of our province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And the question isn’t for us, because we had it there and it’s 

not there today. So the artists community, the arts community in 

Saskatchewan, know this opposition would have put those 

provisions in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in the dying hours before the election, the members 

opposite refused to support it. The Bill didn’t proceed and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the new government comes in and they just 

strip out anything that actually would have helped the arts 

community in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this isn’t the only program that 

they’ve taken away that would have helped those who are most 

needy in our province. I remember the teen parenting program 

out of Saskatoon, the vulnerable workers program, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — programs that are going to help those who are the 

most vulnerable in our society and those who need our help to 

get fairness, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They have not been willing to 

help. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s unfortunate. It’s actually 

shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a pattern forming and, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the next few years I’m sure 

Saskatchewan citizens will see that pattern continue. 

 

But for now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve made the comments I 

wish to make. I hope and pray that in the future that we 

continue to take these areas and issues very seriously to help 

advance the well-being of Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

It doesn’t matter if they’re from the most advantaged in our 

province or the most disadvantaged. We as government, we as 

members of the legislature need to represent those individuals. 

We need to balance, put forward balanced positions that help 

advance the well-being of all our citizens, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can only hope that in the future 

that we see a new Bill with some additions that will actually 

help the arts community to advance their situation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So with those few, brief comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would move we adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 68, The Arts 

Professions Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 71 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 71 — The 

Innovation Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

my pleasure today to continue speaking on Bill No. 71, well, An 

Act respecting Innovation Saskatchewan, known as the 

innovation Act. And I don’t want to spend a lot of time 

repeating what I said when I previously spoke because I have 

some new material that I want to get to tonight. 

 

But in the short version of some of the things that I said the 

other day was that Saskatchewan has a very long and proud 

history of innovation without an innovation Act, without a Bill 

respecting innovation. I mean we’ve got the only synchrotron in 

Canada. We’ve got the petroleum research institute right here in 

Regina. I always grew up knowing that at the University of 

Saskatchewan, they invented alkali-resistant concrete right here 

in Saskatchewan. And that was a contribution that we’ve spread 

right around the entire world. 

 

There’s a whole lot of other innovation. I mean just ask anyone 

who’s farmed for any length of time about some of the 

innovations that they’ve had to come up with to make their 

business work, their farm work. And I know from experience 

that there are literally thousands of people around this province 

that come up with some of the most amazing designs — some 

of them very small, some of them quite large — but things that 

just . . . innovative things that they’ve seen a need for and 

decided that they would simply make it work. 

 

What I have not gotten to was the structure of Innovation 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

Saskatchewan which is going to have a seven-person board that 

will respond . . . Well the Chair of it is going to be the Minister 

of Innovation. It’s a similar structure to what the Crown 

corporations have, with the exception of the Chair is also in this 

instance the minister. Not so with the Crown corporations. 

 

So what we have is a super ministry of Innovation to look after 

the innovation Act, and what you’ve got is a seven-person 

board making recommendations to the Chair, who will then . . . 

The Chair will take it to the cabinet for their decision making, 

and then what comes out of there will be what the Chair wants 

for the public to hear. So it’s a very tightly scripted, tightly 

controlled little operation potentially, and that really is a 

concern. And it’s especially disconcerting from the opposition’s 

perspective because the Sask Party government has admitted — 

the Minister has admitted — that there will be political 

involvement in the decision-making process around 

investments. 

 

We know another concern around that is that the Sask Party 

says that Innovation Saskatchewan will only invest in 

non-mature businesses. And yet we know that the government 

opposite is a group that took $320 million out of the Green 

Future Fund, which I don’t think anybody would describe green 

innovations as a mature industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

We have again a pretty good track record on that. I mean, start 

whenever you want. In the ’70s there was an Enersave program 

that I think led all of the nation, and that was to help 

homeowners insulate and do things in their residences to reduce 

our use of fossil fuels and reduce our electrical consumption. 

And that was way back in the ’70s. 

 

Then along came the ’80s and the Conservatives axed that 

program, and instead what they did is they paid for half of a hot 

tub to get elected. They had a program where rich people could 

put in a hot tub and get half of it back. And I say rich people 

because my colleague, the member for Dewdney, Regina 

Dewdney, was talking about 43 per cent of artists that make less 

than $10,000 a year. Well those aren’t the people that were 

putting in hot tubs. I can guarantee that. 

 

[20:00] 

 

So we have . . . I think I’ve hit some nerves, and I’m enjoying 

pausing to listen to some of the heckles, Mr. Speaker. But the 

fact remains that we’ve got a government that says it will only 

put money into green or new projects — new, not mature 

projects. And I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very 

offended at that very notion on one level, and this is the level 

I’m offended. You look at the forestry industry where I mean 

the word today is hard times, unemployment, a forestry industry 

that in virtually every phase, every aspect of Saskatchewan’s 

forest industry is shut down today. Virtually every aspect of it. 

 

And I mean, I think what offends me the most, we had in the 

works, we were working to reopen the Prince Albert pulp mill. 

And I hear $100 million thrown out, and $100 million meant 

that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan weren’t on the hook for any 

environmental damage on that site. Yes, you bet it was a good 

beginning of a deal, and we were determined to follow it 

through. And you bet we’d have had that mill open. 

 

But what did we hear, what did we hear from the now 

government? We heard a vote for Darryl is a vote to open the 

mill. That’s what they said in P.A. [Prince Albert]. Well here 

we are nearly 17 months later, that mill is locked up tighter than 

it ever has been. There’s no sign of that mill opening. And you 

bet I’m offended when this government says they’ve got money 

for new things, and yet you have a whole huge sector of our 

economy shut right down. I say shame. 

 

If you want to look at agriculture, this is an area where what’s 

the government’s answer been this year? I’ll tell you one 

example that I know of, Mr. Speaker. Lands branch that rents 

Crown land to farmers. A farmer whose total bill last year was 

3,830-some dollars — it wasn’t 3,840; it was 3,830-some 

dollars to rent — and this year it’s over $9,800 to rent that exact 

same land. That’s what they’re doing for agriculture. And then 

they have the audacity to say oh, but they’re the friends of 

agriculture. Well I just, I mean with friends like that, I’ll tell 

you there’s an awful lot of farmers that don’t need enemies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m offended now. I’m hearing a member opposite 

saying I don’t believe that. You bet your bottom, I believe that. 

I know it to be factual. I know it to be factual, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what offends. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, here we are with the Saskatchewan 

innovation Act. We have a government that is wanting to set up 

a seven-member board to advise one minister on where the 

money should be put in. That minister will largely control it as 

Chair of Innovation Saskatchewan. That minister will take any 

suggestions, presumably, to cabinet, a very small group of 

people who will then say yea or nay. And then what 

information is going to come out? It will be exactly the 

minister, the information that that minister wants to come out. 

 

So we have some real concerns with the way this Act was set 

up. We have some real concerns with taxpayers’ money being 

scrutinized or not scrutinized, as the case may be. We have lots 

of questions around Innovation Saskatchewan. There’s 

potential, Mr. Speaker, for the budget to show up just a one-line 

item, and we say yea or nay. And frankly, that’s not good 

enough. I mean how can anybody be opposed to some 

economic development for Saskatchewan? But the problem is, 

we’ve got who knows how much taxpayers’ money on the hook 

here, and without the ability of an opposition, necessarily, to be 

able to scrutinize it in a timely fashion. 

 

So yes we’re concerned about the relative secrecy, and we’re 

worried about this Act which looks like it potentially can avoid 

questions in the legislature, and we’re concerned about secret 

deals. 

 

We’re only going to hear, Mr. Speaker, I predict that we’ll only 

hear about what Innovation Saskatchewan invests in or does 

when it’s a winner, when there’s a photo op and a cake to cut. 

That’s when the people of Saskatchewan will hear it. That’s 

when it’ll appear in our weekly and our daily newspapers and 

maybe on the 6 o’clock news at night. But I predict we’re not 

going to hear much about some of the bombs, some of the 

failures. And so we’re really quite concerned about this Act. It’s 

not something that we take lightly. And I want to say, Mr. 



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

Deputy Speaker, that right wingers have a long history of not 

minding the purse, and we’re pretty darned skeptical about it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that I’ve touched some nerves over 

there. I know that a number of my colleagues yet have much to 

add to this debate. Many of them want to speak to it. I’ve done 

the best I can to outline a few of the concerns that we have. And 

so at this time I move adjournment of this debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation 

Park has moved adjournment of Bill No. 71, The Innovation 

Saskatchewan Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? Carried. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 79 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to enter into this debate on An Act to 

amend The Education Act, 1995. And I find this short title 

intriguing — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2). I’ve 

not seen that too much in my time here, a Bill entitled No. 2 

when we’ve already got a Bill in place by the same title. Kind 

of an unusual process here, but nevertheless it’s what’s before 

us. And so I will talk a bit about that. 

 

And clearly it’s not a very long Bill. The Bills I have talked 

about today haven’t actually been long. They’ve been talking 

about numbers. Here the guts of the Bill really is striking out 

the number two and substituting the number three. Kind of an 

interesting concept . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And then there’ll be number four. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — We’re hearing a number four, maybe? I know 

one minister prefers no more than five, and one wants no less 

than 11. I think that’s the way it goes. 

 

But I do want to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talk a minute about this. 

And I always go back to hear what the minister had to say. And 

here we are talking about The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 2), and this is what the minister had to say back on March 

9, just last week. And I’ll quote. And this is a quote; this is a 

direct quote from the minister: 

 

This change will better ensure the impact of the changing 

Saskatchewan economy can be more fully realized in the 

community before the effect on school enrolments is 

assessed. 

 

That’s pretty straightforward. But I find this very interesting, 

the word that they’re now using to describe the Saskatchewan 

economy. It is now changing. I thought it was booming. I 

thought things were going great here. Now they’re actually 

starting to position it as an economy that’s going through some 

changes. That’ll be very interesting to see what they really 

mean in the year, in the months, weeks ahead. So what does that 

really mean? Changing. 

 

So clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re concerned about that. 

I’m just talking, I’m just saying, repeating back what the 

minister already said. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I’m just saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 

what he said. Changing. I thought it was booming, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But here, this is another quote that I find very interesting. The 

minister said: 

 

Education partners raised no objections when they were 

again consulted on the lengthening of time a school may 

be designated as a school of opportunity to three years. 

 

And I think that’s probably straightforward. They probably 

didn’t have any concerns, but did they realize that what that 

meant was that was going to be yet another version of Bill No. 

79, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2), which means 

it could take some time? This is not as straightforward. This 

could have been done a lot more simply, a little easier if it was 

done through committee and just done as an amendment, and 

we could have done that. I think that would have been a 

relatively more straightforward way here, but clearly this could 

be something that’s a little bit more complicated, more 

complicated than needs to be. 

 

You know, as I was reviewing this and I found that I was 

reading again the response that the member from Battlefords 

raised some very important points, and I want to quote from 

him. And it goes, and I’ll direct quote: 

 

For example, you know, the question that the stakeholders 

are probably asking is, how do you put a time frame on an 

opportunity? 

 

And that is so true. How do you put a time frame on 

opportunity? And, “Why do you put a time frame on an 

opportunity . . .” Why is it just a number? Really, “. . . isn’t it an 

infinite number, Mr. Speaker?” And I think that’s a really good 

point. 

 

Why is it that they’re putting a number on this? Now somebody 

might be cynical and say, well it’s interesting; we’re getting to 

the number three. And I’ve heard number four shouted out 

across the way. Just as long as it gets us past the next election, 

somebody might suggest, because they don’t want to be dealing 

with this during an election period. Clearly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this is something we’re starting to see already as when 

we have a fixed election date, we know the year it’ll happen. 

We know it’ll happen, and so the minister and the cabinet on 

the other side is starting to prepare, to start looking ahead. And 

clearly this must have come up after they put The Education 

Amendment Act, Bill No. 79, together and came up with yet 

another version of Bill No. 79, The Education Amendment Act, 

2009 (No. 2), realizing that this is a time to get it in because if 

they did it a little later, they could be problematic. 

 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that we have a lot of questions about 

this. We do want to know, when they did consult with the 

stakeholders, would the stakeholders would’ve preferred that 

this be in Bill No. 79 (No. 1) as opposed to Bill No. 79 (No. 2). 

I think there’s a big difference in those two and which ones will 

get passed through this session. I would like to know, were the 

stakeholders consulted on the process or were they kind of 

surprised of how this is getting to be kind of a complicated 

process? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this really is relatively straightforward. I 

think that we’re getting hung up on the numbers here, whether 

it’s two, three, or four. Some people say there should not be a 

number. That will be the discussion that we should have. I 

wonder if the stakeholders actually asked that very question 

because in their own language, when the economy is changing 

— not booming now, but changing — maybe when you’re in a 

bit of a downturn . . . We had the previous speaker just talk 

about the forestry sector, if there are communities along the 

forest fringe. 

 

We know that not much has happened from the government in 

terms of leadership over the past 17, 18 months. Clearly two 

years, three years is not enough. Communities have been put on 

hold and this government has not shown the leadership in the 

forestry sector that really needs to step up to the plate. So those 

communities along the forest fringe really are at risk of losing 

schools. And clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether it’s two or 

three years really doesn’t make a lot of difference, they 

probably would prefer to see no number in there because they 

do still believe in their communities. They do see their schools 

as schools of opportunity, and yet these folks, the government, 

seems intent on putting a number on it and really maybe there 

should not be a number at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I’m a little surprised. I am disappointed that the minister 

would not take a broader look at this and say listen, two or three 

really isn’t working; really you need to judge each school by its 

own merit, and why have we come up with a number here? This 

is not helpful, and clearly it’s not helpful again when they put it 

into a separate Bill. That makes it even more complicated, and 

some people may actually think it’s moving forward when 

they’re thinking Bill 79 is moving forward. But it’s not Bill No. 

79 (No. 2) that’s moving forward; it’s Bill No. 79 (No. 1) that’s 

moving forward. And so it’s kind of complicated, and I don’t 

know if it’s very helpful at all. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And I would really encourage the minister and his staff to think 

about clear, clear language when they’re putting these Bills 

together so people can follow and understand what the real 

intent of their Bills are and they can track their progress. 

Because when you have Bills with the same title, the only 

difference is the (No. 1) and (No. 2), how can you tell the 

difference? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I think that I will have many 

questions in committee because we do want to know, is this Bill 

here simply because of political reasons? Are they taking it out 

of the election time zone next time? Why did they pick three as 

opposed to two? What is the evidence to suggest three is better 

than two when you’re talking about communities or schools of 

opportunity, as I’ve said? Why not indefinite, clearly indefinite? 

 

We know that we’re into challenging economic times, as the 

minister would describe them. They’re changing economic 

times. It’s a fortunate thing that Saskatchewan has been able to 

be sheltered from the storm that’s been happening across the 

globe, but we don’t know. But we’ve seen forestry — forestry 

is a good example and there are others — but forestry is a clear 

example of a sector that’s taking more than two years, more 

than three years to recover, not just in Saskatchewan, across 

Canada, in fact in North America. But we hope that does 

bounce back. 

 

We do hope that this government does take some leadership in 

that. But when you see one department, one ministry, not 

recognizing their responsibility in leadership in some of the 

economic sectors, they . . . We talk about the social economy, 

but that was just written off by the Labour Market Commission 

— just written off. Yes, eliminated. Then you have the forestry 

sector; there’s not much movement. So I do have some 

concerns here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So with that I know others will want to speak on this Bill 

because they are concerned about the confusion that’s arising 

from this and also the idea of what really are the facts here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. With that then, I move that we move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 79, The Education Amendment Act 

(No. 2). 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 79, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 73 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 73 — The 

University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

tonight to stand and bring a few remarks to Bill 73, a Bill that 

would amend The University of Saskatchewan Act. 

 

And if I may say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to be able 

to participate in this debate. I have not had this opportunity for 

some time, given various responsibilities that I’ve held within 

government and within the opposition. And I am grateful to my 

colleagues for allowing me to have a little opportunity to speak 

to this Act tonight which involves the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, an institution which many of us 

have known as students. And I look forward in fact in my own 

life to a closer relationship with that university in future, and 

therefore I have some real interest in this particular piece of 

legislation. 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those who may not have had the 

chance to study this Bill, it proposes a variety of amendments 

which I understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have been 

recommended to government by the University of 

Saskatchewan. And that provides for these amendments a 

certain level of high recommendation, knowing that the 

amendments have been suggested by the university and are 

supported by the university. And with other members who have 

addressed this Bill in the House, both from government and 

opposition, we recognize that for the most part these 

amendments will enjoy the support, I’m sure, of all members in 

the House. 

 

One of the amendments, as I understand it, will delete the 

designation of a visitor, which is an old designation allowing 

what were described as visitors to be part of the university 

governance. That will be deleted and I think we’re in agreement 

that that’s entirely appropriate. 

 

And another amendment will extend the ability of board of 

governors to be appointed not just for two but for three 

consecutive terms. And again we’ve indicated our support for 

that concept, thinking that that experience of serving as a 

member of the board of governors at the university on occasion 

requires longer than the two terms, and a three-term limit, we 

will agree, is appropriate. 

 

The one amendment which has a certain level of debate 

attached to it is the amendment which has to do with the 

selection of a chancellor for the University of Saskatchewan. 

On this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is some difference of 

opinion. Up until this amendment, according to the existing 

Act, the chancellor is selected through a voting process which is 

available to all former graduates of the University of 

Saskatchewan, through the convocation. All of those who have 

received a degree from the University of Saskatchewan are 

eligible to cast a ballot in the selection of chancellor. 

 

The amendment that is before the House now would change 

that process to bring it into a process of a number of the board 

of governors and the senate making a recommendation to the 

senate, the senate then acting on the recommendation, 

effectively changing the process from one of a wide vote among 

all graduates to a more selective process through the board of 

governors and the senate. 

 

Now if I may say, Mr. Speaker, I believe there are good 

arguments on both sides of the questions. Good arguments can 

be made by those who would support the amendment and the 

change, and some good and decent arguments made by some 

who would not support the change. And somewhere in the 

balance, Mr. Speaker, we look for the change in legislation. 

 

The minister in his second reading remarks pointed out that in 

his view this . . . I should actually quote it I think, Mr. Speaker. 

The minister responsible in his second reading remarks said 

simply, the “. . . process for selecting a chancellor . . . [is] 

simply . . . not effective in today’s environment.” But he didn’t 

say much more than that about the reason for the change from 

his point of view. 

 

Now it can be argued that the process of selecting the 

chancellor through a vote of all of the former graduates of the 

University of Saskatchewan has in fact been effective when we 

look at that distinguished list of men and women who have 

served as the chancellor of our university: John Diefenbaker, 

Sylvia Fedoruk, Peggy McKercher, Tom Molloy, currently 

Vera Pezer, Emmett Hall. All of these have been selected 

through the process which we have known, which is the process 

of vote. I think it can be argued we have through that process 

elected some very, very significant individuals who have done 

very good work in the role of chancellor. 

 

I would suspect that part of the issue that has brought this to the 

legislature is that, I’m told, that the vote turnout, the number of 

graduates who actually do participate in this election, is 

relatively small, relatively small. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

expect you would find on the government side of the House . . . 

and I know you would find the opposition side of the House 

somewhat of a difference of opinion. And members, I think, 

have to side one side or the other on the balance of this 

question. For my own part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am not yet 

convinced that we need this change. I am not yet convinced that 

denying the opportunity for all of the graduates of the 

University of Saskatchewan to participate in selecting the 

chancellor is a process that is not still effective. 

 

In fact just this very day, Mr. Speaker, I received a very nice 

letter from the Alumni Association of the University of 

Saskatchewan. And whenever we have that contact with the 

university, it reminds us of the significance of the institution 

and our role in supporting that institution. The ability to cast a 

vote for a chancellor of the university is yet another ability to 

maintain that contact, maintain that sense of interest and 

support. 

 

I fear that one more removal of the alumni’s engagement in the 

university is not to serve the university well. Therefore in the 

balance, Mr. Speaker, I would argue that this amendment need 

not proceed. As I say, this is not an issue that’s determined by 

any partisan or, I think, philosophical point of view. It’s more 

of an individual choice. On balance I would stick with the 

process. I would encourage the university in fact to encourage 

its alumni to be part of that process in the next opportunity to 

select a chancellor. 

 

That said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suspect this legislation will 

pass the House. As I’ve said on the other amendments, there is 

little or no controversy. I expect the legislation will pass the 

House, the changes will be made, including the changes for 

chancellor. And let us be clear, I don’t believe that the future 

post-secondary education in our province hangs in the balance 

on this particular piece of legislation, but would argue and do 

argue that I do not believe, as an individual member of this 

House, that the time is right to make the change on the 

chancellor. 

 

Now I know that other members have opinions on this matter 

and will want to express those opinions in the debate. And with 

that therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 73. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 49 — The 

Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the 

opportunity to speak to The Ambulance Act which makes a 

number of very important amendments to The Ambulance Act. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, you have heard other members of the 

opposition speak to this Act. And you will have sensed, I’m 

sure, as members of government will, that on balance there is 

little that we will be critical of in these amendments. A number 

of questions have been asked and a number of questions yet 

need to be pursued in committee. 

 

But we see these amendments to The Ambulance Act as being in 

fact appropriate and in some ways necessary — necessary to 

describe more completely the governance of the ambulance 

system in our province and appropriately to make the changes 

required by The Paramedics Act that gives the self-regulating to 

the paramedics as a profession. We were pleased in government 

to work with the paramedics in putting that Act in place. And 

these amendments, as I understand them, put The Ambulance 

Act in line with the new paramedics. 

 

Every member in this House, Mr. Speaker, I think would want 

to stand in this debate and recognize the extremely important 

and valuable role that our emergency services provide, and in 

this case, particularly our ambulance services. We have built in 

Saskatchewan over time a significant continuum of care for 

emergency care, ranging from the first responders to the 

ambulance crews to the paramedics — and the growing role of 

the paramedics — to the ERs [emergency room], the nurses and 

doctors, to the specialists. It’s a long continuum of care. 

 

As a result of my own experience serving in the Ministry of 

Health — and I’m sure every Health minister before and after 

— we all quickly recognize the challenge that faces the 

province of Saskatchewan in delivering quality health care 

services, given we are, in the Canadian context or in a larger 

context, a relatively small population in a very large geography. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to meet the needs of our people, many of 

whom live in small communities, in remote communities, in 

distant communities — I think of our North, for instance — the 

role of the first responder, the role of emergency care is very, 

very crucial. I think every minister of Health recognizes that 

and, I believe, every member in the House. 

 

And therefore we have very much supported the paramedics 

and their growing role in providing that first level of care. The 

amendments to The Ambulance Act, I know, identify that new 

role and recognize it. And therefore we’re very, very pleased, 

Mr. Speaker, to be in support of the Act. 

 

Again I know that other colleagues wish to make comment on 

this Act and so I would therefore seek to move adjournment of 

this debate. 

 

[20:30] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 49. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 45 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that my House 

Leader, my caucus have asked me to make a few comments on 

these Bills tonight — all of which are not high, if I may say, in 

controversy — in fact Bills that I can find myself, for the most 

part, in support of. And this is another. The amendment to The 

Credit Union Act is an appropriate, is an appropriate 

amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I think all members of this legislature will readily 

recognize the significant role that the credit union movement 

plays, has played, and will play in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We know that as our province has changed, so 

also has the credit unions in our province. We know that in 

many of our smaller rural communities where the chartered 

banks in fact have left many areas of Saskatchewan, the credit 

unions in fact have stepped up to the plate, and they have 

opened, actually opened branches in many of our smaller 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen amalgamations of our credit unions. 

They have come together. They have come together willingly. 

They in fact could demonstrate, I think, to government on how 

that kind of work can be done — bringing out the best of both 

local control and more provincial or regional presence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act before us seeks to simply change the 

board which is responsible for the Deposit Guarantee 

Corporation of the credit union. Again, given the circumstances, 

the times in which we are in, and given the direction for boards 

of oversight of this nature should be as independent as possible 

from the institution, again the amendment is appropriate. This 

will reduce the number of board members, make the board more 

independent. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the last time we dealt with The 

Credit Union Act — maybe not the last time but the time that I 

clearly remember — the time the most recent changes to this 

particular feature of the Act was made was in, I believe, 1998. 

And if I recall, at that time The Credit Union Act that we dealt 

with in the legislature here was as thick as the Regina phone 

book or Saskatoon phone book, was a very, very thorough piece 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

of legislation. And I want to compliment my colleague from 

Lakeview who at that time steered that very major piece of 

legislation through. 

 

But even though that’s the most recent change to this provision 

of the legislation, the Guarantee Corporation, the Credit Union 

Deposit Guarantee Corporation, has been in existence since 

1953, Mr. Speaker, and it has a sterling and a flawless record of 

protecting the depositors in the credit union movement. I do not 

believe there has ever been a depositor who has lost his or her 

money in the credit union movement simply because of this 

provision in our credit unions. 

 

I believe members of all sides of the House are in these days 

meeting regularly with members of the credit union. I know I 

met with members of my own local credit union and of Credit 

Union Central just about a week ago, and we talked again about 

the importance of the movement in the province and the 

importance of this Deposit Guarantee Corporation. And we 

want to be very supportive of it. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, in terms of meeting with the credit 

union delegates, they are yet concerned and seek response to the 

issue of insurance sales within the credit union movement. This 

is on their agenda, and it’s something that government will have 

to wrestle with and provide direction to this legislature and to 

the province. 

 

But in terms of this amendment, Mr. Speaker, I — and I expect 

all members of the Assembly — will be supportive. I do know 

though, Mr. Speaker, in conversations with some of my 

colleagues, they too wish to have a few comments to this piece 

of legislation and the amendment. And therefore I will be 

pleased to move adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 45. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 51 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, thank 

you very much. It’s a pleasure and a privilege to rise and debate 

in this debate, debate on Bill No. 51, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2008. 

 

Earlier this evening when our House Leader suggested that I 

should say a few words on this particular Bill, I turned to one of 

my colleagues and said, you know, what in the world would I 

possibly know about the Provincial Court. And he said, well I 

don’t know much about it either other than that I was there 

once. So we won’t go into that any further. But we won’t ask 

him for the details of why he made it. I’m sure it was just as a 

visitor. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, that there are times when we do 

work that has been to do with pensions and benefits and matters 

that are relating to remunerations and those things that assist 

with ensuring that the people who serve the public through 

government are compensated in manners similar to those in 

other provinces, and assure that we need to review these 

procedures every so often and update them and always require a 

bit of work. But it’s essential that we ensure that those people 

who serve us well, whether they be within government or 

within the justice system, which is an arm’s length of 

government of course, are fairly compensated and are 

compensated along the lines that they would receive in other 

provinces. 

 

And I’m sure that we have a system built in. And I think the 

Minister of Justice and his officials probably ensure that we 

have a regular review to ensure that the compensation packages 

that are offered those people in our province here are equal to 

those that would be received by those in other provinces with 

the same level of responsibilities. And I think it’s only fair. 

 

I think it’s fair that we have people who are willing to take on 

these tasks and do these duties. They’re not easy. I don’t think 

anybody for one moment would suggest that a judge’s job is 

easy or anybody working within our court system is an easy 

job. I don’t think it is. I think in a lot of cases it’s probably 

stressful. I mean, in a lot of cases, a lot of weight is put on those 

decisions that are being made by these good folks, and they 

should be fairly and reasonably compensated and their benefit 

package should be that of equal to any other province, and I’m 

sure that the Ministry of Justice moves in that direction. And I 

hope that we will continue to have regular reviews to ensure 

that the compensation packages are fair. 

 

I know that this legislation has taken a little while to come 

through the Ministry of Justice. I remember back a little over a 

year ago when we were sitting in the legislature here. The New 

Democratic Party was the government at the time, I believe, 

when this process first started. And I think that this is good to 

see — it’s been carried through with the speed but also the due 

diligence that it requires. 

 

And I would like to see this move forward in a reasonable 

manner, ensuring that all the work gets done reasonably and 

that we have a good opportunity to review to make sure that 

we’re not making any mistakes; we don’t move in too great a 

haste and make decisions not based on good research and good 

understanding. And I think the minister probably is moving in 

that direction and I really don’t see too much issue with this. 

 

It would be interesting to know what discussions have taken 

place with the stakeholders as far as determining what is fair 

and reasonable compensation for their workload. I would like to 

know how broad those consultations were, whom one might 

have talked to. How broad were those consultations with 

representatives of the legal community? Did they include the 

entire legal community, or was there just an aspect of it? We 

need to know those kind of questions and answers to those kind 

of questions. 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

I think that what we see so far is certainly well headed, I guess 

you would say. But I would like to know the length of time the 

consultations took place over, what were the topics of the 

consultations, how broad were they, what part of the legal 

community was consulted. Was it the entire legal community? 

If it was, who was consulted, who were the representatives of 

those various aspects of that community? 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of questions that I 

think that I have. My colleagues probably have more questions 

and would like to put those questions forward at the first 

opportunity. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 51. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 59 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 59 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and again I 

appreciate the opportunity to enter into this debate — 

particularly into this debate, Mr. Speaker, because here we are 

. . . through this piece of legislation, government is seeking to 

amend The Election Act. 

 

Whenever, Mr. Speaker, we seek to amend The Election Act, we 

are moving into an area of very significant public policy 

because how we choose, how we choose to govern ourselves 

when it comes to process of election, comes very close to the 

heart of our democratic process and principles in this province. 

And so every amendment or change to The Election Act I think 

deserves the very high scrutiny not only of members of this 

legislature but of the public generally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the particular amendments that are before us — other 

members have addressed them — would seek, if I understand it, 

to limit government advertising in a period of time leading up to 

an election. This of course is made possible by the decision of 

government that we should move to a fixed election date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it can be well argued that these are perhaps 

good amendments. Others have argued in this debate that in fact 

even with these amendments in place that the system can be 

manipulated by government if it so chooses to do so. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve watched for instance at the federal 

level a Prime Minister give us what he described would be a 

fixed election date for federal elections, and then when push 

came to shove, of course decided he didn’t need to do that and 

he could simply call an election or dissolve parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a strong, strong feeling on the 

specific amendment that’s before us, but I have some very 

strong feelings about what I observe has been happening in our 

province when it comes to electoral reform and a discussion 

around our electoral process. Mr. Speaker, I will argue that 

what government has been doing is a very piecemeal approach 

to electoral reform. And so we have, on one occasion, we’re 

going to move to fixed elections. We have another Bill before 

the House that would have us move to Senate elections, with all 

the debate around that. Mr. Speaker, now we have another piece 

of legislation that would govern the process of government in 

the run-up to an election. 

 

My point, Mr. Speaker, that I want to make as briefly as I can 

tonight is that this piecemeal approach is not sufficient to the 

task that I believe should be before us in this legislature and as 

the people and province of Saskatchewan. I will argue, Mr. 

Speaker, as I did in the campaign before the most recent 

provincial election, that instead of piecemeal looking at the 

electoral process, that we ought to as a province and a people 

take a fundamental look at the entire electoral process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now I think all members will agree that there is much that can 

and should be done to encourage a more wholesome 

engagement of the people of Saskatchewan in the electoral 

process, in the democratic process. 

 

The democratic process, the electoral process, The Election Act 

itself, Mr. Speaker, in my view is not, first of all, the property 

of government or the property of the legislature. The democratic 

process, the electoral process, in my view, is property of the 

people of Saskatchewan. This is a process owned by the people. 

It’s not owned by a political party. It’s not owned by a 

government or an opposition or a legislature. It is a process 

owned by the people of Saskatchewan. And when it comes to a 

fundamental look at the system, that fundamental look should 

engage the people of Saskatchewan. It ought not to be just a few 

legislators deciding on how we’re going to run an electoral 

system. It ought to engage the people of Saskatchewan in a full 

and wholesome debate. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, I believe, has yet an opportunity, 

has yet an opportunity to offer to the people of Saskatchewan a 

real chance to consider all that needs to be considered about the 

electoral and democratic process in our province. This 

government has the chance. They have a strong majority. They 

won the last election. Mr. Speaker, they have a chance. Now 

that chance will disappear with every passing month as we 

approach the next election. The next window will follow after 

2011. But I believe the window is still open. 

 

Where this government, instead of piecemeal making change to 

the electoral system, could take the lead that I saw happen in 

British Columbia — which I thought was a very healthy and 

creative process — where the citizens of British Columbia in 

congress, randomly chosen, widely representative of the people 

in British Columbia, came together and gave real consideration 

to the electoral process in their province and considered issues 

like proportional representation versus first past the polls. 

 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

We could have a significant look at those who will argue that 

the age of majority, the age to vote should be lowered to 16, for 

instance. There are some who argue that. There are many who 

argue we need stronger education. We need education in civics, 

in governance, in electoral systems. Mr. Speaker, there are 

those who will argue we need change in electoral financing in 

our province — not just the matter of fixed elections, not just 

the matter of electing senators, not just the matter of restrictions 

on government in a pre-election period. 

 

There is an entire, there is an entire field of discussion where, if 

we could engage the people of Saskatchewan in a real dialogue, 

in a real debate about their electoral system — not about our 

electoral system, not about the electoral system that exists for 

politicians — but the electoral system which is our democracy, 

which belongs to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, my 

argument is that we have an opportunity now. 

 

This government has an opportunity now to lead that kind of 

discussion, to set all of these piecemeal approaches aside and let 

us have as a people, a people, serious consideration of our 

electoral system. Because, Mr. Speaker, we ought all despair 

when we see voter turnout falling. We ought to all despair when 

we see young people who do not feel engaged in our electoral 

process. We ought to all be concerned when we have First 

Nations and Métis and Aboriginal peoples who are not feeling 

engaged in the political process in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are new tools that can be used in the political 

process, that we need to better understand. My fundamental 

point, Mr. Speaker, is that now is an opportunity, and the 

opportunity is closing if we do not seize this opportunity now 

for significant, significant consideration of our electoral system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have strong feelings on the 

amendments here. I think they don’t really provide the kind of 

guarantees on government that the government opposite, I 

think, would advertise and suggest they will. But that said, there 

is so much more, so much more we could be doing and thinking 

about when it comes to how we engage in democracy in this 

province because, Mr. Speaker, no one of us would have an 

opportunity to stand in this House, no one of us would have an 

opportunity to serve in this House if it were not for that 

democratic electoral process. 

 

And it is — I agree with Churchill — it may be a difficult 

process, but there is none better. And so to guard that falls to 

government, falls to opposition, and I would encourage the 

government to go beyond this piecemeal approach to elections 

and electoral change and to let the people of Saskatchewan 

engage in a real, fundamental, fundamental discussion. 

 

Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that other members have some very 

strong opinions around this Act and will want to voice those 

opinions in this House, and therefore I am pleased to move an 

adjournment of the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 59. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 60 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 60 — The Senate 

Nominee Election Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to stand 

and speak to this particular Bill. This Bill was introduced in this 

legislature on November 18 by the Minister of Justice. And at 

that point I think there was some sense that this Bill made 

sense, that it had some utility in Saskatchewan. 

 

But just over four weeks after November 18, the Prime Minister 

appointed 18 new members to the Senate using the system that 

had been used for quite a number of decades. And all of a 

sudden this Bill doesn’t seem to have a purpose. 

 

And so my first point tonight, Mr. Speaker, is that I would ask 

the Minister of Justice to seriously consider withdrawing this 

Bill, and if he wants to come back with another Bill of a similar 

nature, he should do that in light of the present circumstances 

and the fact of the circumstances of December when the Prime 

Minister effectively took all the legs off this stool. They took 

everything away that this Bill was intended to deal with.  

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, there seemed to be a sense that this Bill 

was introduced by our present government in Saskatchewan as 

a gift or as a token towards the Prime Minister and to the 

federal Conservatives who had as a goal some form of elected 

Senate. And so this Bill was brought forward on that basis. 

 

But unfortunately when the Bill was actually presented in the 

legislature, it doesn’t fix many of the problems that many 

people in Western Canada see as problems with our Senate. 

And because it doesn’t fix those problems, I would argue that it 

actually adds to the problems that are there. And that was 

clearly confirmed just four or five weeks later when the Prime 

Minister ended up appointing a whole number of people to the 

Senate. 

 

Now what is it about the Senate that has raised the hackles of 

our party, both provincially and federally? Well I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it has to do with a role or a Senate which doesn’t seem 

to provide any kind of equal rights across the province. 

 

Quite often, I think, for those of us in Western Canada who 

have many of our roots in Western United States, we look at 

what kinds of things happen in the state Senates and state 

legislatures just south of us or in the national Government of the 

United States, where the Senates provide a role of giving every 

state an equal representation no matter how large or how small 

the area in geography or in the numbers of people that are in a 

particular jurisdiction. 

 

And clearly the way the Canadian Senate is set up now, it 

doesn’t have that role in any way that’s a fair way. And I guess 

that fundamental question arises, that what is the purpose of the 

Senate? Many people have written about this, but ultimately the 



March 16, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

answers have not satisfied many of us that there is an effective 

role for it. 

 

So I guess my own sense would be to humbly request that the 

Minister of Justice take another serious look at this particular 

legislation and maybe come back with something based on a set 

of hearings like what the Leader of the Opposition was just 

talking about as it relates to electoral reform. But that to bring 

this particular legislation in the November 2008 version which 

was totally, I guess, sidelined by December 2008, serves no 

purpose for Saskatchewan people. And in fact it just further 

complicates an area that doesn’t make much sense for us. 

 

Now I think that that particular task of performing or being a 

gesture of goodwill toward the Prime Minister is no longer 

necessary, and therefore I would ask that the minister seriously 

consider removing this particular legislation. 

 

As you can tell, I don’t have much use for this particular piece 

of legislation, and I know a number of my colleagues have 

similar comments to make about it. But I think ultimately when 

you have legislation that serves no useful purpose, then it’s 

incumbent upon the people who are proposing that — the 

government — to take another look and come back with 

legislation, if they wish to legislate in this particular area, that 

reflects the present circumstances rather than what was here a 

year ago. 

 

But I know other of my colleagues will want to comment on 

this, so I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 60. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 61 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hutchinson that Bill No. 61 — The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to talk to Bill No. 61, The Local Government 

Election Amendment Act. And my comments tonight will be 

relatively brief, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say right off the top that this looks to be a very good 

piece of legislation. This looks to be a legislation that I believe 

has been developed with the Department of Municipal Affairs 

and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

over quite a number of years, let me put it that way. 

 

Part of why I think it is quite a number of years is I know that 

reeves and mayors and councillors get elected for many of the 

same reasons that MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

and I suspect MPs [Member of Parliament] get elected, and that 

is because they want to offer themselves for service to their 

community, to their friends, and so on to do the job of 

governance — in this case local governance — but no matter 

what level that we may offer ourselves for service, I believe it’s 

a good offer. And of course it’s ultimately up to the electorate 

whether your services are required or not and for what term. 

 

I was pleased to see some changes respecting by-elections and 

the need . . . For example if there’s a vacancy in a reeve 

position, then councillors can run under this Act, can run for the 

reeve position without resigning. Of course if, for example, four 

councillors run, well by definition only one is going to win in 

my example. You would not have four by-elections as is 

currently the case, but you would have simply one by-election 

that is where the councillor became reeve. And that would serve 

people very well, so I think that’s a very, positive thing. 

 

I did notice one thing that I’ve not figured out yet and I look 

forward to us getting into committee. And that’s under section 

10 where it is one vote per elector exception. And it speaks of 

where you’re resident in one municipality and you own land in 

another, well there’s an exception. You can vote in both. If it 

speaks to, if you are resident or own land and you can vote 

there, and if you have an interest in a resort village, then of 

course you can vote in a resort village. 

 

But I’m not sure . . . I read that section and I couldn’t glean, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s designed to cap it at two or what would 

happen if someone owned land in three, four, five 

municipalities. And today with . . . There are people that own 

land in even more than that. Now there are not an awful lot of 

people, but there are some. And it begs the question, how many 

times do they get to vote? I don’t have the answer. I just don’t 

see it defined here, and I know that I’m confident that in the 

future that will become an important issue for large landowners 

or property owners; I can put it that way. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m actually quite pleased with the way this Bill 

seems to be moving the electoral process. So it’s very similar to 

one that I know, having run a number of times as an MLA, and 

it addresses things like who’s an eligible voter. It addresses 

things like what the candidate can and cannot do in the polling 

station. It addresses signage. It addresses all sorts of issues in a 

very straightforward, responsible manner that really is most 

fair. 

 

So I’m quite, quite pleased about most of what I’m seeing in 

this around The Election Act. There are a few problems yet. I’ve 

identified one of them tonight, and I know that I have some 

other colleagues that may find some other areas that they want 

to ask questions about or consult and check. So in the interest of 

allowing for that ongoing scrutiny, Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

debate on Bill No. 61 be adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 61. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2009 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 76 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 76 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to just 

make a few comments on this particular piece of legislation. It 

is legislation that normally comes to the House each year as 

there are things that are discovered that are errors, and there’s a 

couple of those, or there are some adjustments made to the 

lands that are included under The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Amendment Act. But it is important that this legislation is dealt 

with and that these lands are dealt with in the legislature 

because this legislation has an important purpose for our 

province.  

 

In reading the information that’s been provided in the 

legislature on this particular Bill 76 up to this point, I don’t 

think it would be clear to somebody reading the record what 

land is involved, in the sense of where it is. And so I will just 

provide a brief explanation that shows that where the pieces of 

land . . . There are two pieces of land that are being removed for 

errors, and one of those pieces is just east of Kyle, 

Saskatchewan on Highway 342. And, Mr. Speaker, if there’s 

anybody in that particular part of the world that is interested, 

they should look and find out where this land is, but it is quite 

close to where to my colleague grew up. And it’s an important 

part of the province. 

 

The next area which is just a small piece of land that’s being 

removed from the legislation is land that is just east of North 

Battleford up towards Mayfair, and I think it’s important that 

people understand that there’s some land that’s involved there. I 

think it’s quite a small chunk of land. 

 

There’s some land that’s being added to The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. And one piece of land that is being added is just 

to the east of Highway 16 from between North Battleford and 

going up toward Delmas, and this is land that, I think, is on the 

shore of the North Saskatchewan River, and was not previously 

included in the land and is now included. 

 

Another piece of land that is involved is land that is just south 

of Paradise Hill, and this is particular land that is being 

removed for a yard site. That seems to be in order. And the final 

piece of land that’s included here is a quarter section just to the 

east of Mayfair, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these are appropriate uses of this particular 

legislation. I know that some of my colleagues may have some 

comments on the particular land that’s involved, and so 

therefore I move to adjourn debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 76. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, considering 

the hour, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy House Leader has moved that 

this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:07.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 9 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2307 

 Bill No. 43 — The Trespass to Property Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2309 

 Bill No. 68 — The Arts Professions Act/Loi sur les professions artistiques 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2311 

 Bill No. 71 — The Innovation Saskatchewan Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2314 

 Bill No. 79 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2316 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2317 

 Bill No. 49 — The Ambulance Amendment Act, 2008 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2319 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2320 

 Bill No. 59 — The Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2321 

 Bill No. 60 — The Senate Nominee Election Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2322 

 Bill No. 61 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2008 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2323 

 Bill No. 76 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2008 (No. 2) 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2324 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


