




















































Hansard: May 05, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 58A  TUESDAY, MAY 5, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2949 

 May 5, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Merci, M. le Président. Je veux vous 

présenter un groupe d’étudiants et étudiantes de l’École Oman à 

Swift Current. Et je vous souhaite la bienvenue, aux professeurs 

et aux chaperons, au Palais législatif. 

 

[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 

you a group of students from Oman School in Swift Current. I 

welcome you all, along with your teachers and chaperones, to 

your Legislative Assembly.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a great privilege and an honour for me to 

introduce a group of students and chaperones and teachers from 

one of the very, very best elementary schools in all of the 

province, Mr. Speaker, l’École Oman School in the 

constituency of Swift Current. It’s a great French immersion 

school providing obviously grades for both French immersion 

and non-French immersion students.  

 

And it’s close to my heart, Mr. Speaker, because all of our kids 

have gone to l’École Oman School. And I would say this as 

well, Mr. Speaker: it’s special because today joining us is our 

youngest child, Faith. Our daughter is there; she’s asked me not 

to embarrass her, but sometimes dads don’t listen very well. 

Give us a little wave, Faith. There you go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to acknowledge some great teachers 

that have joined us: Mademoiselle Thomson, Kim Thomson; 

Deb Linklater. And the principal has joined us; Peggy Drinkle 

is also here. There’s a number of chaperones. Welcome to 

Jackie Watson, Tanya Bouvier-Mortenson, Les Smid, Jen 

Harroldson, Bernice Braun, and Sheila Granger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great school, made so by the parent advisory 

committee, the active parents, and by our teachers at Oman 

School. And I’d ask all members please to join with me in 

welcoming, in either language, our guests from Oman School in 

Swift Current. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, and while I’m on my feet, if I 

may very quickly welcome back to this Legislative Assembly, 

Ambassador David Wilkins, now with the firm Nelson Mullins, 

who are already doing great work on behalf of the province. We 

know, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Wilkins has served his country 

well and frankly been a friend to Canada and a friend to 

Saskatchewan, now in a more formal way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, his firm’s been busy expanding this legislative and 

public affairs role in attracting leading Democrats, as well as a 

few more from other parties in the United States, and already 

doing good work on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan to 

represent what is North America’s most compelling story. I 

wonder if members will join me in welcoming him back to this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to join with the 

Premier and call it embarrass your daughter at the legislature 

day today. Seated in the front row of the Speaker’s Gallery on 

the west side is my daughter Morgan, who also told me, please 

Mom, don’t embarrass me either. So I figure if the Premier can 

do that with his daughter, then clearly I can do that as well. So 

I’d like to present Morgan Morin, who is clearly no stranger to 

the legislature, and welcome her here today. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce a 

group in the Speaker’s Gallery as well from the Regina 

Immigrant Women Centre. There’s a group of 15 here 

accompanied by the staff from the centre. These people that are 

visiting us today are from South Korea, Pakistan, India, 

Afghanistan, Vietnam, and Israel. And I’d like to welcome 

them to the legislature and hope they enjoy the proceedings 

here today and welcome them to Canada. But most especially, 

welcome to Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d 

like to join the member opposite in welcoming these 

stakeholders associated with the Regina Immigrant Women 

Centre. We’d like to extend a very warm welcome, and they’re 

helping to ensure that our communities are increasingly 

cosmopolitan, diverse, and dynamic. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

all members to welcome these individuals and representatives 

of this centre to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, in the Speaker’s gallery, is my much younger sister here 

with us today. She’s a business owner from Prince Albert, and 

her name is Pamela Helbig-Sukut. So I’d like you to give her a 

very warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 



2950 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2009 

And it’s asking that the Government of Saskatchewan realize 

that the utilization and value of the full range of professional 

skills offered by health care providers is promoted through the 

address of retention and recruitment issues and by ensuring safe 

staffing levels. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to maintaining quality health care 

services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These signatures are from Moose Jaw, Regina, and Indian 

Head. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

well known that inadequate access to quality and affordable 

child care is a major roadblock for parents who want to access 

the labour market or further their own education, and that today 

too many Saskatchewan families are struggling or are unable to 

find quality care for their children, and this limits their future. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government, through consultation with the child care 

community, to immediately invest in growing the capacity 

of early child care community and to enable new child 

care spaces. This investment must include infrastructure 

funding for new facilities and expansion, funding to 

significantly increase the number of early childhood 

diploma and certificate training seats, and funding to 

ensure that the sector is able to increase its wages and 

benefits to attract and retain the needed professionals. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of Saskatchewan families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

in support of indexing minimum wage. Mr. Speaker, we all 

understand that the indexing of minimum wage would ensure 

that minimum wage earners would be able to maintain a 

standard of living as costs of living increase. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing the Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Maple Creek, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

research demonstrates that those working for community-based 

organizations are paid on average 8 to $10 an hour less than 

employees performing work of equal value in government 

departments. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

the implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure 

that CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees 

who perform work of equal value in government 

departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these citizens live in the good city of Moose 

Jaw and Mortlach, Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan who question why the 

Sask Party government is leaving them behind with respect to 

providing safe and affordable water. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake, Prince Albert, Carlton. I so present. 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students through the expansion of the graduate retention 



May 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2951 

program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

university students here in Saskatchewan as well as a number of 

health care professionals practising in the province who hold 

graduate degrees. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway 123 that goes through the community of 

Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by 

the leadership and community members of the village of 

Cumberland House and the Cumberland House First Nations. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the Sask 

Party government to stop denying the money that was 

allocated to this highway and commit to immediately 

improving the repairs of this highway that the people of 

northern Saskatchewan were promised. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and area. 

I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has officially 

proclaimed May 3 through 9 as North American Occupational 

Safety and Health Week, also known as NAOSH Week. 

Yesterday we officially launched NAOSH Week with a 

luncheon and keynote speaker, Dr. Roberta Bondar, a renowned 

astronaut and scientist, who shared her experiences with health 

and safety in space. I hope that her unique perspective inspired 

those who attended to make safety and injury prevention a 

priority. 

 

We all need to work to live. It’s about being there for our 

families and loved ones and living long and fulfilling lives. 

Unfortunately, the future can change in a second. I know 

first-hand. On April 28 we observed the National Day of 

Mourning for workers injured or killed on the job. Sadly, we 

recognized 31 people who lost their lives as a result of their 

duties at work. 

These tragedies remind us of the urgency of practising health 

and safety and the need to embrace safety in our hearts and 

minds. Over 40,000 workers report injuries each year, and 

Saskatchewan has the second highest injury rate in Canada. 

Farming continues to be one of the most hazardous occupations, 

with an average of 14 fatalities and over 250 hospitalizations 

each year. This is not acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us renew our commitment to injury and illness 

prevention and protecting ourselves and others at work, at 

home, and in our communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

International Day of the Midwife 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

International Day of the Midwife, a time set aside to raise 

awareness about the valuable services that midwives provide to 

expectant mothers, their families, their newborns, and to 

acknowledge the significant contributions that midwives make 

to the health of their nations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the midwifery model of care is based on the belief 

that pregnancy is a natural and healthy process. Through 

continuity of care, midwives provide high-quality, safe, and 

cost-effective services to women with low-risk pregnancies. Mr. 

Speaker, the quality of care that midwives provide is about 

much more than delivering babies. Midwives counsel, monitor, 

and support the health and emotional well-being of mothers 

from early on in their pregnancies through delivery and through 

the post-partum period. 

 

Midwives build a trusting relationship with their clients and 

work with them to make informed choices about their care. As a 

result, the demand for midwifery services often exceeds supply. 

Mr. Speaker, the midwife is the most common birth attendant in 

the world. Today’s model of midwifery services is about 

providing women with a choice for safe and healthy maternity 

care. It’s about educating and empowering women to make 

informed decisions about their pregnancies and their bodies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues to join me in 

acknowledging the Midwives Association of Saskatchewan and 

the Saskatchewan College of Midwives for educating the 

community, creating awareness, and ensuring that women with 

low-risk pregnancies receive the maternity care they want and 

need. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 5 is 

recognized around the world as the International Day of the 

Midwife, and I would like to spend a moment drawing the 

attention to our progress in offering midwifery services here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 



2952 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2009 

The model established in this province allows health regions to 

integrate publicly funded midwifery services into the overall 

maternal and infant care services to families. Today Saskatoon 

Health Region is proudly recognizing its four-person midwifery 

team and is celebrating the children born through the program 

in its first three months of operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health Region is leading the 

province in offering midwifery services here in Saskatchewan. 

The midwifery model is an excellent example of patient-centred 

care. Under this model, midwives work as specialists in normal 

births and providing women with other options for the 

management of their pregnancy and for delivery and 

post-partum care of their children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today is a day to celebrate the International Day of 

the Midwife and the success of the introduction of publicly 

funded midwifery services here in Saskatchewan. We look 

forward to building on that success in the months and the years 

to come. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Buffalo Narrows Resident Proud Northerner 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

speak of another proud northerner. John Young from Buffalo 

Narrows enjoys a challenge, but he’s also a realist who has seen 

his dreams disappear. 

 

Throughout his life, John has done one thing very well — he 

has supported his family. John was raised by his kookum, and 

as a young adult John travelled to Meadow Lake to become a 

journeyman carpenter. And even with his kookum’s help, John 

was unable to cover the expenses to remain in school. 

 

Next John turned his attention to another one of his talents — 

hockey. In boarding school at Ile-a-la-Crosse, John remembered 

attending games at neighbouring communities, often 

accompanied by some very enthusiastic nuns. John made first 

line centre for the Meadow Lake Stampeders, who promised 

John a job. However no jobs were available, and three months 

later John was forced to return home to Buffalo Narrows. 

 

With his youthful dreams behind him, John worked in the 

mining and forestry areas as part of his plan for life. However 

John’s true calling came as a forest fire fighter. For 20 years, 

John was a leader of the initial attack team, in charge of four 

men, and he travelled throughout North America fighting forest 

fires. He retired at 50 and has since returned to join the mining 

sector. And throughout his life, John with his wife Priscilla 

raised three wonderful children: Nason, Curt, and Tara. 

 

Today John wants northern talent to be recognized and given 

the opportunity lost to him. To that end, he’d like to see a trades 

school opened in Saskatchewan’s North. Mr. Speaker, John also 

believes in giving back to his community and has coached 

hockey. I thank you, John, for sharing your challenging story of 

life in the North, and I’m very proud to represent you. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Multiple Sclerosis Walk  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Sunday was a great day for a walk in the park, and a particularly 

important day for the Moose Jaw branch of the Multiple 

Sclerosis Society as they held their annual Multiple Sclerosis 

Walk in Wakamow Valley. 

 

Multiple sclerosis is an unpredictable, often disabling disease of 

the central nervous system. An estimated 55 to 75,000 

Canadians are affected with multiple sclerosis. The MS 

[multiple sclerosis] Walk is the society’s largest pledge-based 

fundraising event. This year a record 185 walkers participated 

in Moose Jaw, raising a record of nearly $35,000. The funds are 

invested in helping those with multiple sclerosis and for 

continuing research programs to end this disease. 

 

Saskatchewan Roughrider Scott Schulz came out to inspire the 

walkers and to lead the trek. The 5-kilometre walk took about 

an hour and a half. More importantly, it renewed the awareness 

of MS and raised much-appreciated funding. 

 

Of all participants, I’d particularly like to acknowledge Elsye 

Reader, who personally raised $8,754 for this event. Elsye 

participates each year and continually exceeds her own 

expectation for this worthy cause. Congratulations to Elsye and 

congratulations to the Moose Jaw Multiple Sclerosis Society for 

their dedication and organization in the annual MS Walk in 

Moose Jaw. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatoon Student Named Loran Scholar 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian Merit 

Scholarship Foundation is a privately endowed fund awarding 

yearly scholarships to Canadian students. In the fall session, I 

recognized the Saskatchewan winners of the awards. One of the 

winners was Divya Pahwa from Walter Murray Collegiate in 

the riding of Saskatoon Eastview. Divya went on to the national 

competition in Toronto and won the national scholarship award. 

She is now called a Loran Scholar. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this award is the largest undergraduate merit 

scholarship in the country. It’s based on character, service, and 

leadership potential. It is an investment in the future. The 

scholarship is renewable for up to four years of undergraduate 

study at one of 24 Canadian universities. The award is 

comprised of a stipend, a tuition waiver, funded summer 

programs, and one-on-one mentorship for a total of $75,000. 

Mr. Speaker, I interviewed Divya in the fall provincial 

competition and was so impressed with her and her 

accomplishments to date that I’m not surprised that she’s the 



May 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2953 

national winner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in 

congratulating Divya Pahwa on her prestigious award, and we 

wish her all the best in her bright future. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

New Democratic Party Memberships 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, banana republic, corruption, 

subverted by fraud, a bad smell, the story doesn’t add up, it 

defies believability, it seems to me it is fraud — those are the 

words that some of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

leadership candidates are now using to describe the Dwain 

Lingenfelter phony membership scandal. Today one of those 

candidates even called for Lingenfelter’s resignation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lingenfelter’s weak explanation yesterday reeks 

of political corruption and cover-up and leaves many 

unanswered questions. Who was this volunteer who supposedly 

signed up 1,100 members on his own? Why isn’t Dwain 

Lingenfelter allowing this person to come forward and tell his 

side of the story? How do we really know he was acting on his 

own? Was this done with the knowledge and consent of 

Lingenfelter’s campaign? 

 

Why would anyone assume that 1,100 First Nations persons 

wanted to join the NDP without checking with them first? Isn’t 

that tremendously insulting to these individuals and First 

Nations people in general? What was the plan to get these 1,100 

people to vote for Lingenfelter when they didn’t even know that 

he had signed up as a member of the NDP? And if he was really 

acting on his own, how on earth did he obtain $11,000 in 

Lingenfelter campaign money to pay for these phony 

memberships? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is old-style politics at its worst. Saskatchewan 

people deserve answers, more answers than they got from 

Dwain Lingenfelter yesterday. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Public-Private Partnerships 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party will send out a press 

release about a very important thing like popular baby names, 

but they won’t send out press releases about important public 

policy initiatives that might provide real insight into their 

direction of the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government privatized sasktel.net, directory 

assistance, message relay service without informing the public. 

This is a government that privatized the auction of surplus 

government vehicles to one of their political friends. And this 

government created a new organization within government to 

implement public-private partnerships — the P3 [public-private 

partnership] secretariat — again without any news release. 

 

To the Minister of Government Services: why is the Sask Party 

trying to hide its P3 privatization agenda? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, since the member opposite’s asking question, it’s 

certainly not a secret, Mr. Speaker, that we do have a P3 

secretariat. We’ve staffed it up. They’re starting to work; 

they’re going around talking to people, Mr. Speaker. And the 

people who are involved in the P3 are doing so because they 

want to be, Mr. Speaker, unlike the membership lists from the 

members opposite’s campaign, who don’t even know that 

they’re signed up on it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who are involved in P3 within our 

government are there because they understand the process will 

serve the people of Saskatchewan best. It’ll be open and 

accountable and efficient, Mr. Speaker, with people knowing 

exactly what they’re getting, unlike the NDP memberships. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s good 

for the minister to confirm for us that they have an agenda to 

continue privatization in our province. There’s a big difference 

between bureaucrats studying issues — something which all 

governments will do from time to time — and creating a 

specific agency, Mr. Speaker, to implement a policy of 

privatization, of private-public partnerships in our province. 

 

To the minister: everyone knows he supports P3s. Why doesn’t 

he just admit it so we can have an honest debate within this 

legislature about the issue of P3s and its policy initiatives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, we support the P3 concept, and fact is, the members 

opposite supported the P3 concept. They had a P3 set up from 

2004 to 2007, Mr. Speaker, under the leadership of the current 

deputy leader of the NDP Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is not a new concept in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

There have been P3s in Saskatchewan. We are just investigating 

those further, Mr. Speaker, for the betterment of the people of 

Saskatchewan, and we’re doing it in an open and accountable 

manner, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite in their 

leadership campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2954 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, just because the minister said 

something is not the way it is, doesn’t mean it is, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, on January 2, 2009 . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — On January 2, 2009, the Leader-Post reported: 

“British Columbia, which has been in the lead when it comes to 

such projects in Canada, has seen long-term savings and quality 

from the public-private Sea-to-Sky Highway, [D’Autremont] 

said.” In other words, the minister saw the BC [British 

Columbia] Sea-to-Sky Highway project as a model of P3 

development. 

 

To the minister: does he still see this project, the Sea-to-Sky 

Highway project, as the model? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, P3s are certainly not the way the NDP have done 

things with their membership campaign. 

 

The P3s, Mr. Speaker, are actually a system of government 

procurement that works, Mr. Speaker. The Sea-to-Sky Highway 

is one of those examples in British Columbia that has returned a 

benefit to the people of British Columbia in a cost-effective 

manner and provided them with a better highway than what 

they had originally proposed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of projects around 

the world on P3s, and fact is Tony Blair’s Britain has been one 

of the leading forces on this, Mr. Speaker. Your own ministries 

followed it in 2004 to 2007, Mr. Speaker, so I’m not sure why 

you’re all of a sudden upset about them when you were doing 

them yourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, a study prepared by the Canadian 

Centre for Policy Alternatives reports that, and I quote, “. . . the 

Sea-to-Sky P3 will cost taxpayers over $220 million more than 

a traditionally procured and financed project.” 

 

One of the main reasons for this, Mr. Speaker, is that 

governments can borrow money at a substantially lower rate 

than private developers. In the case of the Sea-to-Sky Highway, 

Mr. Speaker, the difference amounts to more than $20 million a 

year over 10 years, or a total of $220 million the taxpayers will 

have to pay in excess. 

 

To the minister: is he aware of this analysis? And if so, why is 

he promoting an option that will result in Saskatchewan 

taxpayers paying far more than they need to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re doing an analysis of all of the information that 

we can find available, not just one organization with a particular 

political goal and slant and ideology to their analysis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re taking a look at all of the evidence. That’s 

why we’re not rushing on this, Mr. Speaker. We’re taking it 

slow and deliberately to make sure that when a P3 is done that 

it’s done in the proper manner and serves the people of 

Saskatchewan — not like the NDP’s membership scandal, Mr. 

Speaker, where the Lingenfelter campaign is not serving 

Saskatchewan people well and is not even serving the NDP 

party well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Support for Education in Rural and Northern Communities 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students in all 

parts of this province are entitled to a quality education, but the 

Sask Party’s most recent budget cancelled all funding for the 

teacher recruitment and retention initiative, a program that 

provided bursaries to teachers for courses in areas where school 

divisions find it difficult to recruit and retain teachers. This 

program benefited school divisions in rural and northern 

Saskatchewan and had, according to the same letter announcing 

the program’s cancellation, “an enviable record of 

accomplishment.” 

 

To the minister: why has the Sask Party cancelled a program 

that has been so important to school divisions in rural and 

northern Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the very same questions were posed by the 

member in committee. I answered those questions in 

committee. We did an explanation as to how the province has 

evolved. I mean, at the time that the program was put into place, 

the province had well over 115 school divisions, and there was 

a need to serve smaller school divisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of amalgamation, as a result of 

individual plans at each school division level, there is a far 

greater emphasis on the school division best understanding 

what kind of teacher they require and to go ahead with 

recruitment and retention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the northern school division was the school 



May 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2955 

division that utilized this the most. We’ve had discussions with 

that northern school division and they understand why this 

move was needed. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re moving on 

with providing education, quality education. And that is why, 

Mr. Speaker, we added $240 million to funding education this 

year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this program provided 

training in Aboriginal languages and Native studies and 

bursaries for Aboriginal teachers. The Sask Party touts its 

commitment to mandatory treaty education, but it’s ending a 

program designed to create a more representative workforce for 

teachers and a more culturally relevant learning environment for 

Aboriginal students — all students for that matter. There’s more 

than a little inconsistency here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why has the Sask Party cancelled a program 

that helped to recruit more Aboriginal teachers and ensured that 

students have the opportunity to learn, in a culturally affirmed 

environment, about Aboriginal language and culture? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, we continue to recognize 

the fine work of NORTEP [northern teacher education 

program], and in fact their graduation just occurred in the last 

week, Mr. Speaker. And there are teachers that are being trained 

by the various programs. We know that in fact those teachers 

are highly likely, Mr. Speaker, to get jobs. There are very few, 

Mr. Speaker, that don’t get jobs at the time that they graduate. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve identified with the school divisions that we 

are needing to ensure that the school division can address those 

needs at that local level. That is why, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

moving away from the plan of the NDP which was to underfund 

school divisions to ensure that they would have to be passing on 

that extra need to the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. We’ve changed 

that. 

 

We’re now going to ensure that school divisions are able to 

determine what is their course of action and how they will 

recruit the teachers that they need to best deliver quality 

education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister can say all he wants, but 

it’s a program cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This program also provided teachers in rural and northern 

Saskatchewan with specialized training in areas such as autism, 

visual impairment, deaf and hard of hearing students, and 

social, emotional, and behavioural disorders. It provided 

coursework that helped rural and northern teachers meet special 

education requirements. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, students in all parts of this province 

deserve qualified teachers who can provide this kind of support. 

To the minister: why would he cut a program that supports 

students with special needs living in rural and northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there has been no cut to 

the delivery of quality of education to students. For the member 

to stand in this Legislative Assembly to suggest that there has 

been a cut to the actual provision of funds to provide education 

is wrong. It’s simply that — it’s false information Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have added, we added $240 million to 

boards of education to allow them to recognize what they need 

because, Mr. Speaker, in any school across this province, 

there’s a tremendous difference. There’s a tremendous 

difference for students as far as what special needs they require. 

And we have trust, Mr. Speaker. We have trust in those board 

members. 

 

The governing structure has remained the same as it was before 

we made the changes on the funding of those boards of 

education. We recognize the quality work. We recognize that 

there are quality teachers. And the member seems to imply that 

there aren’t quality teachers that are delivering that plan right 

now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — As always, when the minister doesn’t 

have an answer, he turns up the volume. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s cut of this program highlights 

challenges created by the Sask Party’s education financing 

changes. The Sask Party is abandoning a provincial role in the 

recruitment and retention of teachers in rural and northern 

Saskatchewan in incredibly crucial areas. They say, now it’s all 

up to local school board. But the minister can’t have it both 

ways. He can’t take control of the purse strings for education 

and then off-load responsibilities on to school boards. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party abandoning students and 

families in rural and northern Saskatchewan who need and 

deserve qualified teachers capable of providing these services? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, and for the benefit of the 



2956 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2009 

members opposite, if they would not raise their voices, I’ll 

remain calm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the information for the member opposite is this. 

The information is that the money was provided to the board of 

education. The board of education has that expense within their 

budget. 

 

So let’s use the case of the Northern Lights School Division that 

had that expenditure within their budget. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

recognized the budget from last year for this year. We’ve added 

to it the full cost of teachers’ salaries. We’ve added to it — 4 

per cent increase. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, my officials have already met with all 

of the boards involved. Mr. Speaker, there’s no change to the 

board, who was the group that decided on what teachers they 

needed. It was never the Minister of Education that determined 

what teachers would go and teach in the particular school 

division or a particular school. Mr. Speaker, that’s the role of 

the boards of education. They will continue to maintain that 

role. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Child Care Spaces 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last year this government 

committed to 500 new child care spaces. And they were starting 

at a point of 9,900 spaces available in the province, so their end 

target was 10,400 spaces. But as it turns out, after 18 months we 

now are at just over 9,700 licensed spaces in the province. Not 

only has the minister fallen short of his target, but we’ve 

actually lost ground and gone backwards. 

 

The problem is announcing the spaces without providing the 

funding needed to put the spaces in place. To the minister: 

when will he quit failing Saskatchewan families and commit the 

resources and the political will needed to make these announced 

spaces a reality? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s probably a 

good thing for the NDP — in light of the membership scandal, 

in light of the fraud scandal — it’s probably a very good thing 

that there are only a very few question periods left. Because you 

know, Mr. Speaker, the information that the member is asking 

about today is the very information that I spent many, many, 

many minutes during estimates explaining the exact procedure 

as far as the appropriation of spaces — why, under the NDP 

leadership, we were the worst in Canada; why, in fact, the per 

capita amount of child care spaces in Saskatchewan is the 

worst, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re not proud of the NDP’s record that left this 

province with just over 9,000 spaces for a province of under 1 

million people when in fact the province of Manitoba — again 

just over 1 million people — has nearly 30,000 child care 

spaces. That’s the record left by the NDP. It’s going to take us a 

little while to catch up, Mr. Speaker, and we have a long way to 

go to take care of the mess left by that government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t have 

much room to complain about our record. He says he doesn’t 

like it, but he’s done worse. He hasn’t done anything. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — We’ve gone backwards. Eighteen months and 

he’s done nothing. So it’s the government’s responsibility to 

respond to the pressures and the challenges within the province. 

And on the child care file, they have clearly failed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government hasn’t fulfilled last year’s 

promise of 500 new child care spaces, and now in this year’s 

budget they have announced another new 1,000 spaces. Now 

this government has to do more than just announce new spaces. 

You actually have to do the work and put the spaces in place. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Higgins: — To the minister: when can Saskatchewan 

families waiting for child care spaces expect to see these new 

spaces actually in place and accessible for Saskatchewan 

families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, child 

care spaces are very important to communities. And these are 

real spaces. These are real child care centres. These are real, 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the phantom memberships of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can’t have it both ways. 

She’s asking for how spaces are allocated, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the last 16 months we’ve allocated a total . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I gave this information to 

committee, and I’ll give it again to the benefit from the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. In the last year, Mr. Speaker, 35 new 

homes were licensed throughout the province. Unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, 43 licensed homes closed, resulting in a net loss of 

199 spaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are closures that occur, reasons that they 

occur. Well 10 of them chose to go work in a different field. 

Eight were for family reasons. There was non-compliance with 

regulations — five were a result of that. There was either 

retirement, illness, or death — five. And, Mr. Speaker, three 

decided to relocate. 

 



May 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2957 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is a challenge. There’s no question. There 

are people who are looking at providing child care spaces. 

They’re either going to do it through a licensed child care centre 

or they’re going to do it through an unlicensed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in a growing economy, one of the things that 

we see happen is that people who are providing those spaces 

decide that they want to do something different because there is 

a better paying job out there in the growing province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this Saskatchewan Party 

government has more financial advantage than any previous 

government in the history of this province. So the minister 

hands out, well this is where the spaces have been allocated. 

Well you know, that’s pretty cold comfort for families who are 

on waiting lists that run upwards of over 1,000 spaces in Regina 

and Saskatoon — cold comfort. Well you’re getting one 

sometime along the line. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, while this government is taking its time 

rolling out the spaces and giving some nice excuses, families 

are waiting for spaces so they can enter the labour force or 

improve their education. Mr. Speaker, this minister is failing 

Saskatchewan families. When is this government going to get 

serious about this issue and announce the spaces and actually 

put the spaces in place? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Two comments, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, two comments. I wish that the member, the critic for 

the NDP, would have passed on the information to the member 

opposite. Because, Mr. Speaker, there are 2,000 applications 

right now for 2,000 child care spaces before the ministry to look 

at the 1,000. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has asked, where 

are the spaces going to go? Well, Mr. Speaker, for this spring of 

’09, 45 are going to go to Fairhaven School in Saskatoon; 50 

are going to go Lester B. Pearson in Saskatoon; 50 are going to 

go to Yorkton; 25 spaces in Frontier; 28 spaces in Foam Lake; 

15 spaces at Hope’s Home in Regina; 15 spaces . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I find there’s some members who are 

constantly, constantly interfering in the debate. It’s not all 

members. So I’d ask the members to be mindful of the fact that 

the member has the right to place the question, and the minister 

has the right to respond without interference. The Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll continue 

with the listing: 15 spaces in Montmartre; 30 spaces in 

Gravelbourg; 30 spaces in Kipling; 41 spaces in Birch Hills; 28 

spaces in Esterhazy; 30 spaces in McLean; 50 spaces for Mount 

Royal school in Saskatoon which will end in 2010 because 

we’re working on a construction project; 50 spaces at E.D. 

Feehan, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that there’s to be a child care 

within a school, and we’re also going under way with 

renovations; 50 additional spaces to the Saskatoon Open Door 

Society; and Mr. Speaker, 36 spaces to Nipawin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that takes care of the entire amount that will move 

us up to 10,400 spaces. And then, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

be able to allocate thousands additional spaces because we have 

over 2,000 spaces of request. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Project Costs and Leadership Campaign Issues 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, January 30 

this year, the Premier announced a Montana-Saskatchewan coal 

project, a CO2 [carbon dioxide] sequestration project. And he 

announced the cost was $170 million then. Five weeks later, the 

Premier announced the price had gone from 170 to $250 

million. And then in April, April 8, the Premier said, the cost is 

now $270 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 58 per cent increase in 

less than four months. It’s a $100 million slippage in less than 

four months. 

 

My question for the Premier is: will the Sask Party come clean 

today and tell the taxpayers of Saskatchewan what the 

Saskatchewan-Montana carbon sequestration project is going to 

cost? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 

first of all, there will be more information coming forward on 

that exciting project, our joint effort with the state of Montana 

with respect to carbon capture and sequestration where the 

carbon from a Saskatchewan generation facility can be stored in 

Montana. We expect the Obama administration to be supporting 

the state of Montana’s effort here. And our federal government 

will be working with them to get their support for our own 

initiative in the province. We will be there as a partner, Mr. 

Speaker. And of course, the numbers for each partner are 

varying depending on what each federal government provides. 

 

But it’s interesting that that member would stand up and end his 

question with the words, coming clean. Because there is a party 

in this legislature that needs to come clean with the people of 

the province as to why they’ve undertaken such a woefully 

inadequate investigation of membership fraud in their party. 

That Leader of the Opposition has an obligation as the leader of 

his party to set a better example. Will he direct his party to do 

the right thing and get to the truth of the Lingenfelter 

membership scandal, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



2958 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2009 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

Montana-Saskatchewan CO2 project is one-ninth the size of the 

clean coal project that that government announced for Estevan. 

Mr. Speaker, clearly the Estevan project is much bigger and 

much more . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Clearly the Estevan 

clean coal project is nine times as big. 

 

Using the analogy of the Montana-Saskatchewan CO2 

sequestration project where costs escalated $100 million, 58 per 

cent, my question to the Premier is: what’s happened in the 13 

months since the Estevan clean coal project was announced? Is 

it up 58 per cent or is it up how much? Will he come clean on 

two fronts — the cost of the Montana CO2 sequestration project 

and the Estevan clean coal project. Will the Premier do that for 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very interesting the 

hon. member is asking about carbon capture and sequestration 

and clean coal projects because not very long ago that party 

supported them. Then the critic for the Environment has now 

said, no, they don’t support them; they don’t make a lot of 

sense. And then today we pull off the NDP web page, Mr. 

Speaker, we pull off under the category of “Our Legacy,” a line 

where they’re taking credit for working on the world’s first . . . 

[inaudible] . . . emissions clean coal power plant, Mr. Speaker. 

That was the project that they actually abandoned. 

 

We believe Saskatchewan can lead and will lead in clean coal 

technology and carbon capture, Mr. Speaker. We believe that 

Saskatchewan will continue to carve out a place of leadership 

with partners in Montana, with partners frankly in the Obama 

administration indirectly, and with our own federal government, 

and be able to market that technology around the world. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, with respect to coming clean on fronts, 

I would encourage that party opposite to think very carefully 

about their conduct over the next few days. They haven’t 

answered questions about who else knew about the Lingenfelter 

membership fraud. They have not answered questions about 

how someone could cut an $11,000 cheque in a campaign and 

the head of that campaign, Mr. Lingenfelter, say he didn’t know 

about it. They have a lot of answering to do, Mr. Speaker, to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

Specialty Wine Franchises in Regina and Saskatoon 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in December our government announced that we 

would be introducing a specialty wine franchise in 

Saskatchewan’s two major cities. Meyers, Norris and Penny 

was hired as an independent third party to conduct the 

application, review, and selection process. Each proposal was 

evaluated on a number of criteria including the proponent’s 

business plan, industry experience, retail location, and other 

factors. 

 

That process has concluded and today I announce that specialty 

wine franchises have been awarded for both Saskatoon and 

Regina. In Saskatoon, Cameron Rizos, owner and operator of 

Cava Secreta wine and spirits will be the owner and operator of 

the new franchise. 

 

Cameron has a long-standing connection to Saskatoon’s 

hospitality industry. Cameron’s family has been involved in a 

number of restaurants and fine dining establishments over the 

years, and Cameron himself has managed various 

establishments. 

 

Two years ago, his love of business and passion for food and 

drink led him to open Cava Secreta, a business focusing on 

wine education and wine merchandise. As a specialty wine 

franchisee for Saskatoon, Cameron plans on transforming his 

existing business into a much larger location in Saskatoon’s 

revitalized River Landing neighbourhood. 

 

In Regina, Wayne Henuset will own and operate the new 

franchise. Wayne has extensive experience in the beverage 

alcohol industry. In 1994 he started Willow Park Wines & 

Spirits in Calgary. Today, Willow Park Wines & Spirits has 

become the largest privately owned retail liquor store in Canada 

and is synonymous with quality, great service, and unparalleled 

selection. With his vast business experience in a variety of 

sectors, Wayne is an entrepreneur who knows how to create 

economic opportunities and someone that we are pleased to 

have in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that Saskatchewan wine lovers have been 

anxiously awaiting for news about these new businesses. 

Saskatchewan, like other provinces, is experiencing an 

ever-growing market of savvy consumers looking for specialty 

wines and information associated with entertaining — 

everything from food pairings to proper stemware to use. These 

wine store franchises will serve this niche market and 

complement SLGA’s [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] existing network of liquor stores that offer a broad 

selection of products to a much more diverse clientele. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one more way we are modernizing 

Saskatchewan’s liquor system to make it more responsive to the 

people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 



May 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2959 

like to thank the minister for sending the ministerial statement 

across the floor so I could have a chance to look at it and very 

pleased to be able to make a number of comments on the 

minister’s announcement today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this announcement was first made in 

December, the proposal did raise a number of concerns amongst 

people in the general public. And many felt that it was really the 

first step that we were seeing in the privatization of SLGA, 

something that’s been a long-standing disagreement between 

people of our political persuasion and those within the 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen over the last 

couple of months just reinforces the concern over this whole 

piece of franchisees in the specialty wine business. 

 

When we look at the contracting out and the privatization of 

sasktel.net, the privatization of directory assistance, the 

privatization of SaskTel on the message relay service, and then 

what we have seen from the central vehicle agency — the 

auctions of surplus vehicles that have been very successful over 

the years, have been proven time and time again to be the most 

cost-effective way to reduce vehicles that are no longer useful 

to the Government of Saskatchewan and to receive a very good 

return on those vehicles — we’ve seen that contracted out to a 

private auctioneer. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this one too, and we also 

think of the questions that were just asked in question period 

about this government’s preference and moving towards the 

opportunity for P3 agreements. And they haven’t been clear 

whether it’s in infrastructure, whether it’s buildings, whether 

it’s education, whether it’s in the medical system, whether it’s 

highways, where they’re looking at this. They’re just kind of 

looking. So when we add this all together, and we look at all of 

the examples that are out there, that have happened over the 

past short period of time, those concerns are still there when it 

comes to the privatization and this government’s direction with 

SLGA. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that, that being said, there will be wine 

lovers across the province that will look forward to seeing what 

the selection will be. We don’t know what it is. 

 

And the minister provided the names of the owners and 

operators that will have the licence for these new franchises. 

And, Mr. Speaker, while the one, Cameron Rizos, has been 

active in Saskatoon, I guess there is a number of questions 

when we look at Mr. Wayne Henuset, and it talks about his 

business that was started in Calgary. So is he a resident of 

Saskatchewan? Has the government’s policy of Sask first and 

promoting business within Sask first and being able to look at 

people in the province . . . Mr. Speaker, it is a question because 

I do know of a couple of instances where Saskatchewan 

companies, Saskatchewan companies have put in a bid for 

services through Government Services, but a contract was 

awarded to a Quebec company. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we always know there is a priority or 

should be a priority on behalf of government to support 

business in the province of Saskatchewan, there is a number of 

questions that pop to mind when we look at this issue. 

 

The government says that these wine store franchisees, they 

will provide a niche market that will just complement SLGA. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that there will be a number 

of people across the province that will be watching to see what 

expansion, if any, is a problem, and if this issue of privatizing 

and peeling off portions of Crowns and Treasury Board Crowns 

continues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 

report Bill No. 73, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment 

Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in the Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill, and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan 

Amendment Act, 2008 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has moved that Bill No. 

73, The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 



2960 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2009 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 357 through 359. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 357 to 359 tabled. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the Standing Committees on Crown and Central Agencies 

and the Economy to do their work, I move this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House stand adjourned in order to facilitate the work of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:29.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2949 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2949 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2950 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2950 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2950 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2950 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2950 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2951 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2951 

 International Day of the Midwife 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2951 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2951 

 Buffalo Narrows Resident Proud Northerner 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2952 

 Moose Jaw Multiple Sclerosis Walk  

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2952 

 Saskatoon Student Named Loran Scholar 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2952 

 New Democratic Party Memberships 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public-Private Partnerships 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2953 

 Support for Education in Rural and Northern Communities 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2954 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2954 

 Child Care Spaces 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2956 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2956 

 Project Costs and Leadership Campaign Issues 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2957 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2957 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Specialty Wine Franchises in Regina and Saskatoon 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2958 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2958 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2959 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 73 — The University of Saskatchewan Amendment Act, 2008 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2959 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2960 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


