




















































Hansard: November 02, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 7B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2009, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3379 

 November 2, 2009 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 

by Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 7 p.m., the House will resume its 

evening session. I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise today to 

respond to the Speech from the Throne. I am voting for our 

amendment that my leader has moved and therefore voting 

against the main motion. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Just hang on, hang on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I go into talk into detail to the Speech from 

the Throne, I‟d like to acknowledge my wife and my family, my 

wife Sandra and my family, for their support. Truly we‟ve 

heard from a number of the members it is important to have our 

family supporting us. And I am very pleased to have my wife, 

my children, my grandchildren yelling and chanting, and you 

know every now and then, it‟s nice to see when you accomplish 

something they‟re pleased. Anyway I just want to acknowledge 

that. 

 

You know, so many of us have a good staff, and I am fortunate 

to have CA [constituency assistant]. Vicky Sanderson in La 

Ronge. She does an excellent job, the casework that she does, 

truly. And I think my colleague earlier said that sometimes the 

people that come into our office, they‟ve tried to work through 

the system, and the system for some reason hasn‟t helped them. 

So the casework taken on by CAs is crucial, and I‟d like to 

acknowledge Vicky and thank her for her hard work. And that‟s 

the La Ronge office. 

 

But also I‟m fortunate to have a suboffice in Pelican Narrows 

where we can deal with a lot of the community members that 

are in that area, Sandy Bay, Deschambault, and Pelican 

Narrows. Bernice Custer works there, and she does an excellent 

job. And we‟re working through some difficult times, and that 

community has had a lot of deaths and I guess some serious 

community problems. And they‟re dealing with them, and I 

commend what they‟re doing. And she‟s working there and 

hopefully will do that. 

 

I‟d also like to acknowledge Doris Morin who‟s a part-time CA, 

and she does an excellent job. She‟s always there. Whenever 

you need a hand or things aren‟t going so good, she‟ll give you 

that compliment and she‟ll give you that pat on the back and let 

you know that you‟re doing the right thing for the people. And 

that‟s so important; I appreciate that. 

 

I‟d like to thank the people of the Cumberland constituency for 

their support that they have given me. I also want to make it 

very clear that it is an honour to serve them in this House and 

serve them as the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

for the Cumberland constituency. 

 

I get an opportunity to attend a lot of community functions and 

sometimes, you know, we have our issues. And I‟m going to get 

into that a little bit more as we go along this evening. And I‟ve 

got lots I want to say. And I‟m going to say what needs to be 

said from the community that I come from. There are concerns, 

there are issues, and they‟re going to hear what I have to say so 

that it‟s their voice coming through here very clearly. So bear 

with me, the members on the other side, please. 

 

I just want to at this time especially thank one of our elders who 

serves as an elder with the Lac La Ronge Indian Band, 

Catherine Charles. I seek a lot of advice — her wisdom, her 

guidance, her love, her compassion for her people and the 

community — and I thank her for that. 

 

I want to congratulate the new members of this caucus, Regina 

Douglas Park and our leader. Very pleased to have the 

experience he brings with him and the support. It‟s truly 

uplifting. 

 

To my new colleague, friend, I wish you all the best, the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. You know, you fought a 

battle, and I say it was a battle. And I just want to commend . . . 

You truly are an example. When someone‟s going to go into 

politics, you truly are a person with the heart, determination, 

and confidence. You do have it, so keep doing what you‟re 

doing. I‟m glad to have you here. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to acknowledge we‟ve had a 

number of elections — school board, mayor, and council. And 

I‟m very pleased to acknowledge some of our mayors, our 

councillors. There‟s new ones. There‟s also incumbents. 

There‟s the ones that were there for a while. Some will . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Rosetown-Elrose has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to this Assembly, it‟s my pleasure to introduce to 

you in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, two good friends of mine. Ian 

McPhadden — Ian is the president of Ag-West Biotech, and a 

good friend and good supporter. And with him is Penny 

Aadland, also a good friend. And I‟d ask all members to please 



3380 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by the Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded 

by Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to at this 

time, also acknowledging the mayors and council, we had just 

passed the election with a new leadership for FSIN [Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations]. And I‟m very pleased to see 

that our member, my colleague, was there to support them as 

they went through the leadership process. 

 

Anyway I‟m very pleased, and I wish them all the best working 

with the current government. I hope they will work with them. 

And if they won‟t, by all means please come and speak to the 

official opposition, and we‟ll see what we can do to assist them. 

 

You know, I want to get into a little bit of the speech. And I‟ll 

have to be honest with you, Mr. Speaker. You know the speech, 

to be honest to you, was boring speech I‟ve ever heard, to be 

honest with you, coming from a boring government and a 

boring leader. So, Mr. Speaker, it had no vision. And I‟m going 

to get into why it had no vision, and how truly, truly 

disappointing this was, and to see the vision direction that we‟re 

going to go in. 

 

I just want to make a point. Forestry, an industry that is in such 

dire need, and not much being said for the industry or the 

families and the forestry business. Not a mention in the Throne 

Speech. It‟s almost like they‟re forgotten. And they‟re 

struggling out there and they need some help. I cannot believe 

that an industry that was as strong as it was has not had support 

from this government at all. They‟ve turned their back on the 

forestry industry, on the forestry families, and on the 

communities that have been impacted. 

 

You know, it‟s a little appalling that they would actually hold 

back any community development money, and they‟ve held one 

point five. Why would you do that? It doesn‟t even make sense 

to me. When they need the support the most, that‟s when you 

go and work with them. And anyway, I challenge that to the 

government. Get back to the table with them. Go and have a 

conversation with them. Work with them. 

 

You know, I want to talk a little bit about roads. Roads are 

important up north. And I‟ve heard the past minister and the 

new minister, they‟re going to have different things to say over 

the next while. I‟ve served petitions day after day. I‟ve asked 

questions in estimates. Highway 135, highway 123, 102, 

petitions have been served, just constantly bringing them up. 

 

And you know, when I think about some of the comments that 

have been made, and we talk about the industry sector and the 

resources in the North, and I hear the comments made that there 

is such an opportunity up north, and you have so many 

resources that we have to get into. Then where‟s the 

commitment by that government, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the 

roads that are in the worst shape and getting worse, not better, 

getting worse under their watch? 

 

And they talk about a five-year plan rollout. Isn‟t that 

wonderful? But I‟m very pleased, you know. I‟ll continue to 

remind the community members back home. The leadership, 

they‟re going to continue to fight. They‟re going to do all they 

can to make sure the government doesn‟t forget about them. 

 

I‟m so supportive of the roads because of safety. Some people 

forget about the safety. They don‟t have a clue, Mr. Speaker. 

The North has been ignored. And I‟ve already been through my 

speech about the priorities that were there before. This 

government didn‟t fulfill the promises or the commitments — 

and we‟re told they don‟t have to — of a previous government. 

 

So I want to go on to the next thing. And I mean, you talk about 

a highways advisory for the North, and I believe they‟re just 

announcing it. If you look at some of the information, Mr. 

Speaker, a northern transportation advisory committee has been 

struck. And I guess at some point they‟re going to make some 

announcements, prioritize. Well I‟m hoping at the end of that, 

whatever comes, the government will fund it. 

 

But I‟m a little concerned that truly, with what I‟ve seen from 

the budget, they aren‟t going to fund it. It‟s not going to be a 

priority for them. And that is sad to the people that I represent 

who need that to travel in and out of their communities. So for 

that, again, there have been lots of petitions. 

 

But I have to also comment to the staff that work on those 

roads. They do an excellent job for the resources and the 

equipment they have. And hopefully we‟ll continue to fight on 

their behalf of the official opposition to make sure the resources 

come to the North. And I think we have a right to travel on safe 

roads. 

 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to comment a little bit about 

addictions. The North is suffering. And I know the rest of the 

province has its issues with addictions. We‟re no different. The 

front-line staff are doing the best they can with the resources 

they have, but there‟s so much more work needs to be done. 

 

It‟s tough when you watch families who suffer and have to go 

through the loss. It‟s terrible; it‟s not good. And I just cannot 

believe the seriousness of addictions. And I‟m hoping that this 

government will pay attention. And they can talk. And they can 

go around. And I wish they would start by listening to what I‟m 

saying today — now, because it‟s important. Addictions is a 

serious matter. It‟s affecting a lot of our communities, not just 

the North. There‟s a lot of harm coming to our young people, 

and we have to address it together in a meaningful way. 

 

We also have mental health issues that we have to address. We 

have too many people who lose their battle with depression — 

young people, old people — and in the North we‟ve been 

heavily hit with that. And to that, you know, my heart goes out 

to the communities that have to deal with that. I‟m hoping the 

government will hear their concerns from the leadership, from 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3381 

the community, from the parents, and the caregivers to try to 

help out and do all they can, working collectively, because that 

is so important, Mr. Speaker. They have to work collectively. 

 

Anyway I want to also go on, Mr. Speaker, to housing. Housing 

is a huge issue in my constituency, the crowding. You know 

some of the homes sometimes will have 13 to 16 people living 

in them, very crowded. So when we talk about housing . . . And 

it affects health as well, because if you‟re living in crowded 

space like that, H1N1, it‟s just an opportunity there for nothing 

but harm to come to a lot of people. So we have to address it. 

 

You know, I don‟t mind giving out compliments to the 

government and to anyone else when they truly work with the 

people and the leadership back home. When there are good 

things to announce, I can acknowledge them. I‟m not against 

that. When someone does something good, we want to say good 

for the people. And, you know, the government has done some 

good things in some of the communities, but unfortunately there 

hasn‟t been a lot done in the North. 

 

And I‟m sorry if the members don‟t like it, but that‟s the way it 

is. That‟s reality, what people are telling me back home. So if 

the people are feeling it, then I guess you need to do a better job 

because you‟re not getting through to them with your pats on 

the back you give one another every now. And your 

cheerleading doesn‟t work. It doesn‟t cut it. 

 

You know, we talk about long-term care, and we know that we 

have a priority. I‟ve been serving a petition in this House for 

quite some time every day and I‟ll continue — long-term care 

for La Ronge. And as other communities come onside, and they 

want to bring their petitions and their concerns, I‟ll do that for 

them because it‟s important. There‟s been hundreds of 

signatures on these petitions. And I know we‟re working with 

the health authority, and I‟m hoping. 

 

The minister talked about the health authorities have to make a 

wish list or prioritize what they need for our health region. Well 

I‟m going to work, and I know the community leaders are going 

to work with them to make sure that not only do we have one 

list of . . . Just the number one, whether it‟s long-term care, 

whether it would be in something like, oh, we have a high 

number of people with diabetes and dialysis. And there‟s 

different things that might be needed as a priority for . . . 

 

[19:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Seated in the west gallery is Mike 

Owens, a prominent lawyer from Saskatoon. I‟m pleased to see 

that he‟s visiting the legislature today. I know some of his 

political background. It‟s not always agreed with mine, but I 

think he‟s coming around to our way of thinking. So I‟m 

pleased that he‟s here, carefully studying what goes in the 

House, and I suspect that after tonight‟s visit he will be firmly 

entrenched in our camp. So in any event, thank you, Mr. 

Speaker, for the opportunity to introduce Mr. Owens. And I 

want to wish him well in visiting his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Hon. Mr. McMorris, seconded by 

Ms. Ross, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Going back into as 

far as the priorities of the health authority, and we‟ll identify 

those priorities as the North and as the Cumberland 

constituency, and we‟ll work with the health board in 

co-operation to make sure that the needs of the Cumberland 

constituency . . . And I guess, you know, we have a large 

Aboriginal population and there are many needs, and especially 

with health. 

 

So I just want to focus on that a little bit and continue working 

with the constituency and the leader and community members, 

the things they are saying, Mr. Speaker. And hopefully some of 

their concerns will be addressed by the government. And I‟m 

hopeful. There‟s hope there, and I know the people in my 

constituency have hope. And I‟m so grateful that they still have 

hope because they need it. 

 

We talk about unemployment in the North is very high, Mr. 

Speaker. And the government talks about patting themselves on 

the back, about where they‟re going, and all the vision that they 

have. And unfortunately we‟re struggling. There‟s a lot of 

communities that have a high unemployment rate. It‟s not a 

little bit. It‟s very high. It‟s alarming and we need help. They 

expect help. They expect help from the government, from the 

official opposition, and from their leadership and industry to 

develop. And I know there are some good partnerships 

happening, but we need to do more. 

 

You know, I look at Churchill High School, and it‟s one 

announcement the minister came and made. And we‟ve been 

waiting excitedly to see some construction. And I know they 

like photo ops. But I will like it when I can take a photo of a 

new school, not just one that‟s talked about and one that‟s 

released in the press. I would like to see an actual building, and 

I‟d love to take that picture. And someday maybe I will, Mr. 

Speaker. Yes, we need it now. 

 

I guess I want to stop and focus a little bit, Mr. Speaker, on 

some of the First Nations and Métis issues where this 

government has totally, totally lost it. You don‟t have it. You‟ve 

lost it. I don‟t know if you‟re ever going to get it. 



3382 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

But I hope the duty to consult, once and for all, can be resolved. 

But maybe now with a new minister, a new voice from the new 

grand chief, there might be some different things coming 

forward. And I hope that. There‟ll be time. And I guess to the 

minister and the government, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a time where 

I think they‟ll have to develop a relationship. And I wish them 

all the best doing that. 

 

There‟s a lot of trappers and fishers that are struggling under the 

First Nations and Métis issues, and there‟s a lot of issues have 

to be addressed and some concerns that I see coming. And the 

trappers are very concerned. And I know they raised them with 

the ministers, and I know they raised their concerns with their 

leaders, but unfortunately sometimes I don‟t think they‟re 

feeling heard. When I go to the meetings, trappers‟ meetings, 

they don‟t feel like they‟re being heard. And it‟s time that they 

get heard. It‟s time that this government responds to them and 

go and consult with them and find out exactly what it is they 

need to continue the lifestyle they‟re living and the traditions 

they want to share with their grandchildren and the next 

generation. 

 

We have the commercial fishermen. And we see that industry 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And, you know, they go on and 

don‟t want to talk about some of the new visions they got. You 

know, the fishers have a right to a market, and they have a right 

to continue to make a living the way they have done for 

generations. And I just hope that whatever direction they go, it 

is truly for them and keeps their industry strong, that they‟re not 

being led by anybody down a wrong path that will not assist 

them, but do more harm to their industry. I hope so. And I hope 

and I put that trust in them. 

 

We‟re celebrating 125 year celebration of the resistance, and the 

government‟s going to announce, and I‟m glad to see that, the 

Year of the Métis. Being a Métis person, I‟m very proud and 

honoured. And I know our leader made it very clear, if the 

government didn‟t deal with it, the official opposition would 

deal with it. And I‟m happy to hear that, and I‟m glad to see 

that the government is moving forward on that. 

 

But having said that, there are so many other issues that Métis 

need help to address. They have problems with the core funding 

— $1.8 million would help them with their core funding — if 

that would be reinstated and a figure that would assist them to 

help the area directors do the job that they need to do, 

representing the regions that they‟ve been elected and asked to 

represent. So that‟s important. 

 

I would like to truly see some of the funding that the MNS 

[Métis Nation of Saskatchewan] has been asking for and needs, 

that this government commit to it. Core funding, not just talk. 

It‟s time. Don‟t pat yourselves on the back all the time. You 

guys are good at that; I‟ve watched that. As a government you 

pat one another. You‟re cheerleaders. I‟ve watched it. I mean, 

I‟m learning; I‟m still young. But you know what? I still like to 

see once in a while you guys come to the table meaningful, and 

I mean meaningful, as a government to deal with the First 

Nations and the Métis, truly in a meaningful way, deal with 

their issues once and for all. 

 

And I will give you the compliments, but until I see that 

happen, I cannot give you a compliment on something you have 

not done. You haven‟t lived up to, and you owe it to them to 

deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know I‟ve watched over the last start of the 

session and people responding to the Throne Speech, and to be 

honest with you the government wants to pat themselves on the 

back all the time. They have their cheerleading day, and I know 

they probably have meetings and they develop how they‟re 

going to cheerlead and that‟s great. I hope that does them a lot 

of comfort because back home where it really means 

something, people are feeling neglected, left behind. You have 

no vision. You‟ve left so many people behind. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, they talk about, truly talk about 

where they‟re going to go with their vision and their budget. 

And they talk about the past record, 16 years. And they go 

around, Mr. Speaker, talking about 16 years, but truly it‟s time 

that this government quit patting themselves on the back. And 

that‟s enough; let‟s get some seriousness here. And it‟s time to 

stop blaming the NDP [New Democratic Party] on the past 16 

years. 

 

It‟s time the government stand on its own record, and your 

record‟s going to come. You‟re going to get your chance to 

look at that, Mr. Speaker, very well. And it‟s going to be kind 

of late. We‟re going into . . . And they‟re going to announce the 

vision, a budget, and there‟s nothing left. Where do we go? And 

they say oh, just wait and watch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m waiting. There‟s hope, and I‟ll tell you back 

home there‟s a lot of hope. People still see it. I hope that the 

people back home will get exactly what they deserve. And it 

shouldn‟t matter which way and how they voted. Truly 

shouldn‟t matter. Saskatchewan people have a right to be 

treated fairly and equally by everyone, and I guess by that 

government over there, Mr. Speaker. The government has a 

right to make sure . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — An obligation. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — An obligation. That‟s right. Not only a right, 

but an obligation to the people it represents. All people of this 

province, not just ones that voted a certain way. Everyone has a 

right to have some compassion, have the proper roads, housing, 

mental health.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time you know, I‟ve actually enjoyed 

. . . And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say this: I will 

not be supporting, of course, the main motion, but overall with 

what I see with the Speech from the Throne and the vision that 

this government has, it‟s like the song that was sang in here the 

day of the Throne Speech, “Let‟s Call the Whole Thing Off.” 

Anyway, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 

a great honour to rise in the Assembly and offer a few remarks 

on the Speech from the Throne. Now before I comment on the 

Throne Speech directly, I‟d like to take this opportunity to say a 

few well-deserved thank yous. 

 

First, I‟d like to thank my darling wife Jocelyn, for her infinite 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3383 

patience, her unwavering support, and her wise counsel, without 

which none of what I do here would be possible. And I also 

want to take this opportunity to congratulate her on winning a 

second term on Regina City Council. She is, of course, very 

grateful for the support of ward 2 residents and is very 

enthusiastically looking forward to serving the people of the 

Albert Park and Lakeview neighbourhoods for another three 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few other quick thank yous are in order. I am 

very pleased to recognize the great work being done by Kyle 

Leonard, who does a fantastic job running the Regina South 

constituency office, assisting with casework, and 

communications, scheduling, and making everything in our 

small but very busy office stays on track. 

 

And I appreciate this opportunity to offer sincere thanks to 

Roland Lafrance, Kim Kydd, Trudy Sigfusson, Dawne 

Anderson, and the new kid on the block, Jared Dunitz, who 

look after the legislative office efficiently and cheerfully 

handling policy issues and referrals, correspondence, reception, 

and a wide range of other activities as well. 

 

Next I‟d like to thank the Saskatchewan Party candidates in the 

recent by-elections. Corey O‟Soup and Kathleen Peterson ran 

very energetic and very well organized campaigns and came 

remarkably close to winning in two of what used to be the 

safest NDP seats in the province of Saskatchewan — used to be 

is the key word. I think we‟re going to see more of these bright, 

hardworking young people in the future. 

 

And I‟d like to welcome the Assembly‟s newest 

representatives: the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, who I 

want to congratulate on an excellent first speech here in the 

Assembly; and the member for Regina Douglas Park, who had 

just a little bit of trouble getting elected going into a by-election 

in what was formerly a bastion of NDP support, blowing a huge 

majority and emerging with a razor-thin margin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, when you look at past election results for Regina Douglas 

Park, an interesting trend emerges. In 2003, with the current 

member‟s affable predecessor, the NDP won with a majority of 

over 3,000 votes. Now in 2007, even with likeable Harry Van 

Mulligen at the helm, their lead was cut was to a little over 

2,000 votes. Do you see the trend? Yes, we do, too. 

 

And in the by-election, their far less agreeable candidate barely 

squeaked through by 498 votes. Their future doesn‟t look good. 

No wonder he‟s grumpy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what‟s happening in Douglas Park, you might 

ask? Well it just might be an indicator that voters in this 

constituency, like other people in Regina, are changing their 

mind about the NDP. Or it just might be that traditional NDP 

supporters don‟t have much confidence in their grumpy new 

leader. 

 

I call him grumpy, Mr. Speaker, because he is grumpy. Just 

how grumpy is the new Leader of the Opposition? I‟ll tell you 

how grumpy he is. Why, he‟s so grumpy, he doesn‟t even like 

dancing, particularly jigging, and especially when I‟m doing it. 

He actually said so. He said so in his response to the Speech 

from the Throne, if you can imagine. 

Mr. Speaker, what I‟d like to know is, what is his big problem? 

Is he simply jealous because I‟m a better dancer? Well how 

juvenile. He ought to grow up. Or does he simply have no 

appreciation for the important role that arts and culture play in 

this province? How incredibly mean-spirited. I‟m not sure 

which is worse. Both are deplorable. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Is there anything that makes this man happy, Mr. Speaker? 

Anything at all? Well yes, there is. He mentioned it in his 

remarks to the House. Apparently each year he has a gathering 

with a few friends — a very few friends, I am told — who share 

his rather unique political philosophy.  

 

And together, while they enjoy a kumbaya moment, can‟t you 

just see it, Mr. Speaker? A post-flower-power van full of the 

party faithful, gathered around the annual campfire under the 

stars, somewhere in the middle of the 40-or-so quarter sections 

owned by the Alberta-Conservative-backing, salt-water sheik of 

Shaunavon, clad in polyester leisure suits and disco boots or 

rumpled tweed sports jackets with suede elbow patches, jeans 

and sandals, reminiscing fondly about their party‟s glory days 

in government — linking arm in arm, as it were — and singing 

along with an eight-track tape of hits from the ‟70s, but 

obviously not dancing. 

 

Those were the days, my friend. I thought they‟d never end. It 

truly warms the heart, doesn‟t it, Mr. Speaker? And you say, 

stuck in the past. 

 

What has the media said about this new NDP leader? He‟s not 

new at all. The Canadian Press reports, “Saskatchewan NDP 

turns to the past.” The Sasquatch asks, “Out with the old, in 

with the . . . old?” rabble.ca states, “New leader, same direction: 

. . . NDP holds off reform movement,” and warns that “. . . the 

campaign for the leadership and the convention [itself] showed 

deep divisions within the party.” 

 

One letter to The StarPhoenix in Saskatoon says, “Having 

Lingenfelter as leader will lead to a further exodus from the 

ranks of the NDP . . . I predict the Green Party‟s vote will 

double next time.” 

 

And perhaps the most telling story of all, the Lloydminster 

Meridian Booster says, “So, Harry Van Mulligen is vacating his 

seat to allow Dwaine Lingenfelter to run in a „safe‟ 

constituency . . . it appears Lingenfelter is too scared to run in 

his own rural constituency.” Too scared? Can you imagine? No 

wonder NDP members and MLAs are split right down the 

middle, Mr. Speaker. And maybe that‟s the real reason the new 

leader lost Douglas Park, or just won by a little bit. 

 

I would like to conclude my introductory remarks by thanking a 

very important and much larger group of people, a group of 

people who, unlike the opposition, remember the past and have 

learned from its lessons but prefer living in the present and are 

celebrating Saskatchewan‟s new confidence while planning the 

province‟s even more promising future. I‟m referring of course 

to the good residents of Regina South. 

 

Now each year we knock on Regina South neighbourhood 

doors to hear what our constituents‟ advice might be and listen 



3384 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

to their opinions on the issues of the day. And we deeply 

appreciate their insight and their interest. Regina South 

residents have shared their opinions about what is working well 

in Saskatchewan — like tax reductions, like provincial debt 

repayment, like investments in infrastructure, and support for 

vulnerable seniors, children, and people with disabilities. They 

have also expressed their concerns and thoughts about how to 

make our province even better than it is today. 

 

Like so many other people in Saskatchewan, the residents of 

Regina South are keenly interested in health care. They are very 

aware that one of the most pressing issues in health care is the 

shortage of nurses, and they welcome the news that 

Saskatchewan‟s new government set a bold target of training 

and recruiting 800 new nurses in four years and has already 

achieved 70 per cent of that goal in just two years. They‟re 

happy about that. 

 

In their minds, the next goal has to be reducing surgical wait 

times so that everyone can benefit from needed procedures in a 

timely manner. I want to offer my sincere thanks to the good 

people of Regina South for their insights on this very important 

issue because it is due to their advice and similar 

encouragement from people all over Saskatchewan 

constituencies that motivated us to set another bold target, as 

you have heard, to reduce all surgical wait times in our province 

to three months within the next four years. Now that‟s why this 

very ambitious goal, what the Minister of Health has described 

as a full-court press on surgical wait times, is in fact the 

centrepiece of the new Speech from the Throne. 

 

As expected, there are many other significant health initiatives, 

along with exciting new program announcements in other 

ministries. However I‟d like to use the brief time remaining to 

outline the new work coming out of the office that I have the 

honour of serving, First Nations and Métis Relations and 

Northern Affairs. 

 

And I need to begin the discussion by thanking my predecessor, 

the member for Kelvington-Wadena, whose hard work allowed 

our new government to build strong new working relationships 

with our province‟s First Nation and Métis people for the first 

time in 16 years. The member from Cumberland can‟t hear this, 

obviously. 

 

As the new person in her role, we figured the best way to begin 

was to continue her wise strategy of visiting as many 

communities as possible. So far we‟ve been to Saskatoon, The 

Battlefords, Meadow Lake, and Prince Albert a dozen times in 

total. We‟ve travelled to Beauval, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Pinehouse 

Lake, Buffalo Narrows, La Loche, La Ronge, the Seabee and 

Santoy 7 mine sites, Sandy Bay, Flin Flon, Creighton, and 

Cumberland House. And in the next few days we‟ll be getting 

to McArthur River, Points North Landing, Black Lake, Stony 

Rapids, Fond-du-Lac, and Uranium City. 

 

Along the way, we‟ve met with leadership of the Métis Nation 

of Saskatchewan and some of its component regions, the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Meadow Lake 

Tribal Council, Prince Albert Grand Council, Battlefords Tribal 

Council, Saskatoon Tribal Council, Yorkton Tribal Council, 

and File Hills Qu‟Appelle Tribal Council, along with elders, 

veterans, senators, chiefs, councillors, and community members 

from many of our province‟s First Nations.  

 

That‟s a reasonable start, Mr. Speaker, but we‟re committed to 

doing more, much more. We have to do more because there is 

no substitute for discussing issues face to face with people in 

their own communities. We have to do more because no matter 

how many places my predecessor got to, no matter how many 

places I get to, we‟re still sometimes met with this greeting: 

thanks for coming to our community, yours is the first 

government minister ever to visit us. A shame. A shame, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne outlines a number of 

important initiatives coming forward from First Nations and 

Métis Relations in the coming months. We are building on the 

duty to consult framework policy created by the previous 

minister after very extensive consultation with First Nation, 

Métis, community, and industry participants. This document is 

now being revised with recent stakeholder feedback in mind 

and with a view to completing a final policy in the near future. 

 

The finished document will provide an appropriate framework 

for respectful and meaningful consultation with First Nation 

and Métis partners on a wide range of important issues while 

acknowledging industry needs for clarity and consistency in the 

process of reviewing proposals for road and resource 

development. At the same time, we‟re equally committed to 

developing policy option tables to explore the issues not 

included in the original framework and intended to be discussed 

separately. 

 

By considering environmental stewardship, the mapping of 

traditional lands and sacred sites, sharing in the province‟s 

prosperity, consultation capacity, and the mechanism for 

dispute resolution, we will ensure that the broadest possible 

range of issues are addressed and the widest range of interests 

accommodated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to constitutional obligations mandated 

by recent court decisions, we have a vision. We want to see as 

many First Nations and Métis youth as possible completing 

their education, and we want to see as many of these young 

people as possible taking their rightful place in the workforce of 

our province. With these goals in mind, we are working closely 

with the ministries of Education and Advanced Education to 

bring the highest quality of learning opportunities to all 

Saskatchewan children. 

 

It is also important to note that for the very first time in our 

province‟s history — the very first time in our province‟s 

history — schools will be providing treaty education so that the 

coming generation grows up to understand that, as the Office of 

the Treaty Commissioner says so correctly, we are all treaty 

people. 

 

In addition to supporting key programs delivered by K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] classrooms, First Nations and Métis 

Relations applauds provincial funding from the Ministry of 

Advanced Education to assist Aboriginal students in 

post-secondary educations to meet their goals. We also need to 

ensure that when Métis and First Nations youth complete their 

education, there are jobs waiting for them. 

 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3385 

This coming year we‟ll be adding another very important 

program to meet this goal. Southern Saskatchewan already 

enjoys the benefits of well-organized and properly resourced 

enterprise regions that are working together to bring more 

economic development than ever to our province. In our next 

budget, we plan to include funding for three new northern 

enterprise regions serving the Northwest, Northeast, and 

Athabasca Basin regions respectively. 

 

This is exactly the solution strongly advocated by northern 

business leaders themselves. And we‟re very pleased to be 

meeting their expectations, very thankful for their wise advice 

along the way, and we look forward to their continued 

involvement as we work on this exciting new initiative. 

 

Now the member from Cumberland is calling for assistance for 

the northern commercial fishing industry. I‟d like to ask his 

party: where were they for 16 years as that industry sadly 

deteriorated due to an outdated agreement? We‟re doing more 

in a couple of years than they did in a couple of decades. We‟re 

on the job and we intend to succeed where they failed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are particularly interested in economic 

development in northern Saskatchewan as it goes to the heart of 

our Northern Affairs‟ portfolio. And in our extensive travels to 

northern communities, reserves, we are seeing new energy, new 

enthusiasm, and new confidence that perhaps the members on 

the other side aren‟t aware of. We are also seeing remarkable 

progress in the development of successful business partnerships 

between First Nations, Métis citizens, northern municipalities, 

and industry. We warmly applaud this very beneficial trend that 

is attracting capital investment to the North, building new 

business ventures, and creating new training and employment 

opportunities for all northerners. We will continue to support 

these fine efforts in every way possible and share the vision of a 

vibrant economy in the North. 

 

Jordan‟s principle is another area where considerable progress 

has been made, and First Nations and Métis Relations is very 

pleased to be leading our government‟s work on this important 

file, together with our partners in the Ministry of Health. I am 

very proud to confirm that Saskatchewan is the first jurisdiction 

in Canada where all three parties — First Nations, the 

Government of Canada, and the province — have endorsed a 

plan that ensures that all First Nations youth will receive the 

health care services they need regardless of which funding 

agency has financial responsibility. It was indeed an honour, 

Mr. Speaker, to join former Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations vice-chief, Glen Pratt, officials from Indian and 

Northern Affairs Canada, and colleagues from provincial 

ministries to announce this very special milestone. 

 

The final Throne Speech initiative I want to mention is the 

proclamation of 2010 as the Year of the Métis. This was 

personally requested by President Robert Doucette of the Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan in a letter addressed to the Premier. 

The Premier‟s response was immediate and enthusiastic. As a 

result, the Government of Saskatchewan welcomes this 

opportunity to recognize the unique history and culture of the 

Métis people along with their enormous contribution to our 

province as part of the 125th anniversary celebrations of the 

historic events of 1885. 

 

Quite understandably the response of the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan has been very positive. Here‟s what they‟ve said, 

Mr. Speaker. From their news release titled “MN-S applauds 

historical announcement during Saskatchewan‟s speech from 

the throne,” I offer the two following quick quotations: 

 

There has never been a dedication of this magnitude made 

to Métis Citizens by the province . . . 

 

And: 

 

The designation of 2010 being The Year of the Métis, by 

the Province of Saskatchewan in yesterday‟s throne 

speech marks a great chapter in moving forward for the 

Métis Nation as well as The Province. 

 

Obviously we‟re making unprecedented progress, and this is 

good news for everyone in Saskatchewan, except, Mr. Speaker, 

perhaps for the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, I feel 

compelled to warn him in advance that there are going to be 

celebrations to kick off the 2010 Year of the Métis program of 

activities. They‟re going to take place right outside in the 

rotunda of this Legislative Building on November 4th, and there 

is probably going to be dancing — yes, Mr. Speaker, dancing. 

Even worse from the new Leader of the Opposition‟s 

perspective, there will likely be jigging. Worse of all from his 

perspective, it is just possible that I might be participating if 

invited. 

 

We‟re going to have a lot of fun celebrating this landmark 

occasion, but we certainly don‟t want to upset the new Leader 

of the Opposition who, given his declared distaste for dancing 

and possibly arts and culture of all kinds, now knows which day 

to be absent. He‟ll be happy for it, Mr. Speaker, and so will 

everybody else, I might say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year at this time I closed my remarks with an 

appeal to the bipartisan spirit of the members on the other side 

of this House to vote in favour of the Throne Speech. In 

extending the hand of friendship across the aisle, I noted that it 

was clear that our colleagues in opposition secretly wanted to 

support its historic paying down of the provincial debt, its 

landmark tax cuts, its unprecedented investments in 

infrastructure — like hospitals, like schools, like highways — 

its dramatic increases in support for our most vulnerable 

citizens, and, yes, the long-awaited enhancement of provincial 

revenue sharing for municipalities, including my own town of 

Regina. 

 

I implored, yes, I implored our NDP colleagues to vote with 

their hearts and not to be mere slaves to partisan politics. Right 

in the middle of this impassioned plea, the member from Biggar 

said they‟re not going to do it. They‟re not going to do it, he 

said, Mr. Speaker. And sadly, he was right. Despite their inner 

feelings, when the vote was taken, every single NDP member 

said no to the Throne Speech. You could feel their inner turmoil 

as they struggled with their consciences, but in the end, they 

said no towards moving toward a bright future and yes to being 

stuck in the past. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to believe that a direct appeal to 

their better nature would succeed this year, but I really don‟t 

think so. The reason is simple. They‟re grumpy — grumpy, 



3386 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

grumpy, grumpy, even grumpier than last year, and their new 

leader is especially grumpy. 

 

Okay. The new member from Saskatoon Riversdale isn‟t 

grumpy, certainly not yet anyway. And the veteran member 

from Regina Northeast has never been grumpy. He‟s never been 

grumpy, Mr. Speaker. These two stand out from the rest. They 

stand out a lot. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And this has given me a new idea. I think these two ungrumpy 

members of the opposition would actually be more comfortable 

on this side of the House. So I‟m taking this opportunity to 

invite them to cross the floor to where they‟ll be cheering for 

Saskatchewan, home of Canada‟s strongest provincial 

economy, rather than cheering for the recession; where they‟ll 

be planning for success rather than planning for failure; and to 

where we‟re moving toward a bright future, not being stuck in 

the past. That way, Mr. Speaker, when it comes time to vote on 

the Throne Speech, they can follow their inner voice and 

support all the exciting initiatives and programs it contains. 

Indeed I‟m not asking them to make a decision right away, Mr. 

Speaker. I‟m just asking them to start thinking about it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll conclude by offering this paraphrase of a 

wonderful old political quotation that comes to mind each and 

every time I happen to hear the new Leader of the Opposition 

speak in this Assembly: when I first began this campaign, I just 

wanted to beat the NDP. Now I want to save the province from 

them. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I of course will be supporting the 

Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just in 

response to the Throne Speech, I want to point out the member 

that spoke just before me, the member from Regina South, I 

understood that he was involved with the NDP in his earlier 

years. And as a result of his defection over to the Sask Party, 

they had a motion. And the motion of the Regina South NDP 

executive is very clear and it‟s unanimous. And the motion 

reads, they can have him. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they‟re more than welcome to have that 

member join that particular party. Because in true fashion, Mr. 

Speaker, it really talks about his background. It talks about his 

commitment. And the entertaining he just provided to us, really 

has no merit or point to what he was involved when we were 

with him. So in other words, we did not want him any more. So 

you guys are welcome. You can have him. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the Throne Speech, when 

I listened to the Throne Speech, I was thinking to myself, this is 

like a bad joke or badly timed joke because I was waiting for 

more, as the rest of the members were. They were waiting for 

more — got to be more, got to be more. And then all of a 

sudden that was it. That was it. So I‟m sitting there saying, well 

either that‟s a very boring Throne Speech or it‟s a poorly timed 

joke because we‟re all waiting for more. And guess what? 

Nothing came in that was exciting and certainly nothing that 

really inspired people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look at that and I say to myself, let‟s do a 

recap. These guys across the way, this band of Conservatives 

and Liberals and ex-fired NDP members over there, they got 

together in the dead of night to form the Saskatchewan Party. 

And all of a sudden, bang, you come along after the Throne 

Speech and after two years — two years — they‟re boring 

already. 

 

They talk about the NDP being in power for 16 years. And I‟ll 

tell the people of Saskatchewan as I‟ve told them time and time 

again, yes, we were in power for 16 years, but the first 14 years 

we were busy cleaning up that conservative mess left behind by 

those guys, Mr. Speaker. Fourteen years we cleaned up their 

mess. Fourteen years we cleaned up the mess left behind those 

guys, and all of a sudden, like the pompom group they are, they 

have followed a new leader and a new party and this new 

vision. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, that Throne 

Speech got to be the most boring Throne Speech in the world. 

And I thought there was more coming, Mr. Speaker. But the 

worst part about . . . It‟s not one thing to be boring, Mr. 

Speaker, as the Throne Speech was. It‟s not one thing being 

boring, but when you‟re broke already, all of a sudden you‟re 

going to start losing friends. 

 

So number one is they‟re boring. They‟re uninspired, and 

they‟re broke. So what are they going to do? They‟re going to 

keep waving their pompoms, going to keep waving their 

balloons and saying, look what we‟re doing. And they‟re going 

to entertain the people and, yes, even the member from Regina 

South goes to jig. 

 

He goes to jig and makes a spectacle of himself, but he says, oh 

we‟re going to declare the Year of the Métis in 2010. But guess 

what? There is no duty to consult framework that they‟re 

abiding by. Guess what? There‟s not core funding for the Métis 

Nation. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? They‟re threatening all 

the affiliates, whether it‟s SNEDCO [SaskNative Economic 

Development Corporation], whether it‟s Gabriel Dumont, 

whether it‟s DTI [Dumont Technical Institute], or whether it‟s 

the Clarence Campeau Fund. They never brought one red cent 

increase on these guys, and yet he talks about the Year of the 

Métis. Of course we‟ll celebrate that, but maybe they should 

actually put some money where their mouth is, Mr. Speaker, 

because all they‟re going to do is wave their pompoms and their 

balloons. Well that‟s not leadership. That is absolutely boring 

like their Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I want to also point out as well, Mr. Speaker, is that 

when you look at some of the arguments that these guys made, 

and I want to again recap what I think has been a rudderless, 

leaderless Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. When 

they came into power they had two and a half billion dollars in 

the bank. Two and a half billion dollars and, Mr. Speaker, this 

economy was booming. It was firing on all cylinders. People 

were optimistic. Things were happening. And these guys 

assumed that after 16 years the people of Saskatchewan said, 

maybe it‟s time for a change. Maybe it‟s time for a change. 

Let‟s give the NDP a break. And, Mr. Speaker, we accepted that 

role. As the official opposition, we humbly accept that role. 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3387 

And I want to point out that after 16 years of cleaning up the 

mess that maybe the NDP needed a time out, but we are 

rebuilding, Mr. Speaker. So when I say to these guys, you had a 

booming economy, you had roads being built, you had the debt 

down — from 15 to $16 billion down to 5 to $10 billion dollars 

with the Crowns — and we reduced the debt. And the 16 years 

that we‟re in government, we paid between 11 and $12 billion 

in interest and debt, Mr. Speaker, so we had a long way to 

climb back. And the people of Saskatchewan know that, and 

every NDP in this province should never be ashamed of that 

history, Mr. Speaker, never be ashamed. 

 

And the big thing that‟s really remarkable, Mr. Speaker, when 

you‟re sitting down and listen to these guys we said, look, look, 

we paid down the debt. We rebuilt the province. And yes, we 

had a hard climb back up, and the people of Saskatchewan 

stood by us. But we transferred you two and a half billion 

dollars in the bank and a booming economy. And all we asked 

as an outgoing administration, all we asked was one thing — 

please don‟t screw it up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what have they done? What have they done? 

Let me show you what have they done. Right now the 

headlines, and I go from the Melville Advance, “Sask full-time 

jobs drop.” Mr. Speaker, “Time to twin highway no. 4, more 

work and infrastructure.” “Travel tough on dialysis patients.” 

It‟s Estevan Mercury, October 14. “Potash corporation 

announces more layoffs at Rocanville, Lanigan.” “Canola 

production way down.” “Canadian hog sector nearing industry 

wide disaster.” Mr. Speaker, “Seniors‟ affordable housing 

project opens in Pinehouse.” Oh no, this is one of ours, sorry. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they have really messed things 

up. And the other thing that‟s really important, Mr. Speaker, as 

you look at this scenario right now across the way, $1.3 billion 

miscalculation by that Finance minister on potash revenues. 

Who did they ask, Mr. Speaker? They didn‟t ask the Finance 

people who have all the experience and all the knowledge, and 

that‟s what a good government does. It asks people for advice, 

the people that they pay. 

 

And what happened last year? The Minister of Industry and 

Resources was waving his document saying, oh we‟ve got the 

information from the industry right here. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

he‟s now blaming the industry for giving him those figures 

when they‟re $1.3 billion off their mark. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I talk about a rudderless, leaderless Sask 

Party government, it‟s absolutely true. It is absolutely true. 

They inherit a booming economy and two and a half billion 

dollars, and they brag about the money that they paid down the 

debt. That‟s the money the people of Saskatchewan and the 

NDP handed to you. 

 

And the worst part of all this, Mr. Speaker, is that was their 

inheritance. They spent their inheritance. And now next year 

trouble is on the rise because, Mr. Speaker, if you look at all the 

sectors, all the sectors that are out there, whether it‟s cow-calf 

operations, hog, oil, gas — you can go through the entire list — 

everything is going down. And yet these guys continue 

spending, and they‟ll continue spending because, Mr. Speaker, 

they really, really want to be re-elected. 

 

And I predict today, I predict today that next year there‟s only 

three things that are going to save these guys: massive cuts, Mr. 

Speaker, or they‟re going to increase debt — which I think they 

will — or they‟re going to increase income tax. Those are the 

three options that they have left. And it is very simple, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s very, very simple. We said, please don‟t mess it up 

you guys. 

 

And every New Democrat in this province or person that‟s 

looking at the New Democrats right now, they‟re going to say, 

you know, people said we were wrong to leave that money on 

the table. They said we were wrong to leave that money on the 

table. And everywhere I go I tell people, no, it was the right 

thing to do because when we took over this government, when 

we took over government from those guys opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, the interest on the debt and the interest alone was three 

times our education budget, Mr. Speaker — three times. Can 

you imagine that? And when we left government our 

commitment to education was twice the amount that we were 

paying on interest. That is a remarkable turnaround, Mr. 

Speaker, remarkable. 

 

And I pointed out and I look across the way and I say to myself, 

well where are these guys getting their advice from? Where are 

these guys getting their advice from? They sure and heck ain‟t 

getting it from the Finance people, the bureaucrats that 

Saskatchewan has right at their beck and call, which are very 

intelligent people. Where are they getting their advice from? 

 

And I look at that and I say, well the member from Swift 

Current, the Premier, well he‟s the one that certainly is pushing 

the agenda, and he‟s the one that all of this sits on. And I was 

thinking, well what background does he have to determine the 

budget of Saskatchewan — 5 and 600 million there or $300 

million there? So I looked back on the resumé, and I try and 

see, well where does he get his experience from, Mr. Speaker, 

to do the budget speech and the Throne Speech? And I 

understand from basically what I see that he operated a guitar 

museum, and this guitar museum went broke.  

 

So I was thinking to myself, being a very simple hockey player 

— a player that‟s not very good, I might add, before they say it 

— that if you can‟t sell country music to the people of 

Saskatchewan, you shouldn‟t try and anticipate the global 

markets for potash demand. I just don‟t think that‟s right. You 

should go down to seek advice from people because at the end 

of the day, a $1.3 billion blunder, it‟s at their doing, Mr. 

Speaker, at their doing. They did it. So once again, you look at 

how the scenario unfolds. They brag about paying down the 

debt with their inheritance. Great. Go ahead. Pay it down. 

Everybody applauds that. 

 

They also talk about the vision that they have. Well it‟s boring 

already, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m going through the headlines — 

headline after headline. And then like I‟m thinking about, okay, 

maybe, yes, people aren‟t giving these guys a chance. Let‟s see 

what they can do. And then I look at some of the efforts of the 

people that they had in their government. 

 

I particularly look at the member from Cannington, the member 

from Cypress Hills, from Thunder Creek, and P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Carlton. Those guys waited 16 years to be a minister, 

and they were fired after 16 months, Mr. Speaker, fired. Why, 



3388 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

Mr. Speaker? Because quite frankly, they‟re tired. They‟re 

uninspired, and they all need to be fired, Mr. Speaker. There‟s 

no question in my mind; they all need to be fired. 

 

The other thing that‟s also important, Mr. Speaker, as we stand 

up and we give these shots, Mr. Speaker, we give these shots 

out. I‟m told by my colleagues, they said, you‟d better be 

careful; they have their attack dogs out there — people that‟ll 

go after you and give you hell. Excuse my language, Mr. 

Speaker. But they‟ll give you some extreme grief. 

 

And I tell them, well who is their attack dog? They say, oh the 

member from Wood River, the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest, and a couple of the other members. Well to me, 

they‟re attack chihuahuas. And of course, my colleagues said, 

take it easy, take it easy Mr. MLA from Athabasca. Those 

chihuahuas might know kung fu. And I gave it some thought for 

about two seconds, and I said, yes, but they‟re still chihuahuas. 

 

So at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, 

whatever they would like to do, whatever game that they want 

to play, if they want to rock and roll, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll rock 

and roll. And this Throne Speech, and this Throne Speech is 

bull. It is boring. It is uninspired, and it just really reflects the 

fact that all those members across the way are tired after two 

years. How could you be broke and tired after two years? That‟s 

what I can‟t understand. 

 

And I listened with great interest to some of the members 

opposite, particularly the Minister of Industry and Resources. 

He said oh yes, you guys are great economic thinkers over 

there. But, Mr. Speaker, when I think about who built this 

economy, when I think about the boom that happened in 

Saskatchewan — which these guys inherited — when I think of 

that, Mr. Speaker, I think of people like Eric Cline, our former 

minister of Finance. I think of people like Eldon Lautermilch, 

Mr. Speaker. I think about Doreen Hamilton, Mr. Speaker; 

Andrew Thomson, Mr. Speaker; Joanne Crofford. These are the 

people who I think about. 

 

[20:00] 

 

I don‟t give one ounce of credit to that gang across the way, Mr. 

Speaker, because they don‟t deserve it. Every bit of good news 

that they had as a result of the inheritance that they got from the 

outgoing NDP government is now over. It is now over, Mr. 

Speaker. Now the crow is going to come home to roost because 

the fact of the matter is they‟re tired. They‟re uninspired, and 

they‟re now broke. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, what‟s the amazing thing about all 

of that is people are just starting to realize how bad and how 

tough this whole issue is because the fact of the matter is when 

you‟re sitting listening to the Throne Speech, you want to see 

their vision. They want to see where they‟re going, how they‟re 

going to manage the finances, what they‟re going to do. 

 

And every time that they get into trouble, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

every single time that this government gets into trouble, do you 

know what they do? They blame the NDP. They say oh it‟s 16 

years. 

 

And my advice to them is, it‟s time for you guys to grow up and 

act your age. You‟re two years old. Stop blaming other people 

and start taking responsibility for your own actions and your 

own miscalculations, Mr. Speaker. My goodness, it‟s as simple 

as that. It‟s as simple as that. 

 

So next time the Minister of Industry and Resources gets up and 

talks about the economic minds on this side, I‟ll tell him this, 

Mr. Speaker, that we had more to do with rebuilding the 

economy than any single member across the way. And I‟m 

proud of my affiliation with the New Democratic Party and the 

past administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And before you go on, and before they go on, before they go 

on, they ought to know this as well, that when the tough times 

came, when the tough times came, that member from 

Kindersley went home. He was going to go home, back to the 

farm. And now he comes back here because things are going 

good. Why not, you know? So he comes back again, and he 

comes to be the Minister of Industry and Resources out here. 

 

And the problem is, Mr. Speaker, it‟s like the football game a 

couple weeks ago. Some of the fans got up and left when 

Saskatchewan was behind. I think they were behind by six 

points or a point, rather. And all of a sudden they all left. They 

all left. And people said, oh no, no. No, come back. Come back. 

Saskatchewan‟s winning again. So what he does, he turns 

around and he comes back. 

 

So I‟m going to say to this, Mr. Speaker, that I will not take any 

criticism from that member from Kindersley, and I‟ll not take 

any advice from him either about who built this economy. I talk 

to the people like Cline, Lautermilch, Crofford, Hamilton. 

Those are the people that built this economy, and those are the 

people we should recognize, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely, all the 

way we should recognize them. 

 

So again I go back to the Throne Speech and I‟m thinking it‟s a 

bad joke, that the timing is off. So why are people out there 

across the way smiling? Why are they laughing? You think it‟s 

a big joke that these problems are coming down the pipe, and 

they just simply keep floating out these balloons and these 

pompoms. Well the fact of the matter is the pompoms and 

balloon days are soon coming to an end, Mr. Speaker. They‟re 

soon coming to an end. And who‟s going to pay the price are 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And we warned them, Mr. Speaker, we warned them. Don‟t 

listen to their speeches. Don‟t believe anything they say 

because they‟d rather have their little pompoms to deflect your 

attention from the real issues, from the real issues and from the 

history of this party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, that Throne Speech, it‟s got to be the most boring 

speech I‟ve ever heard in the 14 years that I‟ve sat in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It‟s got to be the boringest speech. 

 

Now what I‟ll point out as well, Mr. Speaker, in my closing 

comments is that the people ought to know, the people ought to 

know when we lost government in 2007, we lost by 6,000 votes 

in 10 seats — in 10 seats, Mr. Speaker. That ain‟t a lot. In this 

Assembly, we‟re going to work very hard over the next couple 

of years to get rid of those guys, Mr. Speaker. And I notice they 

attack not only the new member from Riversdale, who I 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3389 

congratulate and say great work, because they never increased 

their vote. In fact they had 2,100 votes in 2007. They went 

down to 1,500. So they lost a lot of votes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also noticed how they attacked their leader. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m going to tell them this once and I‟m not going to 

say it again, but when our leader began this journey to come 

back to rejoin the NDP and rebuild this party and become 

premier, there‟s four things he had to do. 

 

Number one was he had to really go after the nomination which 

he worked very, very hard at. And then he had to go after the 

party executive to embrace him and to bring back all the people 

that have really come back to listen to some of the things that he 

has said because of his vision and because of his experience. 

And then he had to become the leader which he did, Mr. 

Speaker. He became our leader. 

 

So what‟s going to happen . . . has one more task to do, one 

more and that is become the premier of Saskatchewan. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s going to happen in 2011. 2011 is the date, 

and we are all looking forward to this. The member from 

Regina South, the member from Prince Albert Carlton, and the 

member from . . . wherever they‟re from, be on notice that the 

NDP are back. We had enough of your tired and uninspiring 

work. We had enough of your promises with the money that 

you inherited, and we had enough of your mismanagement of 

our finances and of our future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m going to point out again, as I pointed out earlier, next year 

is going to be difficult. We‟re going to watch where these guys 

are getting their money from. They already stripped the Crowns 

already. They blew their 2.5 billion and, Mr. Speaker, the 

economy is in trouble as you can see from the newspaper 

clippings. 

 

They have messed up everything that they‟ve touched. 

Everything that they have done they have messed up. And 

what‟s worse, Mr. Speaker; they shouldn‟t give something to 

the people and then take it back. That‟s the worst thing you can 

do. When you start talking about land tax reform and then two 

years from now you‟ve got to go back and say, well I can‟t give 

you any more; I‟ve got to take it back. You should not have 

begun that process to begin with. That denotes a lack of vision 

and that denotes the inexperience on that side of the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. It is much like their Throne Speech. It‟s tired, 

uninspired, and they all need to be fired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I say to the people of the North, the people of the North, 

and they always tell me . . . they say, well we watch the 

Assembly with great interest. Mr. Speaker, they‟ve all been 

watching what goes on, and they see some of the roads that 

have been cancelled, some of the projects that have been 

cancelled. And they say, why are they doing this to us? Why are 

they penalizing us? Why are they doing this doing to us? And I 

tell them the reason they‟re doing that is they‟re trying to 

penalize you guys for voting the wrong way. And when one 

region of the province begins to worry about their government‟s 

treatment of them, then that‟s a shame, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a 

shame in 2009 we‟re having those kind of activities. That is a 

bloody shame. 

 

So what they‟re thinking is, if we continue treating northern 

people with disrespect by cancelling projects, then what 

happens? They‟re not going to come back to embrace these 

Sask Party guys. They aren‟t going to come back and say oh, 

we‟re sorry. What they‟re going to do is they‟re going to come 

back. They‟re going to be mad, and they‟re going to be more 

determined, and they‟re going to start doing things that should 

be done, and that‟s to work hard to get rid of any candidate they 

have in the North, in the South, the East, or the West, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We join my colleague and our leader and the rest of the 

colleagues in the South, my colleague from Cumberland, and 

we‟re going to fight. And what we like, Mr. Speaker, their 

termination date has been noted by their leader. It‟s November 

7, 2011. We are looking forward to it. We‟re going to come 

back. We want to win 2011. It‟s going to take hard work, 

vision, and proper planning — nothing that these guys have 

done. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will be standing to support the amendment 

and never the Throne Speech by the motion. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

honoured to be standing here today as the voice of the people 

from the Kelvington-Wadena constituency to reply to the 

Throne Speech. It‟s humbling indeed to be one of the 58 people 

who‟ve been elected to the legislature, to be one of the 30 

individuals who have been given the opportunity to govern this 

beautiful province. It‟s a responsibility and an honour that I‟ll 

never take for granted. 

 

I thank the people of my constituency for the privilege of being 

part of the Saskatchewan Party government. I‟d like to start by 

welcoming the two new members —well one new member and 

one recycled or renewed member. But welcome, 

congratulations. 

 

Before I address my remarks to the Throne Speech and the 

members opposite predictable reaction, I‟d like to thank and 

acknowledge some of the very special people in my life. 

 

First of all my family. There‟s a song I believe we should be 

dedicating to our family because of the pedestal that we‟re all 

put onto when we‟re elected. It‟s a Bette Midler song, “Wind 

Beneath My Wings,” and I think all of us know that feeling. To 

my family, thank you for being there when I need you and 

thank you for forgiving me when I cannot be there when you 

need me. 

 

To Linda and Rhonda in my constituency office, thank you for 

the job you do, not just for the people of the 

Kelvington-Wadena constituency, but for caring and not just 

doing your job. Thank you to the special people in my 

ministerial office here in the legislature. They don‟t work for 

me; they work with me. They do more than just the immediate 

work that‟s put in front of them, but they do it in a context of 

governing this great province. 

 

Last spring the Premier asked me to take on a number of 

different responsibilities, and that change gave me the 



3390 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

opportunity to meet hundreds of people and to add another 

perspective to my life. 

 

But before I speak about those areas, I wanted to say thank you 

to a number of remarkable people, and those are the ones of the 

Ministry of First Nations and Métis Relations. I know those are 

dedicated and committed people with enormous responsibility 

and opportunity. I know, with your new minister, you‟ll 

continue with passion and enthusiasm to do the work that‟s 

essential to government and the First Nations and Métis people. 

 

To the leaders of the First Nations and Métis people of our 

province, you have been given a huge responsibility. I wish you 

the wisdom of the elders as you work with government and 

businesses to find an acceptable balance of rights and 

responsibility and opportunity that will result in the positive 

change that‟s needed for the people you represent. 

 

Congratulations to the new chief of the FSIN, Chief Guy 

Lonechild. And congratulations also to Vice-chief Lerat and to 

Vice-chief Morley Watson. I‟ve had the opportunity many 

times to speak to Chief Lonechild, and I have no doubt about 

his convictions to work diligently and passionately for his 

people. His work within the FSIN was the genesis of a new 

agreement, first in Canada, where the province and the federal 

government and the First Nations developed standards around 

Jordan‟s principle. And I congratulate him and the minister for 

working and continuing this work with the federal government. 

 

Together we must diligently close the gap of lower education 

outcomes of First Nations and Métis people in this province. I 

know the phrase of education being the buffalo of today is 

overused, but it‟s still true. It‟s the only way we can address 

poverty issues, the only way we can address issues of under 

employment, overrepresentation in our justice system, diabetes, 

and other issues. It‟s essential not only to the First Nations and 

the Métis people but to all of Saskatchewan, in fact to all of 

Canada, that an honest dialogue with defined and achievable 

benchmarks be agreed upon. This is not about politics. It‟s not 

about rights versus responsibilities. It‟s about improving and 

enhancing the lives of the First Nations and Métis people, and 

it‟s a platform that all citizens of this province can agree on. 

 

I also want to express my sincere thanks to the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan. President Doucette and his executive have 

worked hard to earn the respect of the people of this province, 

and it‟s an honour to call them friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now have a number of new responsibilities as 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], Minister of SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance], Information Technology Office, ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan], and Public Service 

Commission, as well as the Provincial Secretary. Every one of 

them is exciting and full of opportunities. I don‟t have a 

favourite. It‟s sort of like children; you don‟t have a favourite, 

but they‟re all unique and extraordinary. They‟re winners in 

their fields of expertise. 

 

The individuals in the Office of the Provincial Secretary are 

justifiably proud of the work they do at places like Government 

House. I also want to thank the amazing volunteers at 

Government House. The antique auction, the opening of the 

Edwardian gardens, the teas and historical events adds to the 

pride in our history. 

 

August the 5th to the 7th, Saskatchewan was proud to host the 

Council of the Federation. The efforts of the protocol office 

were professional and tasteful, and at the same time they kept 

reminding us that we really are Saskatchewan, and the 

Saskatchewan hospitality shone through. We couldn‟t be more 

proud of all of them and the volunteers that shed a really bright 

light on our province. 

 

I was also pleased to be able to attend the World Acadian 

Congress in New Brunswick. This event was not only an 

opportunity to celebrate more than 400 years of French 

presence on our continent; it was an opportunity to celebrate the 

current vitality of the francophone culture in Saskatchewan and 

Canada. I also attended the Fransaskois flag recognition 

ceremony at Duck Lake, and the event was an opportunity for 

the Government of Saskatchewan to recognize the Fransaskois 

flag as a provincial emblem and the contribution of the 

community of Duck Lake. 

 

As the Minister Responsible for the Public Service 

Commission, I‟d like to express my sincere appreciation for all 

the hard-working and dedicated men and women that work not 

only in that ministry, but within the public service. I thank you 

for your commitment in providing excellent service to the 

people of the province. I had the pleasure of attending the long 

service awards and recognition ceremony on October the 8th. 

This year I‟m proud to say that the public service recognized 

235 employees with 25 years service and 259 with 35 years 

service. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Also as the Minister Responsible for Information Technology 

Office, I was delighted to receive on behalf of our government a 

national award last month in Ottawa for the work that the 

Information Technology Office has done in government on 

shared services. The ITO [Information Technology Office], in 

consolidating their services, is saving taxpayers $50 million a 

year and is helping to contribute to the province‟s fiscal 

responsibility targets. This work is done by a group of 

professional, leading-edge, state of the art people, and their 

work is incredible. Their vision for the future of technology in 

government is going to ensure that that‟s not the only award 

they‟ll ever receive. 

 

Information Services Corporation has in the last year, 2009, 

provided improved turnaround times for standard land title 

transactions. They exceeded the target that was asked of 2.5 

days, and last year they actually achieved a 1.49 day turnaround 

on average. They continue to have one of the quickest 

turnarounds in Canada for land transactions. And despite a 

slowing economy, Information Services Corporation continue 

to be successful when they focus on efficiencies and process 

improvement. Customer satisfaction remains at 95 per cent. 

Information Services Corporation recently was recognized by 

Macleans magazine as one of Canada‟s top 100 employers and 

by Today’s Parent as one of the top 100 family friendly 

employers. 

 

As minister responsible for SGI, I‟m pleased to say the 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3391 

customer polling done found that the vast majority of SGI 

communities have a very positive image of SGI. Some of the 

initiatives they continue are the Safe Ride program, child 

restraint campaign, and the community seat belt campaign. All 

of this is to promote the safety of our motorists. SGI continues 

to be competitive with insurance rates across the country while 

striving to provide excellent customer service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Crowns continue to play a pivotal role in our 

province‟s success. The priority remains the same: to work for 

the benefit for Saskatchewan people; to provide top quality, low 

cost services. The Crown sector are following the government‟s 

directive to look for efficiency. For us that means focusing on 

effectiveness and enhanced service delivery, keeping in mind 

the need for a Crown to be well positioned to meet the growing 

demands in the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Crowns are spending this year an 

incredible $1.2 billion on capital. Why? They‟re doing that 

because of the infrastructure deficit that the members opposite 

left not only within executive government, within our Crowns. 

The needs within SaskPower are tremendous. This year we‟re 

going to be spending $885 million for new gas generation, 

transmission, and distribution upgrades. There‟ll be $150 

million at SaskEnergy and $221 million at SaskTel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, and particularly their new 

leader, seem to have a major concern on natural gas pricing. 

And I think it‟s time we set the record straight. Since 1995 

Saskatchewan‟s buying has been guided by the gas price 

management strategy approved by SaskEnergy board of 

directors. This strategy has two simple goals: stability and 

competitive rates. Now the NDP and the new leader have been 

calling for all sorts of changes and rebates over the last few 

months. And this is where it gets pretty interesting. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition was very familiar with how rates 

were calculated because way back in 1997 and 1998, he was the 

Chair of the SaskEnergy board when the very same principles 

and formula were used to price natural gas. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, even before that, he was the chairman of the 

SaskEnergy board for the first time in 1991 and 1992. Now I 

appreciate that that‟s a long time ago, and when you get older, 

your memory isn‟t always that good. But it‟s important to 

remember that nothing has changed in the gas buying strategy 

for many years, including all the years the NDP were in power. 

But now they‟re complaining about some of their very own 

policies. Mr. Speaker, current practices are working well — 

well enough in fact that the NDP and the new leader should 

congratulate this government for continuing their programs and 

stop complaining about one of their programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had the opportunity to listen to most of the 

members in this House reply to the Throne Speech. There is of 

course predictability in the replies. My colleagues are 

supportive, and the members opposite are not. That‟s not 

surprising. It‟s really part of the system. The minority has their 

say, and the majority has their way. 

 

My colleagues, the government members, are proud. They‟re 

excited and they‟re optimistic. We know and understand the 

realities facing the world and our province. We know we‟re not 

an island, that we‟re not immune from the global uncertainties, 

but we know the sun is going to come up tomorrow. 

 

We know that the world needs oil and gas that lies under the 

ground here in Saskatchewan, that potash sales will happen, that 

crops will grow, the businesses will start, the people will be 

hired, that houses will be built, children will be born, and the 

people will always be proud to call Saskatchewan home. 

 

On the other hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite are 

languishing in their nostalgic memories of nearly two decades 

when our province was governed by them, or people like them, 

who honestly believe that the best days are behind us. For 

nearly 20 years under the watch of the members opposite, our 

province was in a state of suspension watching the rest of the 

world go by. The suspension was fuelled by the attitude and the 

action of their leaders, the government at that time. Maybe even 

more than action was their words — words like our wee 

province, words like Saskatchewan can never grow at the 

national rate, words like it‟s okay if people leave because 

there‟ll be more left for the rest of us. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people who live here knew in their hearts 

that they were wrong. They knew that 45 per cent of Canadian 

grain is grown right here in Saskatchewan. The world‟s largest 

potash industry is right here in Saskatchewan. The second 

largest oil industry in Canada, an abundance of gas and uranium 

and rare earth minerals and diamonds and fish and trees and the 

most industrious people in the whole world live here. And we 

should not be a have-not province ever. 

 

They knew they need not to be ashamed or made to feel 

ashamed or irrelevant. But day after day, the NDP leaders told 

them in words and actions that we could never be what our 

forefathers, the pioneers, believed Saskatchewan could be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember a study commissioned by the NDP: 

The Changing Role of Rural Communities in an Urbanizing 

World, done by Jack Stabler and Rose Olfert, about the viability 

of the towns and villages and hamlets in Saskatchewan. I 

believe at that time there were 570 communities. This report 

said that there was 60 communities could make it, 60 

communities as partial shopping centres to primary wholesale 

retail centres. The rest would fade away into obscurity as little 

centres do, and they‟ll have little to no services — 60 out of 

570. 

 

They couldn‟t envision new communities. Martensville, which 

is now a city, wasn‟t even on the list at that time, Mr. Speaker. 

Meadow Lake, Humboldt, and Melfort are now cities, but when 

the NDP saw that report, they set out to make the prediction a 

reality. They just took their little paper and their little pencils 

and just started X-ing out all the places that weren‟t on the list. 

It had nothing to do with people, nothing to do with potential. It 

had everything to do with meeting the criteria that they had set 

out, so they slammed the door shut on 52 hospitals. They 

squeezed the confidence out of all and the life out of some 

farmers by tearing up the GRIP [gross revenue insurance 

program] project. They strangled municipalities by not just 

slashing budgets, by downloading responsibilities. 

 

There wasn‟t a road you could drive on, a hospital you could go 

to, a cell phone area you could get. Schools were begging for 

funds for their facilities. University and SIAST [Saskatchewan 



3392 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology] seats were 

decreased, leading to our current shortage of doctors and nurses. 

And people left the province in droves. The wait times for 

surgery increased. Education costs were transferred to taxpayers 

on property. And student loans were based on the assets of the 

farm, not net profits, so in many cases the students and the 

parents worked off the farm so the children could get their 

education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the most embarrassing moments for those 

of us who had to sit on the other side of the House and watch 

these Wall Street wizards talking was watching on TV seeing a 

duck swimming in a pothole on one of our highways. That‟s the 

kind of memories and pictures that people had of 

Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP weren‟t really 

discriminating. They made sure that everybody knuckled under 

their vision of mediocrity. Remember when the Finance 

minister said they didn‟t want Finance to get too much money 

because we wouldn‟t get our equalization payment from the 

federal government? We had to be careful we didn‟t lose our 

welfare cheque. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are people in this province now, and there 

were people then who really didn‟t believe it, but they had to 

leave our province. We have heroes, winners here in 

Saskatchewan, but for years and years those winners had to 

leave our province and go outside of our borders. Writers like 

Allan Fotheringham, W.O. Mitchell. Singers like Joni Mitchell, 

Susan Jacks, Colin James. We had hockey players like Wendel 

Clark and Glenn Hall and Gordie Howe and Hayley 

Wickenheiser. We had the Bronfman family. Jimmy Pattison, 

billionaire president of the Vancouver Jim Pattison Group. John 

Diefenbaker. And also on the list was Pamela Wallin who not 

only hails from my constituency, she‟s also a close friend. 

 

I know the leaders of the NDP went outside the province to 

invest Saskatchewan taxpayers‟ money, but I never heard of 

them going outside the province to market our province, to sell 

the potential of Saskatchewan outside these walls. Marketing 

our province is exactly what our Premier and our government 

has been doing for just a few days short of the second 

anniversary of becoming government. 

 

Our Premier attended the conference of Democratic Governors 

Association in Montana. They met with officials in 

Washington, in Chicago, in Houston, and New York. Our 

Premier was on CNN [Cable News Network] television talking 

about the hot spot for jobs. They made trips to Calgary and 

Toronto to promote this great province of ours. We‟ve been part 

of a trade mission to Kazakhstan. Our Premier went on a trade 

and energy mission with Alberta to Houston and to Texas and 

met with the governor of Montana on carbon capture initiatives. 

Our government recently invited diplomats from eight countries 

to the unveiling of the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of what the members opposite say, 

regardless of how much they‟d like to turn the clock back and 

say life was better in the ‟90s, the people of Saskatchewan 

know better. 

 

The secret of Saskatchewan is out. We are on the world stage to 

stay. The people of Saskatchewan will never return to days of 

nothingness, to no hope and to no vision. We will never again 

be a cartoon or a caricature or a joke as we were under the 

NDP. We have no desire to be the blunt of every political joke 

in Canada. They can languish in their wistful nostalgia as much 

as they want, but those days are never going to return because 

the secret of Saskatchewan is out. Saskatchewan is alive and 

well and growing and is the envy of every province and of 

nations of the world. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will never support the amendment. I will 

be supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure to join in the debate tonight. You know, I just 

want to start off with an observation. It‟s always interesting to 

be lectured on how old and tired we are over on this side of the 

House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the member that was just on 

her feet, she was into a bit of a tirade on the old-and-tired point, 

and I couldn‟t help but notice that the member from Wood 

River was yawning his head off. So I guess, you know, it‟s sort 

of funny for the old-and-tired finger to be pointed over here, but 

maybe they should look around on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As I‟ve said, it‟s a pleasure to enter into the debate this evening. 

I want to start off by thanking my family and friends, my 

neighbours, Mr. Speaker. It‟s quite a job that we do in this 

Chamber. Many people have spoken about the demands that it 

places, and if you didn‟t have that support, if you didn‟t have 

that love, it would be hard to get through it, Mr. Speaker. So it‟s 

not always perfect, but I very much appreciate the support I 

draw from my family and the ability I have to take their name 

forward. 

 

I want to say a word of congratulations off the top to the 

member from Riversdale, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well as to the 

member from Regina Douglas Park, you know, as custom in 

this House, the by-election people coming in to take their 

chairs. And you know, it was humbling knocking on doors in 

Riversdale, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and talking to people that had 

met our candidate there — our now MLA for Riversdale — or 

the people that had met her family or knew of the good work of 

that family, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, she worked very hard, and I know that that hard 

work will continue on behalf of the people of Riversdale, and I 

am very, very happy to be serving with someone who I think 

brings a refreshing and new perspective and a needed 

perspective to the affairs of this Chamber and to the affairs of 

our caucus as we build to the 2011 election. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that they have roots in Riversdale 

going back to ‟42, you know, it‟s something that got borne out. 

And I took a great deal of enjoyment looking at the pride on the 

faces of her family as they watched on as the member from 

Riversdale gave her first speech in this Assembly. So I want to 

say congratulations and keep up the great work. You‟re going to 

go far. 

 

[20:30] 

 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3393 

Now I want to say, as well, congratulations to the member from 

Douglas Park. I should state right off the bat, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that one of the people that encouraged me to get 

involved in elected life was the member from Douglas Park. 

And I know some people in the House may not think that‟s not 

the best thing to have done, but I certainly appreciated the 

things that I‟ve learned from that member over the years, as 

when he served as the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

He‟s somebody with a tremendous capacity for hard work, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a very strategic mind. And you know, some of 

the members opposite like to talk about why, you know, where 

was that individual in the ‟80s and the ‟90s? Well I‟ll tell you 

where he was. He was fighting off the destruction of this 

province in the ‟80s, and he was helping to rebuild it in the 

‟90s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And you know, when it comes to stacking up leader to leader, I 

am very proud to put our leader‟s characteristics and record 

alongside that of the member from Swift Current any day. 

Because of course when he was fighting off the wrecking crew, 

the member from Douglas Park and when he was rebuilding the 

finances of this province, it was the member from Swift Current 

that was taking his lessons at the knee of the Gary Lanes and 

the Grant Devines. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we see proof positive of that 

experience, of that education, in this last budget. In this last 

budget we see a $1.3 billion blunder in potash. And we‟ve 

heard different of the members across the way say that, you 

know, well who knew? How were they supposed to know? How 

is it that they should have foreseen this? 

 

And you know, all they had to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 

listen to the remarks of the then Finance critic for the official 

opposition, Harry Van Mulligen. And if they‟d taken the trouble 

to listen to what Harry Van Mulligen had to say on March 18 or 

March 19 in the budget speech debate, you know, maybe that 

would have given them some pause for thought. Maybe it 

would have given them an inkling that this train is not bound 

for glory, and that good sloganeering and good pompom 

waving and good cheerleading is not a substitute for good fiscal 

planning. 

 

And the fact that they carried on ahead anyway, Mr. Speaker, 

and that the chickens come home to roost at the end of the 

summer, where we find out that potash was only $1.3 billion 

off, that it might be more than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

we‟ll have to wait for the mid-term to find out the full extent of 

the damage that they did with this budget, Mr. Speaker, if you 

can call it that, if you can talk about the paper it was printed on 

being worth it. 

 

You know, I shake my head and I worry about what‟s in store 

for the people of Saskatchewan because of course, when you 

screw up the budget, that has an impact. And we found that out 

in spades in the 1980s and the 1990s in this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan said never 

again. 

 

And I think they look at what happened in this last budget 

where, you know, it was rolled out with great fanfare, and the 

member from Carrot River Valley talked about it being the best 

budget in the whole world, and all of this overblown rhetoric 

that was employed to sell and pompom wave for this budget. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, that they were one point three and 

counting billion dollars off on the potash projection, that has 

real consequences. That has real consequences for the people of 

this province. 

 

And it‟s one thing to roll out the great measures at the front end 

of the budget, but it‟s entirely another to come clawing them 

back, either in the mid-term or in the next year‟s budget. So we 

worry about what is to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of 

the measures that they will undertake to correct the path that 

they‟re on, or the fact that they‟ve taken the fiscal car and rolled 

it right into the ditch, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again, I think of another criticism that Harry Van Mulligen 

levelled against this budget was that the financial growth 

projections were off, that they were far too optimistic. Well 

again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other side had a good laugh 

about the dour Mr. Van Mulligen, and why couldn‟t he share 

the sunshine that they‟re trying to blow around this place. 

 

And again his criticism proved to be right on the money in 

terms of growth projections. And why is that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? Because it was based on the private sector growth 

projections that were available at the time of the budget‟s 

tabling in this House. But apparently the Sask Party knew 

better. Apparently the member from Swift Current knew better, 

and they thought there was so much more we could be. Well 

there was so much more we could be, Mr. Speaker. It turns out 

that we could have a budget that was off by $1.3 billion. This 

on top of inheriting $2.3 billion from the previous 

administration. 

 

And the members opposite wonder what happened over the 16 

years. You know, we made expansions that made a difference 

in many people‟s lives, but we also got the finances of this 

province back in order. And there were a lot of tough decisions 

that had to be made to make that so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But the kind of blithe spirit that they approach the budget and, 

you know, well they can put forward projections that are based 

on so much baloney, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, there is a 

price that gets paid for that. And the problem is the price that 

they‟ll pay for that doesn‟t come till election day, Mr. Speaker. 

But the price that the people of this province pay for it comes in 

programs being rolled back, and the things that they need in 

their lives not having the cash to be addressed. 

 

I think of, you know, one of the hallmark items that got 

ballyhooed in this budget speech was the promise around 

surgical wait times. And surgical wait times are a big issue, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. But just before they tabled the Throne Speech, 

they cut $3 million out of the ambulatory surgical care centre 

slated for Regina. So how is it that it‟s a marquee event on one 

day, but you‟re cutting $3 million out of the project, you know, 

not days before? 

 

And what does that mean? Is it because they want to open up a 

private sector surgical care centre, and then they can somehow 

save the money on the front end but have the people signed up 

for a deal that they pay for and pay for and pay for? You know, 

is that the thinking going on there, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It‟s 



3394 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

more than a little strange that they again highlight it on the one 

hand and then chop it mere days before. 

 

I think about the measures in this Throne Speech around 

poverty reduction and again there‟s some things that were 

improved in the budget. And I acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, 

but I also think about what‟s happened in this province around 

housing and, you know, I think of headlines like that which was 

on the front page of The StarPhoenix, October 22nd, the 

headline is this: “Shelter struggles; YWCA turns away 3,300 

women in 2008.” 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that‟s on their watch. That‟s on their 

watch, and it‟s an increase of 500 per cent over the past two 

years before that. So in terms of the housing situation in this 

province and shelter and people looking for one of their basic 

needs to be taken care of, that it‟s increased over 500 per cent in 

the past two years, I think is a terrible record to take to the 

people. 

 

I think of a headline like, “Gov‟t fails on shelter issue . . .” 

October 28th, page A4 of The StarPhoenix. 

 

And I also think about a story, “P.A. shelters squeezed by 

housing shortage; Hundreds turned away due to lack of space.” 

And again this is from October 27th in The StarPhoenix, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And on top of that I think about a story that ran the week 

previously in the Regina Leader-Post where it talked about the 

shelter challenges being experienced in Regina, and it talked 

about the people being turned away from shelters. And it talked 

about a grandmother who lives in my constituency who‟s been 

in a tent in the backyard for the past 11 months. 

 

And again this is in the midst of economic prosperity, record 

budgets. But even in terms of the things that they‟ve blown 

around the projections, how is it that in a province like 

Saskatchewan you‟ve got someone in the middle of the capital 

city of this province living in a tent for the past 11 months? 

She‟s a grandmother. She should be enjoying her golden years, 

and there she is in a tent in the backyard. And you can check it 

out; there‟s tape up on the Internet. It‟s a study that was done by 

Dr. Marc Spooner at the University of Regina. 

 

So again, I wonder about these people being turned away from 

the shelters. I wonder about the people who have been laid off 

from jobs, and I wonder what they think when they look at this 

Throne Speech, and they see the self-congratulatory tone that 

rides through everything that this government seems to do. 

 

And the fact that any sort of criticism that‟s levelled against this 

budget or this Throne Speech, well you know, well that‟s just 

the NDP being negative. Well maybe it‟s because the Throne 

Speech and the measures of this government aren‟t serving the 

people that we represent. And maybe in a province as wealthy 

as Saskatchewan, you know, the fact that you‟ve got a 

grandmother living 11 months in a tent in a backyard in the 

middle of this capital city is shameful. And maybe this 

government should do better. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I looked for other things in this budget 

that I could agree with . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . or in this 

Throne Speech, I thank the member opposite. Again there were 

certain measures around safer communities. That‟s fine. There‟s 

a continued expansion of The Safer Communities and 

Neighbourhoods Act, which of course we brought in, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when we were in the government benches. 

 

There‟s talk around health care improved, the marquee promise 

around wait times, but again they cut the surgical care centre 

money for the Regina budget.  

 

Talk around the environment, and again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

we‟ll see how the record of the members opposite. A lot of the 

good things that are going on in this province around the carbon 

sequestration or the test site down at the University of Regina, 

those were of course things that the then NDP government 

brought in, and that the members opposite like to pretend that 

they somehow invented them. But again, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a 

lot on the environment that we‟ll see how it goes. 

 

And the fact that they had the conversion on wind power in the 

budget in these past few days, Mr. Speaker, again I think is kind 

of interesting. You know, for two years we‟ve had some good 

opportunities out there in terms of better pricing on the 

infrastructure involved in setting up more wind power. And 

what was the preoccupation of this government, of course, but 

the expansion of the uranium power cycle and the UDP 

[Uranium Development Partnership], and then the Perrins 

report. 

 

And that‟s what they‟ve been doing when there were a lot of 

opportunities that have passed by on wind power or on 

demand-side management or pick your renewable source of 

energy, Mr. Speaker. But no, they went off on a wild goose 

chase. And now the member from Kindersley has got his foot 

on the brake and a foot on the gas, and he‟s trying to pass his 

driver‟s licence with the people in the car along with him. But 

it‟s a shame that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they took all this 

time to take the people of Saskatchewan off on some wild 

adventure, that again there were important things to be done in 

terms of the expansion of wind power that they should have 

been doing years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It‟s my pleasure . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I hear one 

of the members opposite talk about a rehash. And again my 

seatmate, the member from Athabasca, talked very 

convincingly about the tired and uninspired approach that came 

with this Throne Speech. And I guess it‟s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, to hear something about tired or a rehash from the 

members opposite because, of course, there were 50-plus 

measures in this budget that were re-announcements. You 

know, there was a little over a half a dozen that were new 

announcements. And it‟s again, Mr. Speaker, that a government 

two years in has run out of gas this soon in the ball game. You 

know, we‟re welcoming taking them into the closing stretch, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟re welcoming that indeed. 

 

I‟ve been granted the privilege of serving as the First Nations 

and Métis Relations critic for the official opposition by my 

leader, and I‟ve also been given responsibility for Provincial 

Secretary. And it‟s a privilege to pursue those issues, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, particularly in the Provincial Secretary 

portfolio. 

 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3395 

And the francophone affairs bureau, I‟ve looked with great 

interest on the action there. Je suis très heureux pour faire cet 

portefeuille. [Translation: I am very happy with this portfolio.] 

There‟s some interesting things to be pursued there. And we‟ll 

be paying very close attention to what happens around the 

expansion of French language services and the funding 

available to the very important Fransaskois and francophone 

community in Saskatchewan. 

 

As First Nations and Métis Relations critic, I want to say that, 

again, Jordan‟s principle being signed off at the end of summer, 

that‟s an accomplishment. And we‟re glad to see it done. It‟s 

something that certainly the federal New Democratic Party, that 

the members opposite like to deride from time to time, Jean 

Crowder, the Aboriginal Affairs critic for the federal NDP, 

moved a motion calling on the House to adopt Jordan‟s 

principle over a year ago. And that was passed, you know, 

again demonstrating leadership on the issue. 

 

And that the province has signed the deal, we think is a good 

thing. We think that the services should be delivered on the 

basis of need first, and that you can sort out the jurisdictional 

wrangling after. It should not cost any other children their lives 

or their well-being, as was the case in that of Jordan. 

 

[20:45] 

 

I‟m also glad to see the announcements on the Year of the 

Métis. Again, it‟s the 125th anniversary of the North-West 

Resistance, and it‟s good to see that. And we‟ll wait to see the 

details in terms of resources that are being brought to bear by 

the members opposite to ensure that it‟s not just declaring the 

year, but there is a good celebration that unfolds as well. 

 

But it occurs to me, Mr. Speaker, you know, this is something 

they should be doing. It‟s the 125th anniversary, and of course 

they should be celebrating. And I know that our leader was very 

supportive of the request made by the president of the Métis 

Nation, Robert Doucette, and that on our side, we were quite 

prepared to move a private members‟ motion calling for it as 

such, but we‟re glad that the government has come forward 

with this measure and this proclamation. 

 

And again, though, Mr. Speaker, it would be sort of like if we 

had the centennial and then it wasn‟t celebrated. You know, of 

course this is something that should be celebrated. Of course 

this is something that we should try to achieve better 

understanding on in terms of the proud history of this province 

and what makes us who we are as Saskatchewan people. So we 

look forward to joining with the Métis Nation and all 

Saskatchewan people in the celebration of 2010, the Year of the 

Métis. 

 

One of the things that of course was not in the Throne Speech 

— we‟ve heard a little bit more about it from the minister 

responsible, the member from Regina South — concerns the 

situation around duty to consult. And we‟re watching with great 

interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we‟ve heard a lot of 

things being tossed around in terms of what the members 

opposite promised before the election and what duty to consult 

and accommodate would mean to First Nations and Métis 

people. 

 

And then of course there is the reality of what happened after 

the election. And since then we‟ve had a process where, you 

know, there was a great conference held in May of 2008, and 

since then the interim report got delivered almost on Christmas 

Eve, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about a year ago. 

 

So, you know, when the minister, the current minister says that 

he looks to bring something forward in the near future and what 

these tables mean, we‟re looking not just with great interest, but 

we‟re looking with some sense of frustration as well, because 

certainly it seems that the members opposite and this current 

minister and the member from Swift Current seem to be more 

interested in going around and around and around on the issue, 

instead of actually coming forward with something that is 

concrete and that will serve to better engage First Nations 

people and Métis people in the economy and the social and 

economic life for this province. So we‟re waiting for that, Mr. 

Speaker, with a lot of impatience and an awful lot of frustration. 

 

And it‟s interesting to see that the members opposite continue 

to use sort of weasel words like, share the prosperity, around the 

issue of resource revenue sharing. And it seems to me that they 

want to sort of dangle that out there to try and encourage First 

Nations and Métis people along because, of course, resource 

revenue sharing is what they‟re interested in, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That‟s one of the big points of their interest in the duty 

to consult and accommodate consultations, their round tables. 

 

And the fact that the members opposite, you know, despite sort 

of representing one thing before the election and drawing the 

resource revenue sharing off the table after the election, there‟s 

very little patience for that out in First Nations and Métis 

country. 

 

And in terms of what is needed to be brought forward, I can tell 

you this, Mr. Speaker. They need to put resource revenue 

sharing on the table for negotiation, and they need to do that in 

a very clear and transparent way, and stop it with the weasel 

words, and stop it with the shadowboxing because the province 

deserves better, let alone First Nations and Métis people. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you look around the province and 

why would First Nations and Métis people be interested in more 

own-source revenue, in more self-reliance, in more capacity? If 

you look at the health disparities in this province, if you look at 

the education disparities in this province, if you look at the 

economic disparities in this province, you know that First 

Nations and Métis people are looking for the tools to get the job 

done. 

 

They‟re looking for a share of the prosperity of this province 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I hear the member from 

Regina South chirping from his seat. And I guess my advice to 

him and to that government opposite is, you know, enough with 

the chirping from your seat. That member got up and gave a 

speech that was sort of one-half comedy and not a lot of 

substance on the First Nations and Métis issues. And again, he‟s 

got one of the most important portfolios in this government, in 

terms of the challenges that we have set out in front of us, in 

terms of whether Saskatchewan succeeds or fails as a collective. 

And there should be a great, bright future in this province for 

the First Nation and Métis people. And that seems to be this 

gloss and this superficiality from the minister responsible, I can 



3396 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

only assume is reflective of what‟s going on in that cabinet as a 

whole, and in that caucus as a whole. 

 

It was a great pleasure to be there for the FSIN Assembly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to observe the proceedings and to congratulate 

those who contested elections and those, of course, who won. 

And I can tell you this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it‟s more than 

a little strange, you think about the importance of an 

organization like SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association], a very important organization, or SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], again 

another very important institution in this province, and you 

think about what it says when the government doesn‟t take the 

trouble to send not even the minister. Not even the minister. 

They couldn‟t even be bothered to send a backbench MLA. 

They couldn‟t even be bothered to send a backbench MLA. 

 

So again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s fine for him to say a few 

fine words in this Assembly, but the chiefs, the First Nations, 

they‟re not fooled. And there was talk about that in different of 

the speeches that were given at the Assembly in terms of, you 

know, where is this government when it comes time to actually 

deal with respect and in partnership with the First Nations and 

Métis people in this province. So it‟s my hope, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that they tune up, that they smarten up, and that they 

show up. But again their actions and their absences speak 

louder than their words. 

 

I‟m going to close off by saying a couple of things about my 

constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One thing that is of critical 

importance to the future of Regina Elphinstone Centre and to 

the opportunities that are available in my home community of 

North Central — my home neighbourhood, North Central — is 

the work that‟s going on around the North Central shared 

facility. And this is work that goes back a number of years, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, an initiative led by the Regina Public School 

Board. And you know, certainly we were supportive of the 

project, and not just in words, but in dollars as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In the summer of 2007, Scott Collegiate was number two on the 

capital list for the K to 12 capital. And I was very glad to see in 

measures passed where this government has come forward with 

dollars for the project. But I‟ll be watching very closely and 

anxiously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see that this project is given 

the support that it is due, because it‟s not just a project for 

North Central — although the need there is great, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — but it‟s a project that embodies the very principles 

of SchoolPlus from the ground up. It‟s a project that could be a 

leader in terms of educational infrastructure in Canada, if not 

North America, if it‟s done right. 

 

And there‟s a lot of people who have put a lot of work and a lot 

of hours and a lot of hard thinking and hard figuring into 

making this project what it is. So I‟ll be watching very closely, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see that that hard effort, that great effort 

is supported the way it should be by this government of the day. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to recap, it‟s interesting looking at this 

budget in the context of the budget speech we went through last 

year and the great ballyhoo that came from the side opposite. 

And the way that the mid-term and the first quarter results have 

come through to show that of course when Harry Van Mulligen 

said that, you know, on potash and on the growth projections, 

you‟re off, and the members opposite scoffed and laughed. It 

turns out Harry Van Mulligen was right on the money. 

 

And in terms of what this government needs to bring to bear, 

they need to be right on the money too. They need to be on the 

money because if they‟re not, there are consequences that get 

played out in real people‟s lives. It gets played out in the 

economy that tails off. It gets played out in 5,800 jobs gone 

down. I think of the Sears call centre in the middle of Regina 

Elphinstone centre where hundreds of people have lost their 

jobs with the closing of that facility. And I think about all the 

families that get to scramble through putting together EI 

[employment insurance] and their eligibility, and how are they 

going to put bread on the table to keep the family together, and 

how are they going to pay their mortgage. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that‟s why you‟ve got to add it up 

right. You‟ve got to have a budget that holds water. You‟ve got 

to have a budget that pays attention to the details, let alone a 

budget that screws it up by $1.3 billion. And again we‟ve heard 

from different of my colleagues in terms of what the 

commentators have had to say about this, and how this is as bad 

as what went on in the 1980s in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see the same things to worry about in 

this Throne Speech. Despite the few good things in this budget, 

I find it to be largely a rehash of 50-plus older announcements; 

I find it to be tired and uninspired, and I find it to serve the 

people of Regina Elphinstone not like they should be served, let 

alone the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ll be supporting the amendment and 

voting against the Throne Speech. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Thank you very much. It is a pleasure that I rise this 

evening to participate in the Throne Speech debate. 

 

But before I do, it‟s a great honour and a privilege to serve in 

the capacity as a member of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, and you don‟t do it without a great deal of help 

and support. And first and foremost of those who have 

supported me over the 14 years I‟ve had this rare and distinct 

pleasure, is my good wife, Carole. She‟s very much my 

confidante and my very best friend, and someone who has 

through thick and thin stood by and supported me in the 

endeavours in the service that I provide to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I also would like to acknowledge people in my office in Melfort 

who take care of a lot more of the day-to-day issues than what 

they used to, in my absence and the requirements of my office. 

But Laurie and Peggy do a great job of being there for the 

people of Melfort constituency. And they also have a full 

agenda there for me most Fridays when I get back to the 

constituency and can be available. Here in Regina, Kim and 

Carrie man the front desk, and Fred and Dick are also integral 

to the operation of the office here in Regina. 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3397 

I would be remiss as well if I didn‟t acknowledge at this time 

the incredible work of the professionals in the Ministry of 

Finance. You know, Mr. Speaker, when you come to an office, 

you take very much for granted some of the back-of-the-scenes 

quality and professionalism that goes back in all of the 

ministries in government. And certainly I want to acknowledge 

the very, very high standards of professionalism and dedication 

to the province of Saskatchewan that exists in the Ministry of 

Finance. 

 

I would be remiss, Mr. Speaker, if I didn‟t take this opportunity 

as well to welcome the new members to the House, and in 

particular to welcome the new member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. I‟ve been very impressed with the conduct of the 

member to date, and I know from her words and actions that 

she‟s very sincere and will be a very, very good representative 

of her constituency. And I wish her very good luck into the 

future. 

 

I also would like to welcome or rewelcome or reacquaint 

ourselves with the member from Regina Douglas Park. I 

certainly have been elected long enough to remember when the 

member left Saskatchewan and moved to a different challenge 

for a period of time. And certainly there was about, from the 

time I was elected to the time the member left, about five years, 

so we had an opportunity to interact as colleagues in the 

Legislative Assembly. And I wish him well with his new 

challenges as the Leader of the Official Opposition because I 

believe it‟s certainly going to be different than the challenges 

that he has faced up to in the past. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I find it always invigorating to be able 

to go home to my constituency and touch base with the folks 

that you represent. I have the benefit of being in what I 

immodestly believe is one of the best constituencies in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I know that all 57 of my 

colleagues feel the same way about their constituencies, and 

rightly so. 

 

But it‟s very good to go home and spend the weekend at home, 

to touch base with the folks, to see what‟s happening in your 

constituency, to meet officially and unofficially with elected 

and unelected officials in the community, and to see what‟s 

going on. 

 

And you know, it‟s exciting for the people of Melfort 

constituency these days. In Melfort for example, people are 

very excited about the fact that a new Canadian Tire is under 

construction in Melfort in a new development on the south side, 

south and east of the community. And there‟s a great deal of 

anticipation about what it means for the future of Melfort going 

forward. 

 

[21:00] 

 

There‟s a new hotel going to be built on the site. And despite of 

the wet weather and the muddy weather, I notice that the 

contractor has got the site prepared for the start of construction 

of the new hotel. There‟s two condo projects, multi-family 

dwelling condo projects. One is over half, I believe, sold out 

and that‟s a very good sign. Another one that I was noticing on 

the weekend is just putting the roof on it, so it‟s progressing 

well, and it‟s a good indication of the things that are going on in 

Melfort. And there is in the community a greater sense of 

optimism and hope for the future. 

 

Certainly one of the major projects in the province that the 

Melfort area is looking forward to with great anticipation is the 

Shore Gold diamond project just north of Melfort across the 

river. I‟ve always said it‟s been inaccurately described as being 

east of Prince Albert, but it‟s a lot easier to visualize if you say 

it‟s north of Melfort. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Enterprise has reported 

that there were a number of companies that accompanied the 

trade mission to Kazakhstan. And certainly there were a couple 

or three of them from my constituency mentioned — Schulte 

and Doepkers and Bourgaults. And they‟re certainly some of 

the very strong companies in my constituency that provide a lot 

of employment and a lot of GDP [gross domestic product] into 

the whole area. 

 

But in addition to that there‟s Michel‟s Industries in St. Gregor. 

There‟s FPS [Failure Prevention Services Ltd.] in Watson, and 

a number of the short-line equipment manufacturers that are 

very significant to the economy of the province. And they are 

doing quite well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to report. They‟re 

looking forward to expanding their businesses. They‟re meeting 

the challenges of the currency exchange rates and those kinds of 

things with a great deal of tenacity, and they are growing their 

business in spite of the challenges that are happening not 

necessarily only in Canada but around the world. 

 

In the province, there seems to be a sense of optimism that has 

not been in this province for a good many years. We became far 

too used, in my opinion, to being a province that was a have-not 

province that always felt that we were sort of an hour of extra 

flight time between eastern Canada and Alberta. And it‟s kind 

of interesting and exciting for me to be a part of a province that 

is actually moving to the forefront of the country in so many 

areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, when I look out and see some of the 

discussions that have gone on in Canada at Finance ministers‟ 

meetings that I‟ve had the privilege to attend, it‟s been really an 

eye-opener to see the number of challenges other provinces are 

facing in this global recession. And certainly we‟ve said that we 

are going to be a part of the global recession, but we felt . . . and 

the historical record so far proves out that we‟ve been relatively 

immune compared to other jurisdictions. 

 

You know, when I look at what is happening in Alberta or 

British Columbia or Ontario and even in Manitoba and in 

eastern Canada, the whole impact of the global recession has 

been much more severe on a proportional basis than it has been 

for we in Saskatchewan. And I think Canada can rightly point 

with pride to the fact that we have done better as a country than 

the United States is doing and the United States‟ state 

jurisdictions as well are doing. So we‟re in a relatively 

privileged position, and we recognize that having said that, it‟s 

a good feeling to know that we are perhaps faring better, and 

there is a basis for the sense of optimism that we‟re seeing 

around the province. 

 

But we certainly recognize, at least in one major commodity 

that has an incredible impact on Saskatchewan, that the impact 



3398 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

is very severe. And I‟ve speaking of course to potash. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to give a little bit of a perspective of the 

whole potash scenario. You know, Mr. Speaker, it is a 

challenge. 

 

First of all, let me say absolutely without reservation that what 

we were doing was taking the best advice we could get from the 

industry, from officials in Finance, from officials in Energy and 

Resources, and from the analysts across the country and those 

that observe the potash sector of the economy. And it‟s real 

easy for us to say . . . It‟s a lot easier for the opposition to say. 

But it‟s also something with a great deal of honesty that we will 

say as a government, the forecasts we used were wrong. That is 

of historical truth and there‟s no sense pretending it was 

different. 

 

When we went into the budget deliberations this spring, you 

have to put it in the context of what was going on at the time. 

At the time, the spot price for potash was $710 a tonne, and we 

used 556. There were sales in . . . CIBC World Markets 

predicted for 2009 that potash prices would be $700 a tonne. 

Canpotex in the second half of 2009 had realized sales in the 

700 to $750 a tonne range. And there were forecasts that 

predicted that potash might be as much as $1,000 a tonne 

because there was the belief that the commodity of potash was 

in relatively short supply and the world demand for fertilizer 

was going to continue to have a very strong influence on those 

prices. So there was forecasts as high . . . as the impact for the 

Saskatchewan budget as high as $3 billion. We felt on the price 

that, if we used 556, that that was a reasonable level of 

prudence in our forecast in terms of the price of potash. And by 

way of interest, the spot price for potash right now is hovering 

around that 500 to $515 level. 

 

The problem is, the problem is we assumed on the tonnage 

assumptions that from ‟07-08 we had sold 11 million tonnes, 

and ‟08-09, 10 million tonnes. We used 10.3 million tonnes 

believing again that there was going to be a reasonable amount 

of potash sold. And that‟s where we were absolutely wrong. 

 

I can say to you now that, as of the first quarter numbers, we 

have sold under 2 million tonnes. And that is a dramatic change. 

It‟s unprecedented in 35 years of the potash industry. And you 

have to remember in context, Mr. Speaker, the potash industry 

has really only existed in Saskatchewan for barely 40 years 

from start to finish. This is virtually unprecedented in the entire 

history of the potash industry. 

 

And so it‟s absolutely true. It‟s absolutely true that we were 

wrong. We would have been wrong if we would have used a 

billion five as the number. We‟d have been wrong if we used $1 

billion as the number. We‟d have been wrong probably if we 

used $600 million as the number. This was simply 

unprecedented, and I recognize that that is a reality, and it‟s 

created much consternation. 

 

I said when I tabled the budget that one thing that was keeping 

me awake at nights was the potash industry. I‟m not sleeping 

any better these days. But I mean it is also an industry that 

could have gone in the good way, and you know, if it would 

have went that way, if we‟d have been sitting there now, we‟d 

have looked like geniuses. Unfortunately, it hasn‟t done that, 

and the clarity of hindsight is a very, very clear sort of vision to 

take. 

 

But I also note with interest, and important to signify, is the 

potash industry still believes very strongly in the fundamentals. 

And it‟s just not idle talk or reports that you get in interviews. 

The three major components of the potash industry that 

currently exist in Saskatchewan are all on an aggressive, very 

expensive expansion program of building the capacity for the 

future. Potash Corporation is continuing with their plans, and 

Agrium and all the rest of them are still carrying forward as 

Mosaic. And they‟re carrying forward with plans in the 

magnitude of $6 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is a 

strong indication of the belief of the future of the potash 

industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, we have the real possibility at 

the south end of my constituency, around the community, south 

of the community of LeRoy that BHP Billiton is actively 

pursuing and progressing through the approval processes the 

concept of building a brand new potash mine in that vicinity 

that would be of the magnitude of an investment in excess of $3 

billion. And that‟s an incredible commitment and belief in the 

potash industry from a very significant player in the world 

market because BHP Billiton is the largest mining company in 

the world. And they wouldn‟t be making this strong 

commitment and indication of support of the potash industry if 

they didn‟t absolutely believe in it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although we are having very great challenges 

related to the revenues coming into the province as a result of 

the potash commodity right now, there‟s a lot of reason to be 

optimistic for the future. But I think that the lesson that we have 

to take from what has happened in commodities is we have to 

build in even more prudence. 

 

Would we have been able to, in all due respect, to build in so 

much prudence last year that we would have had numbers down 

to 5 or $600 million? I think not. I don‟t think anybody would 

have reasonably expected us to go from the 1.4 billion, and in 

the face of these predictions and in the face of the analysts that 

were talking about the possibility of 7, 8, $900 potash, that 

anybody would have accepted projections as low as $600 

million. We‟d have been accused of deliberately lowballing the 

numbers so that we wouldn‟t have considered important 

programs that needed to go forward for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I think that what we have done is very 

important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues have gone over a great many of the 

list of things, and I could go on tonight. And I want to make 

sure there‟s time for the members that haven‟t had a chance to 

speak before the vote on the amendment tonight. But I don‟t 

want to go through every ministry-by-ministry recitation of the 

accomplishments that this government has accomplished. 

 

But I want to say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the past . . . and I 

answered in a question during question period last week, but 

you‟re limited to a one-minute response. But I want to make the 

point because it‟s very important for the record . . . is that when 

we took office, the balance in the Growth and Financial 

Security Fund or the previous fund that was there was one point 

two five six point ten billion dollars. That was the fund on 

September 30th, 2007. The GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt, 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3399 

the GRF debt at the time was $6.8 billion. When we go to 

today, we have $840 million left in the Growth and Financial 

Security Fund, but the debt is down to $4.1 billion. We paid a 

tremendous amount of money down on the debt which I would 

think that we would be complimented for because it‟s important 

for the financial future of the province. That‟s a big part and a 

big reason of where the money went. 

 

And I would think, I would think the opposition would be very, 

very interested in seeing that that happens since they‟ve harped 

on the state of the debt of the province for many, many times, 

both when they were government and in opposition. But they 

never did anything about it. We had the opportunity with some 

unprecedented revenues, and what we did with it is to 

strengthen the financial future of the province by paying down 

the General Revenue Fund debt by 40 per cent. And that‟s just 

sound fiscal planning and good business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from a financial perspective, I want to outline a 

few other things that we did with the revenue that I think is so 

important. Mr. Speaker, we reduced the income tax payable by 

low-income taxpayers by $300 million, not just last year but 

this year. And that‟ll be a permanent feature going forward of 

that reduction. And by increasing basic personal exemptions, it 

has reduced the take of income tax by $300 million. That‟s a 

good thing for the people of Saskatchewan because it‟s taken 

80,000 low-income payers off the tax rolls entirely. And that‟s a 

good thing, and that‟s where some of the money has gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are the kinds of things that are important 

over and above what has happened in all of the other ministries. 

And it certainly is the kind of thing that I want to point to with a 

great deal of pride that what we‟ve done with the money. 

 

Going forward, are we going to be able to keep the spending 

growing at the rate it has in our first two years? No, we can‟t 

because revenue will simply not sustain it. So we‟re going to 

have to, we‟re going to have to reduce the rate of growth of our 

expenditures. We recognize that, and that is just sound fiscal 

policy. When we had the unprecedented revenue, we applied it 

to very worthwhile projects. And when the revenue is going to 

be less bountiful, we‟re going to exercise the fiscal discipline 

that we need in order to make sure that we approach things in a 

very balanced way. 

 

[21:15] 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, looking forward to the future, looking 

forward to the future, Mr. Speaker, I point to one of the latest 

provincial economic outlook documents that have come to my 

possession, and this is dated October 30th, 2009, and it‟s from 

BMO Capital Markets Economics. 

 

In real GDP growth estimations for 2007 through 2008 and 

2009 forecast, ‟10 forecast and ‟11 forecast, in ‟09 forecast 

Saskatchewan is showing a real GDP growth of a small amount 

of .2 per cent positive. It is the only province in Canada that is 

positive. 

 

So we lead the nation in GDP growth this year even though it‟s 

very modest, based on BMO Capital. 2010, that‟s going to grow 

to 2.9 per cent, again not a runaway performance but the best in 

Canada; and in 2011, forecast from BMO Capital for 

Saskatchewan, 4.4 per cent growth, again not runaway growth 

but the best forecast of any province in Canada. 

 

So while we are being affected and while the growth is slowed 

— and it‟s going to take a fair bit of time to move out of these 

economic challenges that the world has — Saskatchewan is 

well poised to go forward and meet that challenge, a better 

position than any other place in the world. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the challenges are real, and we‟re going to 

have to have the determination to meet them. All in this 

Assembly have a responsibility to our province to exercise our 

responsibilities as the very best we can to ensure that 

government is an engine of growth, an engine of optimism, and 

an engine in the belief of the great future of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I‟ve said it before. I‟ve said it in good times, and I‟ll say it now, 

that there‟s no province in the country that I‟d rather be the 

Finance minister of than Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be 

voting in opposition to the amendment and proudly supporting 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It‟s an honour for me to get up on my feet to talk to 

this Throne Speech. 

 

I wanted to also acknowledge some people that I truly need to 

thank that are in my life, one of them being my father who has 

been very supportive of me. And I have to say, the very first 

election I ran, he didn‟t vote for me, but I think he does now. 

But nonetheless he‟s been hugely supportive of my choices, and 

I am very grateful for his example and his commitment and 

devotion and love of this very great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to thank my three daughters. It‟s hard to believe that 

when I was first elected, they were 10, 13, and 15. And now 10 

years later, I had my oldest daughter get married the weekend 

before last. I tried to —to a wonderful young man — I tried to 

explain to her she should remember what her mother does 

before she plans the date of the wedding while we‟re in session, 

but I‟m truly proud. It was a beautiful wedding. 

 

I want to thank Susan Dunne, my constituent assistant who‟s 

been with me for the entire 10 years I‟ve been elected. She is 

truly the face and voice in Humboldt and someone that is 

extremely well liked in the constituency and does a fabulous 

job. 

 

I want to thank my office staff here in Regina. I have Kelly, 

Scott, Charlene, Kim, Sherry, and Julie. We are a team that 

work very well together; they are my co-workers and they truly 

do a great job as well. 

 

The constituency of Humboldt is an amazing constituency and 

one that I‟m truly privileged to represent. There is some 

challenges in Humboldt; there is no doubt. We have four potash 

mines. There are more potash mines in the constituency of 

Humboldt than any other constituency within the province, and 

you know, that is causing some concern within the 



3400 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

constituency. It also is a huge agriculture constituency. And no, 

the crops are very much in the field, and that is causing some 

concern among the agriculture community. 

 

But you know what? The optimism in the Humboldt 

constituency is also extremely strong. They know our province 

is going ahead, and they are excited about it. They‟re watching 

the new hospital — that was promised time and time again by 

the NDP — now under the Sask Party, they‟re watching it being 

built. They‟re busy making plans for the new high school in the 

city of Humboldt, and they‟re excited about it because they‟ve 

been waiting for that announcement for years and years. They 

are very excited about the renovation to one of the elementary 

schools within Humboldt. 

 

And the private business in Humboldt is booming. I hate to tell 

the member from Melfort, who‟s waiting for their Canadian 

Tire, Humboldt opened theirs. So there‟s a lot of new 

businesses. There‟s a lot of construction happening in 

Humboldt, and it truly is a very optimistic, positive group of 

people that live within that constituency. 

 

I want to take a moment to welcome the new members, the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. I agree with the member 

from Melfort. I think she will represent her constituency very 

well. And welcome back to the new leader of the . . . or old 

leader of the NDP Party. He was here many years ago when I 

was first elected, and it‟s interesting to see him come back. And 

it‟s with words that he has spoken that I want to give my speech 

to the throne around, because one of the first questions that he 

asked when he had the opportunity to ask questions was, where 

did the money go? And he implied that we have simply blown 

the money. 

 

Now the Finance minister previously talked about our 

aggressive reduction of debt which I think the entire province 

has to agree was a good initiative under our government. But he 

also talked about initiatives that help my constituency such as 

the amount of money that we shared with municipalities, and 

every municipality took advantage of that, many of which 

applied the money to water projects that members on the 

opposite side say that we‟re ignoring. But you know what? A 

lot of the small towns did need that money and desperately, and 

they are using it for infrastructure needs within their 

communities and for water projects. 

 

I‟m wondering if the members opposite think that the 80,000 

people that are no longer paying taxes are better off now, no 

longer paying taxes, than they were under the previous 

government. Are they better off after two years of a Sask Party 

government than they were for 16 years under the NDP 

government where they were paying income taxes? 

 

I want to concentrate on what was done in my ministry. And 

I‟m very interested, when I am done and throughout, to see if 

the NDP will challenge that anything that we‟ve done within 

the Ministry of Social Services was indeed blowing money, if it 

was indeed something we shouldn‟t have done. We introduced 

the low-income tax credit which replaced the NDP sales tax 

credit with the significant amount of money that people receive. 

We also increased the income threshold eligibility. The NDP, 

you only were eligible up until $13,935. Under the Sask Party 

government, you are eligible up to $28,000 a year. Are they 

better off now after two years, or were they better off after 16 

years where they only qualified for an income level of 13,000? 

 

We increased within my ministry the mileage rates paid to 

clients for medical appointments and approved travel. Under the 

NDP, they didn‟t see an increase for many years. They were 

paid 13 cents per kilometre. In ‟06 they did increase that to 17 

cents per kilometre, and we immediately brought it up to 22. 

Were they better off under the NDP government where they 

were sitting at 17 cents a kilometre? Are they better off with the 

Sask Party government? 

 

We brought the children under the age of 14 into our 

prescription drug plan. The NDP campaigned that it would be 

seniors only that would qualify for that drug plan. So are they 

better off with the NDP campaign promise or with what the 

Sask Party did? 

 

The active families benefit was introduced by our government, 

where children aged 6 to 14 will qualify for a $150 tax benefit 

for activities, be it sport, culture, or music programs. There‟s a 

number of programs that qualify. That was a benefit that was 

never, ever eligible under the NDP government. 

 

Our government donated $20 million to food banks over four 

years for skills training for those that just need that little help 

over the barriers to gain employment. Through Education we 

increased the funding for child nutrition and development 

programs delivered through CBOs [community-based 

organization] and schools. Are those children better off through 

the Sask Party government with those increases to food banks 

and education programming, or were they better off where that 

wasn‟t looked at with the NDP government? 

 

We increased the Saskatchewan employment supplement quite 

significantly, as well as the income threshold of those that 

qualify. Seventy per cent of the clients that benefit from the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

are single parents. Are they better off with those increases that 

the Sask Party brought in, or were they better off where it just 

sat with 16 years of the NDP? 

 

We increased the minimum wage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my 

understanding that we‟re one of the highest now in the nation. 

Are they better off now or were they better off with a lower 

minimum wage? 

 

For seniors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we increased the seniors‟ 

income plan by 110 per cent. It had been totally neglected and 

not increased once for 16 years under the NDP. Are those 

seniors better off with the Sask Party government that increased 

the seniors‟ income plan by 110 per cent, or were they better off 

going year after year after year with the zero percentage 

increase under the NDP? 

 

Let‟s talk about shelter and housing. We increased the 

emergency shelter rates to ensure the financial viability of our 

emergency shelters. We understand, quite frankly, that there is a 

housing stress in many of our communities because the 

province is growing, and that‟s a challenge of a growing 

province. We significantly increased the funding to our 

emergency shelter rates to keep our emergency shelters 

financially viable and to encourage expansion. In some 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3401 

communities, we have seen expansions of the emergency 

shelter spaces. I‟m very happy to say that we just recently, in 

the last week, announced the first ever in the province 

emergency shelter for youth, and it‟ll be here Regina. 

 

We addressed affordability very quickly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

after the election. And we looked at the shelter rates, again 

recognizing that shelter was an issue that was very stressful for 

the residents of Saskatchewan. We increased the rental 

supplements for families. We increased the disability rental 

supplement. We increased the shelter rates within the income 

assistance clients. And we indexed them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

so that a family right now, if they qualify for the shelter rate and 

the rental supplement, will receive 100 per cent of the average 

rate within the community that they live. If there‟s a family 

member with a disability or if it‟s an individual with a 

disability, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will receive 110 per cent. 

It is revisited every six months. 

 

We recognize that the marketplace is changing rapidly, and we 

will also respond rapidly, unlike the NDP who, from 1991 to 

2005, never looked at shelter rates once, not once. In that time, 

there was over 30 per cent inflation rate in the cost of rents in 

the different cities within our province — 30 per cent increase 

in the amount of rates, rental rates, and absolutely no increase 

from the NDP government. Are they better off under the Sask 

Party government, or were they better off languishing, waiting 

for an increase under the NDP government? 

 

Availability is an issue, and availability is a little harder to 

address in a very, very quick manner because of course you 

have to construct the new housing. Over three years, the NDP 

delivered 456 rental units within our province. I‟m very proud 

to say that in less than two years, the Sask Party government 

has delivered 493 rental units. We have delivered more rental 

units in two years than the NDP did in the last three years of 

their being government. Are they better off? Are they better off 

than they were with an NDP government? 

 

Currently we have over 500 units in construction, over 600 

units in development and planning stages. Have we accelerated 

building social housing and affordable housing in our province? 

Yes, we have. You know, within our housing projects, I am 

very, very pleased to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have 

included 1 million to Habitat for Humanity and their program. 

And they were quite excited to get that funding from their 

government, and it will mean 20 more houses delivered through 

Habitat for Humanity because they do an exemplary job in 

delivering homes. 

 

We also have a unique project that we just announced recently 

with a group called DH2. It‟s a partnership specific to housing 

for disabilities, and we‟re looking at housing units specific to 

different needs. We announced earlier in the year the Ehrlo 

Community Services and Phoenix Residential Society 

partnership, which will be 32 units specific to people with 

serious mental illness. And the interesting thing that I was told, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we made that announcement, was it 

was the first time a government had ever recognized specialized 

housing for people with mental illness. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to speak for a moment on CBOs. 

In the last four years of the NDP government, they increased 

funding for eight years. I have my critic day after day after day 

read petitions on how they languish behind in being able to 

address recruitment and retention. And he doesn‟t want to talk 

about the past, but that‟s why they‟re languishing behind in 

recruitment and retention of staff. 

 

In less than two years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government 

increased the funding for CBOs by 12.3 per cent. In less than 

two years, we funded CBOs well over the inflation rate and 

well beyond what the NDP had given them over eight, or over 

the last four years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we held five summits 

just to listen to CBOs and what they had to say and what their 

concerns were. And they wanted to have long-term contracts, 

and we are now entering into those agreements and will do so 

as they go forward. 

 

I heard quite loud and clear that the food allowance at the group 

homes for youth as well as the group homes for adults with 

disabilities was far behind and was left languishing, again under 

the NDP government, where they couldn‟t afford to feed the 

people within the group homes. Tell me, are the group homes 

better off under the NDP government where they were given 

$4.85 per person to feed the individuals within that home? Are 

they better off with the Sask Party government where we have 

now almost doubled that to $9 per person per day for the people 

that live in the group homes? 

 

But you know what? But you know what? The critic said this, 

and I quote: 

 

And I can understand that those who work in the group 

homes are excited about this announcement, but I must 

say that myself, as critic for Social Services, I‟m not 

happy nor delighted about this announcement. It just 

represents another ad hoc announcement . . . 

 

Really? Really? You know, I had five summits, and I heard 

loud and clear what the CBOs wanted and needed. And we 

cannot do everything that they need overnight, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but they don‟t think this is ad hoc. They think this is 

filling gaps that was left behind after 16 years of a government 

that neglected the CBOs and didn‟t address these urgent issues. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we increased mobile crisis services, very 

critical services for families in crisis after hours, by 1.4 million. 

We increased family support services by 1.3 million. We 

increased approved private service homes and private care 

home fees by 2.1 million. We increased sexual assault centre 

funding and transition housing funding by 1.1 million. Are any 

of those something that blew the money, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

Can the NDP challenge any one of those spending and say that 

we shouldn‟t have done it? Or do they agree we far outfunded 

anything that they did? 

 

I want to speak for a moment on disabilities because it has been 

something that I‟ve become quite heavily involved with, and I 

have to say the disability community have been so supportive of 

our initiatives and so excited about the things that we have been 

able to do. 

 

For a government that sits and says that, you know, they were 



3402 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

looking after all people and ensuring that all people were . . . no 

one was left behind, it‟s interesting that there was a 

440-individual wait-list for individuals with disabilities waiting 

for residential spaces and day programs. And that didn‟t seem 

to bother the NDP at all. They didn‟t mind that this wait-list 

was growing more and more each and every year. 

 

Well it did bother the Sask Party government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and we announced $76.9 million for residential spaces 

and day programs for people with intellectual disabilities. And 

we‟ve been able to make announcements in Maidstone and 

Wynyard and Outlook and Swift Current and Humboldt and 

Kipling and Yorkton and Langenburg and Weyburn and Wilkie 

and Regina and Saskatoon. And we will continue to make 

announcements, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we make the wait-list 

go away. 

 

I am so proud to say that in a very short period of time — I 

made the announcement a year ago and I said that it would take 

us four years — well by the end of this fiscal year, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, 264 people that were languishing on a wait-list will 

languish no longer. Are they better off with the Sask Party 

government, or were they better off with the 16 years of neglect 

by the NDP government? 

 

You know, Susie Eidem, from the Elmwood residential 

incorporated, said this: 

 

We feel so fortunate to have been a part of this amazing 

period of growth [and I‟m quoting, Mr. Speaker]. It is 

wonderful to have eliminated our wait list and to be able 

to provide appropriate services to those who need them. 

Thank you so much to Premier Wall, and Minister 

Harpauer for recognizing that the needs of people with 

disabilities have been neglected for [far] too long and for 

making this a priority in their service to our province.  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud to be part of a government that 

increased funding to the family respite program, to early 

childhood intervention programs, to intensive support factors 

through the Ministry of Education, through transit assistance 

within our cities, to Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 

program which is also known as SAIL. 

 

I‟m happy to be part of a government that for families have 

doubled the caregiver tax credit, doubled the infirm dependent 

tax credit, doubled the supplement to the disability tax credit, 

and significantly increased the amount to the disability tax 

credit. 

 

Can the NDP say that that was blowing money? Are all of these 

things just blowing money? Is that what I was doing through 

my ministry? Is that what we were doing as a government as we 

gave more dollars to those most vulnerable within our society? 

 

Within child welfare, one of the first initiatives that I announced 

was to finally have an electronic case file management system 

within our province. It is stunning to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

within our province we can trace a library book anywhere 

within our province, but we can‟t trace a child in our care. 

We‟re working totally off of a paper file system. That is 

unbelievable to me that that was neglected for so long, and it 

will be no longer under the Sask Party government. 

In addition we‟re adding 25 million, just in our last budget 

alone, of increases to the child welfare system to increase the 

spaces and support for children who come into the care of the 

province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like any member to say that none of 

those things helps those most vulnerable within our society. I 

would like any member to say that all of the people affected by 

all of the program enhancements and additions that we have 

done were better off with 16 years of the NDP than they are 

with the increases and benefits and supports that we have done 

under the Sask Party. Are all of those things just blowing the 

money? 

 

And it‟s very interesting to have any of the things that I have 

said that we have done in less than two years challenged by the 

NDP to say that it was a waste of our money to help those most 

vulnerable. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say I will not be 

supporting the amendment, and I will be proud to support the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm River. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to join 

in the debate for the Throne Speech and the amendment that‟s 

up before here today. I‟d like to welcome the new members. 

The member from Riversdale, I‟d like to welcome her to the 

legislature, and also . . . [inaudible] . . . for the Regina Douglas, 

the member there. I can remember when I was a new member, 

he had welcomed me to this legislature in 1999. Well now I‟m 

returning the favour and welcoming him back here today. 

 

Also I want to give a thanks to my CAs who have been doing 

an excellent job. This year we‟ve handled many, many calls, 

and they did an excellent job. Clark Puckett, Donna Petit, and 

Lavonne Lyke have worked very well in the office where I have 

been able to get out and talk to the constituents and, you know, 

get a feel of what‟s going on and a feel what‟s been happening 

with the last two years. And are they happy with what‟s been 

going on? And yes, they are. They have been very happy with 

what‟s going on in this. 

 

Speaking about this Throne Speech, “Moving Forward”, it‟s an 

excellent theme for the province of Saskatchewan. It says 

what‟s happening in this province — that it‟s moving forward 

and providing optimism. 

 

And as I speak right now, probably the people in Arm 

River-Watrous and throughout Saskatchewan, probably the 

most people that have optimism right now are farmers. And as 

we are speaking, probably right now here today — tonight, as 

we go — there‟s combines rolling throughout this province as 

farmers right now are struggling to get the last bit of harvest off 

as the weather has turned a little bit nicer. And we‟re hoping 

this week it‟s going to stay nicer. But they are going to need at 

least a week or more to get the crop off, and I know as we speak 

right now they are working very hard at doing that. 

 

And I wish them all the best and the Godspeed to get this crop 

off because it‟s been a trying year for farmers, especially in my 

. . . I‟ll take my eastern, my northeastern part of my 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3403 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. There is still quite a bit of crop out 

there. It was a cold, late spring, and they‟d been struggling with 

the crops. The only good thing about, yields are good, Mr. 

Speaker, and if we can get that off, it will help the province 

immensely as we go ahead. 

 

This throne from the speech talks about many things and the 

throne from the speech should be many things. It talks about the 

things you did in the past and the things you are going to do in 

the future. It talks about the things that have happened 

throughout your year, the last year of your constituency. And 

one of them is the optimism that‟s out there and moving 

forward in this time and era, which this province is, moving 

forward at it.  

 

I know when I look back at . . . When I was first elected in 

1999, the biggest challenge that my constituency, my towns 

were facing was the people leaving. When I‟d meet with 

mayors and reeves and town councillors, the biggest thing that 

they talked about was empty houses and how were they going 

to fill them, and towns shrinking and dying. And now we‟re 

faced, when I meet with them, is they‟re talking about doing 

subdivisions and expanding and all the houses being full. 

 

You know, and I‟ve listened to the speeches from the other side. 

You know, they talk about how it was like they were turning 

things around way back and if they‟d only stayed in a little 

longer. Well you know, I can remember. One of them is a news 

release they‟d released in 2003 — shortly before the election 

was called — talking about “Out migration at lowest level in 

four years.” I mean they were bragging about that or, you know, 

issuing a news release. That‟s like the captain of the Titanic 

saying, well I‟ve got some good news and bad news — the 

good news is we‟re not sinking quite as fast as I thought; the 

bad news is we‟re still sinking. 

 

And that‟s the message that that previous government had sent 

out to the province. And that‟s one of the reasons I ran in 1999 

because they‟d given up on the province of Saskatchewan. They 

always felt that it should be described as a wee province and 

that the towns should die and what few people out there move 

to urban. 

 

I know the one member had talked about the Stabler report. I 

can remember going through that and also having meetings 

about that. And I know the government used the Stabler report 

in a lot of their theories and policies as they were going. They 

actually believed that, that there would only be probably 60 

communities left in Saskatchewan in 10 years. They talked 

about education, that they were . . . how to manage I forget 

exactly how many students. They had figured in 10 years we 

would be handling less. Well right now in my constituency 

there‟s more kids in the schools than there was in 1999. 

 

And that speaks to the government. And also when I‟m out 

there every day, the optimism that there‟s people moving back, 

that Saskatchewan is the have province and going to stay a have 

province. Because they‟ve always wanted to be a have 

province. They never liked going to Ottawa and getting 

equalization payments, and struggling, and the jobs always 

going to Alberta if you want to go work, or if you were going to 

Eastern Canada. Now we have people coming here to 

Saskatchewan, working. 

Many of my friends used to go work in the oil patch in Alberta. 

They‟re working here in Saskatchewan. There‟s a pipeline 

that‟s running out through, not very far from Regina, at 

Moosomin, up through that area. And that‟s where I had a 

couple of buddies staying. I know they were staying at the 

town, Moosomin. He‟s been working on the pipelines for 10 

years. This is the first year he‟s been able to work in his home 

province of Saskatchewan. And that‟s something to be proud of, 

that we should be working more towards that, that our people 

shouldn‟t have to go to other places to work. 

 

As we talk about agriculture — as is farmers are struggling 

right now to bring the crop in — one of the things we did was 

put in, and this Throne Speech talks about covering 100 per 

cent wildlife damage. And that was an issue out in Arm 

River-Watrous. When we were in opposition, a lot of the guys 

would tell me that their crop was being destroyed, especially 

this year where we sat for a month. Combines out in our area 

never turned a wheel for a month, a whole month. And that‟s 

just about the time that the ducks and geese are making their 

migration, deer has been coming up, lots of damage. At least 

they know that the field, the crop out there, they‟re going to get 

paid for it if it‟s destroyed by wildlife. And that‟s something 

that they‟re quite happy that we put in at that end of it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Infrastructure was another thing that, you know, that we‟ve 

stepped up to the plate for. We were always short of 

infrastructure. I can remember in Watrous they applied to this 

government in 1993 for a long-term care facility. They had their 

share, and every year they would come to the government and 

ask, can we get our share to finish this, to build this for the 

residents? 

 

I remember going there in 2001 — they called me there — and 

the water was leaking through the roof, you know. They say, 

you know, every year we go to the government and every year 

the government tells us no, no. We don‟t know when we‟re 

going to give you the money. We don‟t even think Watrous is 

maybe even going to grow. Maybe you‟re not even going to 

need one in 10 years. It‟s almost the message they were giving 

them. They couldn‟t even tell them that five years from now 

you‟re going to have it or four years, never gave them if they 

were even interested in it. 

 

[21:45] 

 

In the two short years we were elected, that was one of the 

priorities we made, was to do the long-term care facilities — to 

build some, to repair some throughout this province — because 

there was always a shortage of that and infrastructure that 

needed it. 

 

The money that we used, one of things was to pay down debt. I 

can remember the opposition opposite always harping about 

debt, you know, and there was. There was debt in the ‟80s and I 

can . . . Maybe in the first couple of years they struggled as a 

government, but they never ever worked towards paying it 

down. 

 

We made that a priority, Mr. Speaker. We made that a priority 

because that‟s what the people wanted. When I went around and 

they said, what‟s one of the most important things that you 



3404 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

should be doing? And one of them is they were worried about 

debt and health. They say if you can provide them two, those 

are the most important things that you should be doing, and 

that‟s ones you have done. 

 

Forty per cent of the debt paid down. Forty per cent of the debt 

paid down in two years. And you hardly hear a word from the 

other opposite members about that. You know, that‟s something 

to be proud of, and that is one of the reasons why we were 

elected, because we ran on that. We would be addressing the 

debt and also the waiting list. That‟s something we talked about 

in the Throne Speech. And it will be a challenge, but this 

government is up to it because we‟ve met many challenges 

since we‟ve been here. 

 

And that is another number one priority, is health care for the 

citizens of Saskatchewan because everybody deserves good 

health care. And they deserve not to wait two years on a waiting 

list for an operation. And those are the priorities that this 

government has made, and those are the priorities we talk about 

in this Throne Speech. Those, Mr. Speaker, are the priorities 

that we are going to run on next election, and we will win with 

them because those are the priorities of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Those are the priorities, when I‟m out there in Arm 

River-Watrous, that they want. They want a government that 

can run an economy, that can provide jobs, that doesn‟t chase 

away business, and that will provide health care and also has 

hope in rural Saskatchewan — that they‟re not writing off rural 

Saskatchewan, not saying you know what, we‟re not going to 

build infrastructure out there. 

 

Our highways were sadly neglected, and I know the first year in 

the budget we put record amount towards highways. I had some 

major work done on No. 2 and on No. 20 on that. And they 

needed it; they were in poor, poor shape. And there‟s still quite 

a bit of infrastructure that needs to be fixed out there, and we 

realize that. But those are one of the challenges we‟re looking at 

facing.  

 

On the infrastructure, we spent . . . that would help keep 

through the tough times we had. As the rest of Canada and 

North America and the world struggled — you look at what‟s 

happening in the States with huge high unemployment — we 

knew that there needed to be money put into infrastructure 

where we‟ll create jobs. And we did a very good job of it. Our 

Finance minister and the members opposite tried to get the 

money out there, spread it out through the communities to get 

the jobs out there for the people working, to keep the economy 

rolling the very best we can through trying times. And right 

now the world is going through a trying time, and yet you look 

at Saskatchewan. We‟re one of the bright spots in Canada. 

We‟re still listed as one of them. 

 

There‟s people moving here. Throne Speech, we talk about 

8,000 people, new immigrants, you know. I can remember 

when the government opposite talked about 300. They were 

bragging about 300. And, you know, we‟re 8,000. And that‟s 

one of the things that we‟re making a priority too, is 

immigration. I have industries out there that rely on workers 

coming out because there‟s jobs for them here, and they need 

the workers. I have Bergen Industries, I have Drake Meats that 

would be struggling without the open policy immigration that 

we have. 

 

But the main thing with this Throne Speech talks about is 

moving forward. And that‟s what the people of this province 

want, is moving forward. And the optimism that we‟re going to 

move forward, that we‟re going to be over 1 million people, that 

we‟re going to stay over 1 million people, it shows in we‟ve 

announced two new cities. That never happened through the 

‟90s. Even through the ‟80s, you know, the population growth 

wasn‟t that much. 

 

We have a huge potential in this province. Huge potential. And 

I know we have to, and we have been . . . A challenge to meet 

that expectations of growing this province, but keep it moving 

on a steady pace. And we did a good job of it. 

 

I know we‟ve been out there. When I go out to coffee shops, 

even go outside my constituency, I mean people are happy in 

the direction that this province is moving in. You know, they 

talk about improvements we made to infrastructure. They‟ve 

talked about the improvements we made in health care, and that 

we‟re trying to move the economy forward and keep this 

province growing and keep people working, keep our young 

people here, and spending money to keep them here through 

educational programs, through different things. 

 

And the main thing about this speech and the Speech from the 

Throne is moving forward. And that‟s what the Arm River 

constituents want from Arm River-Watrous, and they will not 

be . . . I can tell you that the residents of Arm River-Watrous do 

not support the amendment, they will be supporting the Speech 

from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in the short 

period of time I have to speak, I want to put a few comments 

regarding the Throne Speech on the record for my constituency, 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to say some thank 

yous. And I‟d like to thank one special person in my life, and 

that‟s my wife Sheila. As all the members on both sides of the 

House have said, without the support of your spouse, you 

cannot do the job here. And my wife is no different than 

anybody else. She supports me 100 per cent. 

 

I also would like to thank my three sons. My first son Newton, 

his wife Tanya, and the two granddaughters, Shalyn and 

Courtney. I also would like to thank my youngest son Micky 

and his wife Megan who just got married here in June. And they 

are blessed with a son . . . or daughter, I mean. Holy smokes. 

They are blessed with a daughter, the youngest one, and that‟s 

Brooke.  

 

And I also would like to thank my third son Deny for all the 

support he‟s doing. In fact he‟s at home right now helping my 

wife do all the chores and what have you. The next person I 

would like to thank is my mom, my mom who turned 80 this 

year. And of late she‟s had a few health problems, and I want to 

speak about the Throne Speech and how it affects her. 



November 2, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3405 

But before I get into the Throne Speech and the details of that 

with my mother, I‟d like to welcome to the Assembly the 

newest member from Riversdale. I listened to her speech today. 

She did an excellent speech, one of the better speeches from a 

first elected official that I‟ve heard for some time. So she did a 

great job. Welcome to the Assembly. 

 

I also want to welcome a member that‟s been here for a while, 

then left and came back again, and that is the member from 

Regina Douglas Park. And we look forward to debate the issues 

with him, what he stood for with the NDP before, then moved 

to Alberta —right wing, conservative Alberta — and then came 

back to run the NDP again. 

 

One of the main reasons that you have a Throne Speech is to 

give direction as where you‟re going for the next year, as regard 

to what you‟re going to with your budget and the vision of what 

you‟re going to do that next year. In order to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, you have to kind of reminisce of what you‟ve done in 

the last two years, at least in our time as government, the two 

years previously of what we‟ve done, and where we can go 

forward into the future with the Throne Speech today. 

 

And I am pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that to date we have kept 

112 promises. You know, there‟s an old saying that a promise 

made is a promise kept. Well we‟ve kept our promises — 112 

of them. And as to the promises we make going forward with 

this Throne Speech, we will also keep them because that is 

good government, unlike the previous administration when they 

made promises and never kept them. I‟m speaking specifically 

about my colleague sitting beside me from Humboldt, when I 

believe the hospital was announced, I believe 11 times or 

something. It was a promise made but never kept. And that is 

the record of the previous administration, the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to the Throne Speech, I‟d like to talk 

about agriculture. The reason is is because the good people 

from the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook live in a 

constituency that‟s basically agricultural based. It‟s a rural 

constituency. From corner to corner it deals strictly with ag 

because the people there had a lot to do with ag. And I am so 

proud of the Minister of Ag. The reason is is because he grew 

up with it. He knows it, and he understands it. He can relate to 

the people, the farmers that are out there, with the issues that we 

have. And for him to make a bold comment to move 

AgriStability from Manitoba to Melville is a bold step. 

 

Now I remember the member from Kindersley talking about 

what that means to the farmers there. Well it means the same 

thing to the farmers in my constituency. When they phone up 

regarding an issue, they‟re not talking to somebody that‟s in 

Manitoba, because the issues are different. They‟re talking 

about Saskatchewan issues. Well they have no clue of what‟s 

going on in Saskatchewan. Once AgriStability moves to 

Melville, Saskatchewan, they can relate to the problems that the 

farmers have. 

 

And especially this year, Mr. Speaker, with the snow coming 

early in the North. In fact, we had so much snow in the week, 

and I enjoyed a very nice snowmobile ride on Saturday. I 

enjoyed it. The phone didn‟t ring on the snowmobile, and it was 

just beautiful to drive in the snow. Mind you, I‟m in the North, 

so we‟re accustomed to that. But there‟s a lot of crop out there, 

Mr. Speaker, an awful lot of crop. In fact, in my constituency, 

in going east and west, we‟re probably sitting with some maybe 

40 per cent left to combine. And the snow is causing a lot of 

problems. 

 

I also want to make mention, in the short time I have, about the 

$70 million that went direct to the cattle producers and hog 

producers last year — another bold step that our Ag minister 

took when the farmers were having a very difficult time in the 

cattle producing system. Now $40 doesn‟t sound like a lot, Mr. 

Speaker, but to the people in the cattle industry that was a great 

deal of saying thank you for recognizing the issue we have. If 

we could only get the federal government and the Minister 

Gerry Ritz to come on side and pay his share, they‟d be doing 

well. But at least this government under the Minister of Ag 

thought that we needed help for the farmers and the cattle 

producing industry, and we did it. A promise made, a promise 

kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another issue I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

regarding the largest farm land property tax reduction on 

property tax. What a bold vision for the Minister of Education 

to come out with. Last year we ran on that, and I remember the 

members opposite, whatever minister it was, saying we‟re 

going to get to it, we‟re going to get to it. Well they never got to 

it; it never got done. This Minister of Education took it upon 

himself, along with the help of the new member of Highways 

now, to produce a document that gave the biggest cut to 

property tax. A promise made, a promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another thing that our government did was that they gave to the 

honey producers of the province of Saskatchewan. My brother‟s 

a honey producer, and we gave to the honey producers because 

they needed to be in the crop insurance situation where they 

were protected under the wildlife damage. The many bee 

producers are frustrated with the bear damage that‟s done. It‟s 

very costly to them. They‟d been to the previous administration 

time and time again, and nothing was done. This minister saw it 

fit to put that under the system, and it‟s helped. With the 

snowfall that we have in our constituency right now, Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s a lot of problem with wildlife damage. And the 

wildlife damage that we‟ve taken upon as the minister did, was 

paying out 100 per cent. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I must remind the members that under 

rule 29(5), it‟s time to put the question regarding the 

amendment that is currently under debate. 

 

And so the motion before the Assembly is a motion brought 

forward by the member from Regina Douglas Park, seconded 

by the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, that the following 

words be added to the motion: 

 

This government no longer enjoys the support of the 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan because of this 

government‟s lack of vision for the future, and because of 

this government‟s woeful mismanagement of the 

province‟s finances, and because of this government‟s 

failed policies on health care, the Crowns, energy, 

housing, the environment, and the economy, and because 

of this government‟s refusal to listen to the people‟s 

priorities. 

 



3406 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2009 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 22:00 until 22:30.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the Assembly is the 

amendment. Those in favour of the amendment please rise. 

 

Order. Before we can start, I‟ll ask members to pay attention 

and allow the vote to proceed . . . [inaudible] . . . being 

unhindered. 

 

[Yeas — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 34] 

 

Stewart 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

Elhard Bjornerud Draude 

Krawetz Boyd Eagles 

McMorris D‟Autremont Hickie 

Cheveldayoff Heppner Harpauer 

Gantefoer Kirsch Norris 

Morgan Hutchinson Huyghebaert 

Brkich Hart Reiter 

Allchurch Weekes Wilson 

Duncan Michelson LeClerc 

Ottenbreit Ross Chisholm 

Bradshaw Harrison McMillan 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 20; 

those opposed, 34. 

 

The Speaker: — Order, members. Motion is defeated. Being 

the hour of adjournment, this Assembly will be adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:35.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3379 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3382 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3386 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3389 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3392 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3396 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3399 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3402 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3404 

 Recorded Division (Amendment) .............................................................................................................................................. 3406 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3379 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3381 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


