




















































Hansard: April 23, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 52A  THURSDAY, APRIL 23, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2821 

 April 23, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure 

to report to the House today that we have heroes in your gallery, 

and I‟d ask for leave for an extended introduction of these three 

young men. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s truly an honour and a 

pleasure to introduce three young men to this Legislative 

Assembly, as well as a friend of theirs and members of their 

family. Joining us today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Brett 

Opikokew, age 18, an auto service technician at SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

who will graduate at the end of May. Also Devin Knot, he is 19 

years of age. He is learning how to be a welder. And Josh 

Lasas, age 19. He is pursuing carpentry. 

 

As well Brett‟s mother, Isabelle, is joining her son and his 

friends here with us this morning. She works for the Meadow 

Lake Tribal Council, Mr. Speaker, I think in the financing and 

controlling end of things in that fine organization. And also 

joining us today is Brett‟s sister, Cassandra — she is going to 

be graduating this year from the University of Regina with a 

Bachelor of Arts in journalism — and Cassandra‟s partner, 

Nickolas Crighton. He is going to be graduating with a degree 

in kinesiology. He will convocate in fact this fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the night of April 11, Brett, Devin, and Josh 

were travelling near Meadow Lake. They stopped by the side of 

the road to take a break. And moments after they had stopped, a 

mother travelling with three kids — three small children ages 1, 

3, and 8 — hit some water that had come onto the highway, 

began to hydroplane, and then hit a much larger pool of water 

adjacent to the highway. The car and the family inside quickly 

began to sink, and these three brave young men, without 

thought for themselves, sprung into action. They came to their 

rescue. 

 

One news report, actually the report, an excellent story in the 

Meadow Lake Progress that I commend to all members of this 

Assembly — I think it‟s available online — described the scene 

and actually quoted individuals describing the scene, like 

something like out of the movie Titanic: it was completely dark, 

the water was freezing, and all you could hear was screaming, 

said one observer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few quotes from this same article gives you 

a sense of just how serious this accident was, and how serious it 

could have been were it not for these three young men: 

 

Wendy added that April heard her son‟s cries and realized 

she had to do something. 

 

“She thought her baby was dead,” she said. 

 

“Her son said „Mommy, I‟m still here‟ and then she 

snapped out of it and [she] got him out.” 

 

Amanda said if it wasn‟t for the three boys who jumped 

into the water, April and the children would not have 

survived. 

 

“We owe them so much . . . 

 

“They saved our family. With no hesitation. April said 

these guys were just there. There are angels out there.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, when asked about what they did — and I had a 

chance to do that this morning when I had the honour to visit 

with them a little bit and talk about the event and a bunch of 

other stuff — when asked about the event, they just defer. They 

just said, well we didn‟t really think we were heroes. We were 

in the right place at the right time, said Brett, and Josh and 

Devin agreed with that sentiment. 

 

We know better than that today, Mr. Speaker. We know from 

reading this incident and from listening to the family that they 

are heroes — heroes in our province, heroes in our country. 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve taken the step of writing to the 

Governor General to nominate these three for the Medal of 

Bravery that our nation bestows on those who are deserving. 

And maybe, Mr. Speaker, if you don‟t mind, I will use this 

forum, through this Assembly and through all of the members 

and my colleagues here, to encourage Saskatchewan people to 

join in that letter writing effort to encourage the Governor 

General to bestow on these three the Medal of Bravery for our 

country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we‟re not parents in this Assembly, we are 

brothers or sisters or sons and daughters. And you cannot read 

the account of this story without putting yourself in the place of 

the family that was in the vehicle, or even more desperately, not 

knowing what was going on perhaps for their extended family 

members who were unaware of the calamity and of the danger, 

only to find out that they were saved by these three young men. 

It is hard to read the article without considering that. 

 

And then to meet them, to meet these three men is quite a thing. 

They have a great sense of humour. They have a modesty about 

them. They told stories, even to me, of the actual event where, 

you know, they were able to — in a moment of a lot of stress — 

use the proper technological description for things like flotation 

devices. Brett was running around the incident saying, we need 

a flotation device, and he was trying to think of something in 

the car that they would have to help. They also were 

encouraging, in very forceful words to the mom, who was the 

last one to be rescued, that she could help them help her by 

taking some steps towards safety. These are extraordinary 

young men truly, Mr. Speaker. 



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

And so, a little bit later on we‟ll have a chance to present them 

with a copy of the letter that we have signed to the Governor 

General nominating them for the Medal of Bravery. And there‟s 

been a few other things we‟ve been able to exchange. But I just 

want to say here today, on behalf of a very grateful province, in 

addition to that family, thank you. We are very proud to be your 

fellow citizens. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I simply 

want to join with the Premier on behalf of the official 

opposition in welcoming those three young men and those who 

are with them today to the Chamber. 

 

You did seize the attention of a province. Many of us have read 

the accounts in the local press. We heard the accounts of course 

in provincial-wide media and national media, and I appreciate 

that the Premier has made this opportunity possible for this 

legislature to speak to you and express the gratitude of this 

legislature on behalf of all of those whom we represent. And 

you can rest assured the sentiments of every member will be for 

full support for the Premier‟s initiative to contact the Governor 

General of Canada. 

 

We welcome you and we thank you. And we all, I believe, have 

understood that no matter how we walk through this life, there 

are those who have aided all of us — perhaps in less dramatic 

fashion — but we‟ve all known the support of others. That 

family will forever be in gratitude to you. And we thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

six people in your gallery. Five of them are from Her Majesty‟s 

Canadian Ship Regina. And we have Commander Haydn 

Edmundson is the commanding officer of HMCS Regina. 

Lieutenant Commander Andy Muir is executive officer. 

Lieutenant Lorraine Sammut is a combat officer. Lieutenant 

Greg Oikle is the air control officer. Chief Petty Officer Second 

Class Shane Holwell is the supply chief. And accompanying 

them is the executive officer of HMCS Queen here in Regina is 

Malcolm French. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan are extremely proud of our 

military, and I would ask all members of the Assembly to 

please join me in welcoming the members of HMCS Regina to 

their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

three guests from Saskatoon seated in your gallery. From my 

left to right is Shavkat Khudayberganov, Liz McTaggart, and 

Deborah McConkey. Deborah is a librarian in Saskatoon. Liz is 

a long-time friend and mentor for many years. And Shavkat is a 

new resident to Saskatchewan; he‟s from Uzbekistan. And 

while I‟m sure there‟s been some Uzbeks in our Assembly over 

the years, it‟s certainly not something that happens every day. 

Shavkat‟s been here for a year working and hopes to stay long 

term. And I would ask all members to welcome this group to 

their Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s truly an 

honour today to introduce from the west gallery we have 28 

students from the Colonsay School. They‟re grades 7, 8, and 9. 

And accompanying them their teachers, Brian Cowen and Amy 

Parkinson, as well as chaperones, Joanne Helmkay, Jillian 

Cowen, and Charlene Lang. So I hope they enjoy their day in 

the legislature and their day in Regina. And I would ask all the 

members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — If I could ask of members as well to extend a 

welcome to Mr. Kevin Fenwick, our Provincial Ombudsman, 

who‟s joined us this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it‟s my honour 

to present a petition in support of changes to The Highway 

Traffic Act to be referred to as the Gallenger amendment. The 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

enact changes to The Highway Traffic Act, to be referred 

to as the Gallenger amendment, which would require all 

vehicle traffic to slow to 60 kilometres per hour when 

passing a snowplow with their warning lights activated on 

Saskatchewan roadways. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are from Fort Qu‟Appelle, Vibank, 

White City, Edgeley, Regina, and Fort Qu‟Appelle and other 

towns in that area. It‟s my honour to present these petitions 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for our CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

many of the workers who work for community-based 

organizations in Saskatchewan have traditionally been 

underpaid and many continue to earn poverty-level wages. I‟d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And many of these folks are from Moosomin, Fleming, and 

Watson. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand once again today and present a petition in support of 

fairness for Saskatchewan students through the necessary 

expansion of the graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan as well as the 

University of Regina. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition concerning the need for infrastructure for the 

community of Pelican Narrows and the great First Nation of 

Peter Ballantyne. It concerns Highway 135 and the upgrading 

of this road. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through to the community of Pelican Narrows, as 

committed on August 24, 2007. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by a number of individuals from Pelican 

Narrows. And surveying the names, Mr. Speaker, I see that it‟s 

got a great representation from right through the community of 

Pelican Narrows. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Prince Albert Toppers Volleyball Club 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I‟m proud to 

stand in the House today to talk about the recent success of the 

Prince Albert Toppers volleyball club. The provincial girls‟ 14 

and under, tier 1 club finals took place in Saskatoon just last 

weekend. 

 

As a father of one of the players, I had the opportunity to attend 

all the games. Fourteen teams came from across the province 

for the tournament. Representing the Toppers were four teams: 

En Fuego, Wei, Chaos, and Storm. I am pleased to say the 

Toppers fared extremely well in the tournament. On Sunday En 

Fuego won the gold medal in tier 1, division 1 by beating 

Saskatoon Crush in two sets. Wei won the gold medal in tier 1, 

division 2 by beating Regina Voltage in two sets to bring home 

the gold. Remarkably the bronze medal final for tier one, 

division one had an all-P.A. [Prince Albert] Toppers matchup 

with Chaos beating Storm, to bring home yet another provincial 

medal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to say that my youngest daughter — all 

4 feet, 11 inches tall of her — plays power side on the Toppers‟ 

Wei team, and she can clear the net and spike the ball harder 

than her father ever could. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Next weekend I‟m lucky enough to watch even more volleyball 

when my oldest daughter plays in the 15 and under provincials. 

Keeping my fingers crossed that P.A. brings home another gold. 

 

The girls work incredibly hard all season long. I‟d like to offer 

my congratulations and thanks to the coaches of the P.A. 

Toppers program. I congratulate the P.A. Toppers, En Fuego, 

and Wei for winning gold in the under 14 provincial girls 

volleyball championships. 

 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses 

Celebrates 35th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I attended 

the AGM [annual general meeting] of the Saskatchewan Union 

of Nurses, SUN. SUN is celebrating its 35th anniversary, and as 

part of the celebration honoured its past presidents at the 

banquet last night. Mary Parchewsky, SUN‟s first president, 

spoke to the hundreds of nurses attending about the early days 

of forming a nurses‟ union. Pat Stuart and Paul Kuling shared 

their thoughts and memories. June Blau and Jill Jones were 

unable to attend, and sadly Joan Fockler has passed away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of being SUN president from 

1993 to 1998 — a tumultuous time of mergers, transfers, 

downsizing, and conversions. But there were significant happy 

achievements also. In 1996, SUN joined the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour, the first nurse union in the country to join 

its provincial federation of labour. In 1998, SUN joined the 

Canadian Labour Congress, again the first nurse union to do so 

in the country. Also the beginnings of the Canadian Federation 

of Nurses Unions, joining all nurse unions in the country into a 

national organization, had its roots during that time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am so proud to be part of SUN, this strong social 

force, working for the betterment of not only nurses, but all 

working people and indeed the whole province. Congratulations 

to SUN‟s board, members, and staff, and in particular its current 

and longest serving president Rosalee Longmoore. And thank 

you for a very good evening last night. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

2009 National Elks Curling Championship 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

address the House today regarding a championship men‟s 

curling team from Hanley. On March 15 to 21, the 2009 

National Elks Curling Championship was held at the Granite 

Curling Club in Saskatoon. 

 

The Hanley Elks Lodge team, skipped by Dean Grindheim, 

defeated Alberta‟s Justin Fowler in the final. In addition to skip 

Dean Grindheim, the 2009 national championships included 

third Merlin Lee, second Lawrence Sarich, and lead Mark 

Burgess. 

 

The curling fans gathered at the Granite in Saskatoon were 

treated to some excellent curling in the round robin with several 

games decided by one point in the last end. In the playoffs, the 

Justin Fowler rink from Alberta received the bye to the final, 

while the Grindheim rink played Alberta‟s Ken Lengyel in the 

semifinal. At that point, nothing could stop the Grindheim rink 

from Saskatchewan. They soundly defeated the Lengyel rink 

7-3 and then went on to beat the Fowler rink 7-2 to become the 

2009 National Elks Curling Championships. 

 

The Hanley Elks team now earns a berth at next year‟s Elks 

National Championships. For the Grindheim rink, this is the 

third time that Dean, Merlin, and Mark have won 

championships; they also won in 2006 and 2005. And for 

Lawrence, this is his second; he also won in 2006. So these 

gentlemen definitely have what it takes to curl at the national 

level. Indeed the profile of curling competition across Canada 

and around the world is on the rise, and in Saskatchewan it‟s 

clear that the Elks are approaching a professional calibre of 

curling that we all enjoy. 

 

I would ask that all members join me in congratulating the 2009 

National Elks Curling Championships from Hanley on bringing 

home the trophy for Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Northern Athlete 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Codie 

Pedersen is a very special 22-year-old hockey player from 

Buffalo Narrows. When he turned five, Codie and his brothers 

were given Rollerblades and all three boys learned to skate on 

Rollerblades in the basement of their house, Mr. Speaker. Later 

Codie began skating at the rink and his mother, Tina, said it was 

like he was born on ice. 

 

At the age of 20, Codie finished an outstanding year with the La 

Ronge Ice Wolves of the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League 

and had already played in two SJHL all-star games. With a 

promising hockey career ahead of him, Codie suffered spinal 

and knee injuries in a very serious car accident. He had to move 

to Saskatoon alone and away from family to undergo therapy. 

In a surprisingly short time, Codie fought back and overcame 

his injuries to play for the Ice Wolves in the following season, 

and he only missed five games. 

 

Touched by Codie‟s perseverance, the people of Buffalo 

Narrows raised money for Codie to travel to Michigan to try out 

for the Muskegon Lumberjacks. Codie, set back by injuries, did 

not make the cut, but he played with spirit and received 

encouragement from hockey scouts. 

 

Today Codie lives with the sport he was born to play. He works 

hard for the adult hockey team to help him recover his strength 

so that he might yet achieve his hockey dream. Codie Pedersen 

is an athlete from the North with character and talent. I‟m so 

very proud of him and I‟m proud to represent him. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Indian Head Blooms  

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indian Head 

has become well known across the province and beyond its 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

borders for its Communities in Bloom involvement. Particularly 

noted for the numerous hanging baskets and floral displays 

throughout the town, the town of Indian Head received first 

place in the 2008 provincial competition, which prompted the 

national Communities in Bloom‟s organization to invite the 

town to compete nationally this year, in 2009. 

 

The community received a five-bloom rating combined with 

achieving the sufficient points needed. The rating system 

requires a community to be environmentally friendly in 

everything from town maintenance to disposal of their garbage, 

along with ensuring a high level of cleanliness throughout the 

town. 

 

The community of Indian Head made the decision early in 

January to accept the invitation and, as a result is full speed 

ahead, ready to compete in the national competition. The whole 

community will be fully active during the next few months, 

preparing for the national judging which will take place in late 

July. 

 

The building of the historic Bell Barn, and Little Mosque on the 

Prairie, shooting their second season of filming in Indian Head, 

has led to an excitement that has filled the town throughout. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are very fortunate that we have citizens in the 

province who work together to keep communities like Indian 

Head so attractive. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

World Renowned Pianist Performs in Saskatoon 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, a Saskatoon audience was 

delighted recently with a piano recital by world renowned 

concert pianist Catherine Vickers performing at 

Grace-Westminster Church in Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

A native of Regina, Ms. Vickers was quickly recognized as a 

young musical prodigy. She studied piano under Marguerite 

Buck, a well-known Regina music teacher, and also attended 

the Lyell Gustin Summer School in Saskatoon for many years. 

 

In her youth, she performed with the Regina Symphony, 

participated in provincial music festivals and toured the 

province giving concerts with other musicians for the Junior 

Concert Society. In 1965 she was one of several students guided 

by Lyell Gustin and supported by the Saskatchewan Arts Board 

to take part in a week of musical events in New York City. 

Following further piano studies in Edmonton, Catherine 

received a Canada Council grant to study in Germany where 

she continues to live. 

 

Today, Ms. Vickers is a professor at the University of Music 

and Performing Arts in Frankfurt. She is a frequent guest at 

international musical events, is artistic director of a piano music 

festival in Germany, has given master classes throughout 

Europe and Asia, and often serves as a jury member at 

international piano and chamber music competitions. 

 

Her April 19 performance in Saskatoon was part of a series of 

musical recitals honouring Dr. Lyell Gustin presented by the 

Gustin/Trounce Heritage Committee Inc. The recital received 

support from the Department of Canadian Heritage, the 

Saskatchewan Arts Board, and of course Grace-Westminster 

United Church in Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this was a concert to cherish for those who were in 

attendance. And I would ask all members to congratulate Ms. 

Vickers in her return to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Climate Change Targets 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] abandoned their climate change targets, but 

they now want us to implement their original targets. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, higher targets come with a cost. Higher 

targets mean higher SaskPower rates — this at a time when the 

NDP are demanding holding the line on rate increases. What is 

hypocritical is that the NDP were happy to pass on the cost of 

their original climate change targets to SaskPower customers. 

The former NDP Environment minister said that people would 

happily pay more. They had no concern for the SaskPower 

customers when it came to the cost of their climate change 

targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP cannot have it both ways. They cannot 

demand status quo on electrical rates while demanding harsher 

climate change targets. The NDP cannot feign concern for 

SaskPower ratepayers. Their whole plan is to pass a burden of 

higher targets onto these same customers. 

 

So which is it for the NDP? Which is it, Mr. Speaker — 

reasonable SaskPower rates or higher climate change targets? 

The NDP cannot — I repeat, they cannot — have it both ways. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Forest Management 

 

Mr. Vermette: — A couple of weeks ago the minister made an 

announcement which finally gave the other forestry companies 

and First Nations access to the timber in the Prince Albert FMA 

[forest management agreement], but he offered few details — 

not surprisingly since the announcement was probably to rush 

and distract people from the member from P.A. Carlton‟s 

admission that the pulp mill will never reopen under the Sask 

Party. 

 

To the minister: how many of the 1,500 workers who have lost 

their jobs will benefit from this announcement? 

 



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, of course this is an important issue. We have spoken to 

the forestry companies, both large, small, independent 

producers with respect to the forest management agreement at 

P.A. We‟ve reached an agreement with Domtar and with 

Weyerhaeuser with respect to that management plan. 

 

The companies are all welcoming the plan very much. They are 

saying this is something that is long overdue in terms of the 

forest management agreement of the past that the former 

administration signed. So this is something that the companies 

have asked for. We‟ve accommodated them with respect to this, 

and I believe fully that the forestry companies will be utilizing 

the resource much more than they have in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert FMA with 

Weyerhaeuser stated that if the facilities attached to the FMA 

close for more than 24 months, the government was entitled to 

find them in default of the FMA. That default occurred in April 

2008. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the provincial forest belongs to the people of 

Saskatchewan, and they are entitled to receive the maximum 

possible benefit of those resources. But the Sask Party waited a 

year to announce changes. 

 

To the minister: why did it take the Sask Party a whole year to 

provide access to timber in the Prince Albert FMA to other 

forestry companies and First Nations? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

member‟s question is illustrative of how the NDP ran 

government. The way that they ran government, Mr. Speaker, 

was to use the heavy hand of government to punish people, 

punish companies when they didn‟t get the kind of results that 

they liked. 

 

Our approach is much different. We‟ve entered into a 

consultation process with the companies first of all, where we 

entered into a consultation process with the First Nations and 

Métis people with respect to the FMA as well. And then 

through a co-operative effort with them, through a consultation 

effort with them, through negotiation with them, we‟ve come up 

with a plan that they fully support. 

 

And I would ask the member opposite, does he support the plan 

that we have come forward with that the companies associated 

with forestry in Saskatchewan fully endorse and support? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the people in Hudson Bay and 

Carrot River are tired of seeing raw logs being shipped out of 

province while the mills in their communities sit quiet. The 

Weyerhaeuser Pasquia/Porcupine FMA stated that mill closures 

which last longer than 12 months will result in default of the 

FMA. Weyerhaeuser soon will be in default of this agreement. 

 

To the minister: if the facilities in Hudson Bay and Carrot River 

haven‟t reopened by July, what will the Sask Party do? Will 

they allow raw logs to be shipped out of province, or will they 

ensure the Saskatchewan people receive the full benefit of our 

timber resources? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. I would say to the member 

opposite, stayed tuned. We are talking again with further 

companies with respect to that. 

 

Well I mean, you can say anything you like over there. You will 

see in due course that the companies will be making 

announcements with respect to these kinds of things before very 

long. We‟re encouraged by the discussions that we are having 

with the companies to this point. 

 

It‟s a very, very difficult file — no question about it — given 

the fact that your former administration wanted to write a 

company a $100 million cheque on the taxpayers‟ tab with 

respect to that. And that‟s what you want to do now. The 

member at the other end of the House over here, he says that 

that‟s not something that he would be agreeing with. So which 

way is it? Do you want to go with your plan to give up 

taxpayers‟ dollars, or do you want to go with the bookend at the 

other end that says that they shouldn‟t? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next question, I just 

want to remind ministers to place their responses through the 

Chair. The member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to complain 

about the past forestry deals, but it wasn‟t the NDP who signed 

over control of a big part of our forest to Weyerhaeuser and 

made it impossible for Saskatchewan people to benefit from our 

timber resources even when Weyerhaeuser wasn‟t using them. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The NDP government believed that Saskatchewan people need 

to have control of our wood supply so that we can maximize job 

creation and other benefits. But we have no idea what the Sask 

Party believes. The minister keeps hinting that there are deals in 

the works, but we don‟t yet know what he is cooking up. 

 

To the minister: will he promise that any deal he makes will 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

allow Saskatchewan people to keep control of our timber 

resources, or is he getting ready to sell us out for a photo op? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Our approach to the forest management 

agreement has been this, Mr. Speaker. The forest management 

agreement ran out. We decided at that point the important thing 

to do was to sit down with the companies themselves — both 

large, small, independent producers, First Nations and Métis 

people — arrive at a decision, and negotiate a decision that 

we‟ve worked with them on. 

 

If you look through the public record, you will see that 

company after company after company officials have said that 

this is something that they totally agree with completely, that 

they are supportive of it. It will provide for an opportunity for 

them to look at forestry opportunities in the future. And I fully 

expect that they will be doing exactly as they have committed to 

the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Cost of Living 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the evidence is mounting that 

Saskatchewan people pay more under the Saskatchewan Party 

government. A recent study reported that Saskatoon is now one 

of the least affordable cities in Canada — 27th out of 34 cities 

in Canada, 184th out of 265 international cities. The recent 

provincial budget confirmed that Saskatoon‟s rank among 

Canadian cities is slipping. 

 

Now the city of Saskatoon has announced that ratepayers will 

be paying 2.8 per cent more on the municipal portion of their 

property taxes. 

 

To the minister: why are families in Saskatoon paying more to 

live in their homes under the Sask Party government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, it doesn‟t matter how 

crabby they are on the opposition side of the House. Here on the 

government side of the House we are having a great 

Saskatchewan day in the province with the best economy in the 

country of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — If property taxes are going up in the 

fair city of Saskatoon, it‟s not because of what we‟re doing; it‟s 

because of what you didn‟t do. 

 

You didn‟t fix revenue sharing. You didn‟t provide 

infrastructure. We provided historic increases to revenue 

sharing beyond your wildest dreams. We‟ve also provided new 

infrastructure money through the municipal economic 

enhancement program, SIGI [Saskatchewan infrastructure 

growth initiative], and provincial contributions to the Building 

Canada fund. That‟s what we‟re doing to make life more 

affordable for people in Saskatoon and everywhere here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government talks a good game, but homeowners and working 

families cannot keep up with the rising cost of living. 

 

To the minister: how did Saskatoon lose its affordability 

advantage so quickly? Why is the Sask Party making life less 

affordable for Saskatoon families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll speak louder 

because perhaps the member is hard of hearing. We have 

provided historic increases for the folks in Saskatoon and 

everywhere in this great province for municipal revenue sharing 

and also for infrastructure — the things which the former 

government just didn‟t get around to. I‟m sure if you ask them, 

they had the best of intentions, but they never really got around 

to it. 

 

Tax rebates and increased benefits for Saskatchewan people are 

saving a family of four with $35,000 in income, $2,648; a 

family of four with $50,000 in income, $1,945; a family of four 

with $60,000 or higher income, $1,718; a single person with 

$25,000 in income, $583; single seniors with $15,000 in 

income, $1,308. And it goes on and on and on. Please ask 

another question; we have more time for more facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskPower Rates 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, property tax increases in 

Saskatoon aren‟t the only problem for Saskatoon and for the 

rest of the province. We‟re just days away from a 13 per cent 

increase in SaskPower rates, and yesterday the Minister 

Responsible for the Crown Corporations confirmed that 

families should expect power increases next year and the year 

after that and the year after that and the year after that. 

 

The one-trick-pony tax cuts are already long spent, Mr. 

Speaker. Families can no longer count on that to keep their 

lights on. They‟ll have to find the money elsewhere in their 



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

budget, and for many the money simply is not there. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party so determined to make 

life so difficult for Saskatchewan families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s funny. The NDP 

can‟t have it both ways. You have the member for Walsh Acres 

saying that she wants more stringent carbon reduction targets. 

On the other hand, we have the member from Coronation Park 

saying that SaskPower rates should never go up, that we should 

bring back gimmicks like the bundles and the lowest cost 

bundle that they have. 

 

On top of that, SaskPower is dealing with a . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. At times it‟s becoming difficult to hear 

the question and the response. I ask members to be mindful of 

the right of the individuals who are recognized to respond or to 

ask the question. I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On top of 

that, SaskPower is dealing with significant infrastructure deficit 

left behind by that former NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the NDP want more stringent carbon guidelines, 

that will indeed drive power rates up even more, Mr. Speaker. 

What we will do is provide safe, reliable, economical, and 

affordable power for the people of Saskatchewan, for the 

businesses of Saskatchewan. That‟s what they want and that‟s 

what they‟ll get. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they break their promise on 

keeping carbon emissions lower. They break that promise and 

they raise our power rates all in the same breath. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan families enjoyed the lowest cost of utilities in all 

of Canada under the NDP. The Sask Party took away that 

lowest cost utility bundle program — one of the very first acts 

they made when they formed government. 

 

The Sask Party is now increasing power rates by 13 per cent in 

a very few days and it‟s promising more increases next year and 

the year after that and the year after that. 

 

To the minister: will the Sask Party reconsider their decision 

and bring back the NDP‟s lowest cost utility bundle guarantee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, what was very 

apparent when we became government is that there was an 

infrastructure deficit, not only in highways, not only in 

hospitals, not only with schools, but yes indeed, within the 

Crown Corporations, no more so than within SaskPower. They 

did not fund it necessary. They were more interested in just 

keeping the lights on. They had no plan for growth — no 

two-year plan, no four-year plan, no 10-year plan — no plan 

whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we will do is plan for the future. We will ensure that a 

growing economy, the fastest growing economy in the country, 

will have the power necessary to ensure that it continues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Low-Income Citizens 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well we 

know the financial pressure on some families has pushed them 

to their breaking point. Last week Saskatoon Food Bank 

executive director, Paul Merriman, announced there‟s been a 40 

per cent increase in the number of clients since March 2008. He 

also confirmed that many of the food bank‟s clients are students 

and the working poor. This increase has happened on this 

minister‟s watch. 

 

Obviously the Sask Party‟s one-trick-pony tax cuts aren‟t 

working. To the minister: the rising number of food bank users 

is an indictment of our government‟s failure to reduce poverty. 

The question is simple. What is she going to do about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Our first consideration as a 

government is and will continue to be children and poverty 

among children so the major increases that we have put in place 

for working families through my ministry is for that. It‟s for 

families. So therefore we increased the income threshold of 

who applied and we increased the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement to help those that have a family. And 70 per cent of 

the clients, Mr. Speaker, are single parents. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we increased the rental supplement 

which families also qualify for, and at the beginning of the 

month we‟re going to be seeing a significant increase in 

minimum wage. So that when everything takes place and the 

minimum wage is implemented and the tax cuts are all realized, 

Mr. Speaker, we will then reassess the situation and see where 

we are at at that time. But we have taken significant steps to 

address what is deemed to be the working poor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, these steps just aren‟t 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2829 

working. The government‟s own figures show that 

Saskatchewan is becoming a less affordable place to live 

compared with other provinces, and now even working families 

are going to the food banks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this province needs a comprehensive strategy to 

reduce poverty, complete with targets, timelines, and 

accountability measures. That strategy might include the 

indexing of minimum wage to the poverty line or restoring the 

health benefits for low-income workers that this government cut 

in its last budget. 

 

To the minister: will she commit to a comprehensive strategy to 

reduce poverty in this province that includes the working poor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

question came up in estimates and the member was a little 

impatient to hear the answer because there are so many things 

that this government has done. 

 

The low-income working people, as I said in the previous 

answer, will qualify for the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement if they have a family. They will qualify for the 

rental supplement if they have a family. We are the ones that 

included children in the new health benefit. And they were 

going to have a health plan, a prescription drug plan that did not 

include children, and children have to be our number one 

priority. They still qualify for a discount bus pass, Mr. Speaker, 

so there are many things that we are doing as well as increasing 

minimum wage in a few short days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we did have quite a 

discussion in committee the other night in estimates, and we 

know that this minister doesn‟t like what she calls blue sky 

thinking. But the facts are, the number of food banks users is 

going up, and even people with jobs can‟t make ends meet. Life 

is growing less and less affordable under the Sask Party. 

 

What this minister‟s doing isn‟t working. Many of the measures 

she‟s undertaken may be good in isolation, but they need to be 

part of a comprehensive strategy. 

 

To the minister: will she swallow her pride, admit that she 

needs to do more, and work with communities to develop a 

comprehensive strategy to reduce poverty in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The hypocrisy of that member just 

continues to go on and on day after day. There is no one that 

has met with communities more than this minister. We held a 

series of CBO summits, and you know what many of the CBO 

members and workers and board members said to me? We‟ve 

never met a minister before. This is the first time we‟ve met 

with a minister. 

 

I have met with front-line workers in social services in each and 

every region in this province. And do you know what I was 

told, Mr. Speaker? I was told by so many, we have never met a 

minister before. We have never been asked for what our opinion 

is. We‟ve been never asked what would be helpful. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I find it astounding that that member would sit 

there and have criticism about whether or not I‟m meeting with 

communities, meeting with front-line workers, meeting with the 

organizations that are actually doing very great work on the 

front line. Because I have spent a great deal of time there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If that member would just look at everything that‟s being done 

and not call it ad hoc, he‟d realize it is not just income 

programs. It is health care. It is addictions. It is education. All 

of these things have to be put together . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Study of Energy Options 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, now in 

a matter of days and weeks this government is asking the people 

of Saskatchewan to come forward and express their opinions on 

the future of our electrical generating needs in the province, to 

ask their specific opinion on a nuclear reactor. 

 

Earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, we proposed that the people of 

Saskatchewan be given information so that this may be a 

reasonable, informed discussion. We propose, Mr. Speaker, 

through an energy development partnership, that a partnership 

of experts, a panel of experts, be assembled and funded by this 

government to look first of all at renewable options, alternate 

energy options. 

 

My question to the Premier is a very specific question this 

morning: will he and his government provide the funding and 

the means by which an expert panel, a panel of experts, can be 

brought together to report to the people of Saskatchewan on 

renewable and alternate sources of energy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to thank the hon. member for the question. There is a lot of 

merit in what the NDP proposed earlier this week in terms of 

looking at the issue of energy, electrical generation in our 

province going forward into the future. In fact, it‟s perhaps one 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

of the most important issues that we need to be dealing with 

here in this legislature and as a government. 

 

The one default or perhaps omission in their plan was that if 

this completely replaced what we want to do with the Uranium 

Development Partnership, there would be no chance for the 

public to participate in a consultation and a discussion about 

small reactor technology development or about enrichment or 

refinement or, Mr. Speaker, about nuclear medicine or the 

potential of medical isotopes. Because the Uranium 

Development Partnership is about more than energy, as 

important as that is. 

 

So I think we‟ve taken the best parts of the NDP plan with our 

own proposal for an all-party committee of this legislature, 

resourced as it needs to be, to get the answers and provide for a 

consultation process with Saskatchewan people on the very 

important issue of our need for safe, sustainable energy for our 

growing economy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, at the very heart of the proposal 

of this opposition was the proposal to provide a solid base of 

information — a solid base of information in terms of alternate 

options that we as a people of Saskatchewan may look at to 

meet our future electrical needs. To do that, Mr. Speaker, we 

need the information. 

 

Again I ask a very specific question to the Premier: will he and 

his government provide the funding and the resources to a panel 

of experts who can report to the people of Saskatchewan on the 

realistic options that may be available to us through alternate or 

renewable sources of energy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I‟m a little 

surprised at the question from the hon. member because it was 

his administration, quite rightly, that engaged this province in 

wind generation activity in our province, first through a 

partnership with a private company. Unfortunately they sent the 

wrong message to the private sector by basically taking over all 

of wind generation and deciding it had to be done in-house 

only. 

 

But still, Mr. Speaker, still, Mr. Speaker, the net result is that 

there is expertise at SaskPower with respect to wind generation. 

In fact, that hon. member will know — and again more good 

news for Saskatchewan — is that we‟re in a bit of a sweet spot 

when it comes to wind generation in North America. And that 

means that we have higher efficiency rates than other wind 

generation farms — near 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That 

expertise is in SaskPower. 

 

There‟s no need to hire, to spend taxpayers‟ money to find out 

about these answers when they are at SaskPower. The same is 

true for hydro, Mr. Speaker. The same is true for clean coal. 

We‟re leaders in that. We can provide that information. The 

same will be true for biomass as we look at that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to have this discussion. We need all members, all 

parties to be involved. Will that member support an all-party 

committee effort to find the answers for Saskatchewan going 

forward using our very best asset in this regard, SaskPower? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the question before 

the people of Saskatchewan is, how will we meet our future 

electrical needs? We are a province blessed with options, from 

all of the renewables to a large carbon-based resource to the 

uranium resource, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government took $3 million of the taxpayers to fund a 

study into the uranium industry. We‟re asking for precisely the 

same kind of commitment, not only to renewables and alternate 

sources, but to demand-side management, to looking at the 

potentials of export into the province from hydro in Manitoba, 

to look, Mr. Speaker, at all of the options, not just those which 

we have some experience with, but all of the options. And to 

bring to Saskatchewan expertise that exists not only in our own 

province, but in our nation, across this continent, across the 

globe. 

 

Will the government commit either through the Crown 

Corporations Committee process or by some other process to 

provide the same level of financial resources to this 

investigation so that the people of Saskatchewan can be fully 

informed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, maybe it was the practice of 

those members opposite when they were in government to 

spend taxpayers‟ money needlessly, but that is not the position 

of our government. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because under 

that government they took positive steps towards wind 

generation to make Saskatchewan one of the leaders in Canada. 

I think we have an expertise there we can draw on from 

SaskPower, and they‟ll be able to provide that without any extra 

charge to taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. The same is true on the issue 

of importing power, perhaps, as SaskPower‟s had discussions 

and the minister‟s had discussions with Manitoba Hydro. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is more about politics for members 

opposite than it is about finding the important answer to 

sustainable energy for a growing economy. And it is important, 

Mr. Speaker, that issue, so that we can continue to see reports 

like the Canada West Foundation earlier this week when they 

said this: “The rest of Canada should get used to the idea of 

being led by such a low-key, unassuming champion as 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what the country, that‟s what the world is 

saying about our province. In order to continue that momentum, 

we need an energy strategy for our province, Mr. Speaker. It 

will be achieved by good policy, not by NDP politics. 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I lay on the table the 

34th annual report of the Provincial Ombudsman for the year 

2008. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — And also before orders of the day, I am 

prepared to rule on the point of order that was raised by the 

Opposition House Leader yesterday. 

 

I have had an opportunity to review the exchange that occurred 

on Monday, April 20, ‟09 during question period between the 

Minister of Advanced Education, Labour and Employment and 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. At the time, I was in 

the Chair so it is appropriate that I rule on the matter. 

 

During the course of his comments the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour stated on page 2768 of 

Hansard, “I‟m happy to talk about the lack of integrity 

regarding those questions.” 

 

Parliamentary practice provides some guidance in determining 

whether unparliamentary language has been used. I refer all 

hon. members to a summary in Marleau and Montpetit‟s House 

of Commons Procedure and Practice, on page 525 as follows: 

 

The proceedings of the House are based on a 

long-standing tradition of respect for the integrity of all 

Members. Thus, the use of offensive, provocative or 

threatening language in the House is strictly forbidden. 

Personal attacks, insults and obscene language or words 

are not in order. 

 

Integrity has a number of dictionary meanings. The Canadian 

Oxford Dictionary defines the word integrity variously as moral 

uprightness, honest; wholeness, completeness; and, soundness, 

unimpaired or uncorrupted condition. The question for the 

Speaker is whether the words of the minister were meant as a 

reflection on the member or were they meant to characterize the 

soundness of the questions. The tone, manner, and intention of 

the member must be considered. 

 

In this regard I have two points to make. I find that the two-day 

delay in bringing the grievance to the attention of the Speaker 

and the lack of disorder in the Chamber following the remarks 

must be considered in my decision. I took note of the comment 

at the time it was said and although it caught my attention, I did 

not believe the comment was directed at the member 

personally. Therefore I find the point of order not well taken. 

However, I do have a caution for the minister. 

 

Members passionately and forcefully present their positions, 

especially during question period. I do wish to caution members 

— in this case, the Minister of Advanced Education, Labour 

and Employment because his words are the subject of the point 

of order — to be mindful about their choice of language. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answer to questions 345 through 353. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 345 to 353 are tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Proposal for Study of Energy Options 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m certainly pleased 

to enter into the debate today and to move a motion respecting 

the opposition instructing the government to undertake a 

comprehensive energy development partnership program that 

would examine future energy needs in Saskatchewan. 

 

So more to the heart of the motion, Mr. Speaker, is the process 

that led us to this position now. I want to talk about what led us 

to this moment in time. We‟re debating this on the floor of the 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I find it somewhat difficult to hear the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. So if members, if they 

have issues they want to discuss with other members, if they‟d 

gather behind the bar to allow the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote to speak to the motion. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I would like to say that this certainly could 

have been avoided from the start. We took a very reasonable 

position as an Assembly. We all voted in favour of adding value 

to the resource of uranium. So it‟s not that we don‟t have 

agreement in terms of adding value to uranium. It‟s the 

disagreement that we‟ve got in terms of the process by this 

government to manufacture consent. 

 

And so I want to talk about, I‟ll highlight some of the points I 

want to touch on in terms of how they stacked the UDP 

[Uranium Development Partnership] to start the process, their 

continued flip-flopping in terms of government funding. In fact 

they‟re flip-flopping on so many items here, it‟s hard to believe 

every major point that I make has a flip-flop on it. In fact 

they‟ve flip-flopped more times than a pair of 20-year-old 

beach sandals. 

 

They‟ve flip-flopped on the timeline for a decision. They‟ve 

flip-flopped on waste management. They‟ve flip-flopped on the 

consultation process. They‟ve flip-flopped on secrecy and 

accountability, which is not at all surprising. And so I‟ll touch 

on each of those in my notes here today. 

 

Now that the UDP was stacked right from the start is no longer 

up for debate in this legislature. The member from Prince 

Albert Carlton himself said that, you bet we stacked the deck, 

“. . . and we wouldn‟t have it any other way.” 

 



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

So that they stack the deck is no longer up for debate in this 

legislature, but it‟s strange that they do that on such an 

important decision for the people of Saskatchewan. You‟d think 

you‟d want a balanced approach so that people can make an 

informed decision, but it‟s clear that that‟s not what they 

wanted from the start. 

 

Did they want a real assessment of how to proceed? No. In fact 

the member for Thunder Creek at their own convention said 

that it wasn‟t a matter of whether or not they should proceed but 

how, in terms of nuclear energy. So they stack the deck, and 

that is obvious and not up for debate any longer. They‟ve had 

unbelievable flip-flops on whether or not government funding 

should be a part of the process. And we‟re talking about a 10 to 

$20 billion project, and they can‟t get it straight whether or not 

the government should fund it in any way, shape, or form. 

 

On June 17, ‟08, and I‟ll quote Minister Stewart, the member 

for Thunder Creek says this in response to a reporter, “The 

people of the province, zero. This is not going to be built with 

taxpayers‟ dollars or SaskPower fees. This is going to be built 

with private funds.” That‟s June 17, ‟08. 

 

November 27, ‟08 a reporter asked this question: “In Ontario 

there‟s been an agreement that is allowing cost overruns on the 

Bruce Power project there to be partly paid by the taxpayer.” 

And the response from the minister is: 

 

We‟re certainly not considering anything like that, at least 

at this point. And I guess the options are all on the table. If 

indeed a power station is built, it could be solely built, 

owned, and operated by Bruce Power. It could be a 

partnership between SaskPower and Bruce Power. It could 

be a partnership between SaskPower and the province of 

Saskatchewan and Bruce Power, any number of 

possibilities — other private sector partners, even. So 

we‟re not quite there yet. 

 

So again government involvement in terms of finances are back 

on the table. So then we go to December 1, a short four days 

later. “What‟s your sense [asks the reporter] of the public‟s 

support for having public money going into nuclear power?” 

And the minister again says, “It‟s too early. We don‟t know.” 

So once it‟s on the table, then it‟s off the table, then it‟s on the 

table. 

 

The reporter goes on to ask, “So you think once the public is 

informed about the risks, the support won‟t be there?” The 

Minister for Enterprise and Innovation replies, “I wouldn‟t say 

that the support won‟t be there for the project. But the support 

won‟t be there for doing it with taxpayers‟ money.” So he 

seems to flip-flop again now that money‟s off the table again. 

 

[11:00] 

 

December 12, the short 11 days later, a reporter asks, “How 

about the nuclear industry, which is an established industry? 

How about putting money into a nuclear power plant?” The 

minister replies, “All scenarios or all possibilities are on the 

table as far as financing.” 

 

So there come the beach sandals, Mr. Speaker; he should use 

them. And perhaps the Finance minister wants to use them for 

next year‟s budget instead of the boots he used this year. 

They‟ve done nothing but flip-flop, and it continues. 

 

In terms of a timeline for a decision, the minister has said . . . 

Well first the Premier said that the decision must be made by 

the end of this year. We have to have a decision on this by the 

end of the year in order to move forward. Then I asked specific 

questions regarding that in committee, and the minister says 

that no decision will be made for years, perhaps several years. 

Now to contradict the Premier in terms of a timeline seems a 

strange thing to do, but I think it speaks to the fact that they 

have no idea what they‟re doing. The CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] minister, the Enterprise 

Saskatchewan minister, and the Premier are all on a different 

page all throughout this process. 

 

And it‟s especially true when it comes to the next item. We‟re 

talking about waste, nuclear waste. And the Premier says 

unequivocally that we have a moral and ethical obligation — 

that‟s a quote from the Premier — to store nuclear waste. He 

says that we are going to have, he‟s going to, if elected Premier 

he‟s going to charge the universities with the responsibility of 

looking into how we can store nuclear waste in Saskatchewan 

— and not because it would be a benefit to the economy, not 

because he feels that it would benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan in any way, but that we have a moral and ethical 

responsibility. 

 

So I guess the question is, then where are his morals and what 

are his ethics when it comes to that? Because certainly if he 

thinks we have a responsibility, and he‟s the Premier of this 

province, certainly we will be doing it. Where else does he have 

to go? And so we‟ve got the Premier saying, certainly we‟re 

going to be storing waste. We have a moral and ethical 

responsibility to do that. 

 

Then I asked a direct question of the minister in committee. 

And how does the minister respond? The member from 

Thunder Creek says, no possible way will we be storing waste. 

And you know how they made this decision, Mr. Speaker? 

They made this decision because of polling. 

 

And so I asked them to table the poll, because certainly if 

they‟re going to base a decision as large as this on polling, the 

people of Saskatchewan should know what that polling is and 

what it says and exactly the question that was asked. And so has 

he produced the polling? No. He said he won‟t produce it. So 

not only do they flip-flop, they‟re also secretive. 

 

So that was one flip-flop on waste. And then just this week in 

this Assembly we asked the CIC minister whether or not they 

would store waste, and he says that it‟s on the table. So we‟ve 

got a moral and ethical responsibility; there‟s no possibility 

we‟re going to store waste; and now we‟re going to store waste. 

And in fact, apparently one of the breakout sessions in their 

consultation process, their mock consultation process, is going 

to be about waste. So obviously it‟s still on the table or we 

wouldn‟t waste the people of Saskatchewan‟s time in those 

sessions. 

 

In terms of the consultation process itself — a huge sham 

perpetrated on the people — nine communities, which means 

nine days of personal contact on this issue. And in fact it‟s so 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2833 

bad that the leader of the Métis Nation in Saskatchewan said, 

“You can talk all you want, but you have to accommodate the 

interests of Métis people, and that‟s the thing I don‟t see or hear 

from the province right now.” A direct quote from Mr. Robert 

Doucette. 

 

So the Métis Nation feels that they haven‟t been properly 

consulted and won‟t be. And you know what the minister 

responsible, the member for Thunder Creek, you know what his 

answer was to that? Well it‟s one more day than everybody else 

gets. I don‟t understand that, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t understand. 

Well perhaps I do understand where that comes from, but I do 

find it very unfortunate. 

 

Now additionally they‟re extremely secretive about the whole 

process, and we‟ve had members of the public make requests 

for information from this government on this file. And they‟ve 

been denied, summarily denied, and so we‟ve got . . . And I‟ll 

quote from some writing from the author: 

 

The Brad Wall government is ramping up secrecy around 

the Uranium Development Partnership‟s deliberations. 

 

In mid-February an access to information request was 

submitted to CIC for copies of the complete agenda 

package and minutes to any UDP meetings . . . 

 

And it goes on to say that section 17 was used to block this, and 

it says:  

 

Furthermore, CIC appears to have [and I‟m quoting 

directly, appears to have] violated the Act by not applying 

section 8 which is mandatory stating: “Where a record 

contains information to which an applicant is refused 

access, the head shall give access to as much of the record 

as can reasonably be severed without disclosing the 

information to which the applicant is refused access.” 

 

So secrecy reigns, Mr. Speaker. Again to continue: 

 

The CIC‟s actions represent a complete 180 degree turn 

from those it displayed Feb. 19, 2009, when it partially 

released the agenda and minutes from the UDP . . . 

 

So there‟s a huge contradiction in the way that they go about 

this. To continue a quote: 

 

Among the four reasons given for doing so was that 

disclosure of the record “could reasonably be expected to 

result in disclosure of a pending policy decision or 

budgetary item.” 

 

And I‟m continuing to quote: 

 

The Wall government maintains that no decision has been 

made on nuclear power in Saskatchewan, but the secrecy it 

displays seems to betray that at every turn. Just recently 

the CIC withheld critical information concerning Bruce 

Power‟s feasibility study and a meeting was held between 

the company . . . 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a pending policy decision or budgetary 

item that prohibits the release of information. So they‟ve 

already made up their mind; that‟s what that says. Unbelievable. 

 

And so if I could, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to examine now . . . 

Those are just some of the reasons. And I wish I had an hour 

and a half or 3 hours or 10 hours to go through the litany of 

mistakes and missteps that they‟ve made on this file. 

Unfortunately I‟m going to have to sum it up. 

 

But I will say that those are some of the reasons — only some, 

there are many more — of the reasons that we proposed the 

EDP [energy development partnership]. Now, our EDP is 

comprehensive and you know what it‟s based on, Mr. Speaker? 

This is a strange thing to the members opposite. It‟s based on 

public input: calls to our offices, conversations that you have 

every day where people are saying, you know what? We don‟t 

feel properly informed. And polls bear it out. 

 

So what are they saying that they want? They want an 

apples-to-apples comparison. They want the ability to compare 

all the different energy sources that are possible for this great 

province, and they want to do it at the same time. They don‟t 

want it isolated. They don‟t want favouritism given to one 

power source, potential power source. They want a balanced 

process. And what they‟re doing isn‟t . . . they‟re not getting 

that. 

 

And so we proposed that SaskPower start the process by 

determining future demand, infrastructure needs, and possible 

rate increases for those needs. We proposed a nuclear option 

that the UDP go back and provide some of the work that 

they‟ve done, but also provide information regarding export 

markets, cost per kilowatt hour, cost for storage, and the 

ultimate cost for decommissioning. 

 

We also proposed a carbon option which would look at carbon 

technologies including the role of natural gas, polygen, and 

clean coal. We also proposed a renewable energy development 

partnership which looks at conservation and all the different 

forms of renewable energy including wind, solar, hydro, cogen, 

geothermal, and biomass. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to move the motion at this time: 

 

That this Assembly instructs the government to undertake 

a comprehensive energy development partnership program 

which would examine the future energy needs of 

Saskatchewan, recommend the most effective way to meet 

those needs, and engage the public in meaningful 

consultation. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved: 

 

That this Assembly instructs the government to undertake 

a comprehensive energy development partnership program 

which would examine the future energy needs of 

Saskatchewan, recommend the most effective way to meet 

those needs, and engage the public in meaningful 

consultation. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

motion has some merits, surprisingly. I say surprisingly because 

past NDP motions have sometimes been — how shall we call it 

— a little suspect in the intellect department. This one, 

however, though dealing with a very important issue, our future 

energy needs . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would just like to remind the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose that earlier this afternoon I was asked to make 

a ruling on a comment made the other day, and I asked 

members to be mindful and thoughtful of how they express 

their comments and how the comments are directed, especially 

if they may reflect on members. So I bring that to the member‟s 

attention. The member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 

important issue — investigating the future energy needs for our 

province across the whole gamut, from nuclear to wind power 

to clean coal. There is some merit in the NDP motion. 

 

However there is a more appropriate vehicle that could be used 

for it. It just makes sense to use the existing committee, the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. The 

committee exists. If we use that committee, we can ensure that 

all the resources that are required are available . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Bi-partisan. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Bi-partisan. I thank my colleague from 

Saskatoon for the comment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote part of a press release from 

yesterday referring to the motion that the Crown Corporations 

minister tabled yesterday. And part of the press release says: 

 

The motion directs the committee to “conduct an inquiry 

to determine how the province can best meet the growing 

demand for electricity in a manner that is safe, reliable, 

environmentally-sustainable and affordable for 

Saskatchewan residents.” 

 

“Saskatchewan people already benefit from a diverse 

mixture of electrical power sources, including natural gas, 

wind, hydro, co-generation and coal,” Cheveldayoff said. 

[This is a quote, Mr. Speaker.] “However, Sask Power is 

going to have to increase its power generation capacity in 

order to meet the needs of a growing province. 

 

“The question going forward is — how do we develop 

future sources of safe and reliable electricity in a manner 

which achieves the best balance between affordability and 

environmental sustainability? 

 

“The public has an important role to play in determining 

how we achieve that goal and public hearings will offer 

that opportunity for Saskatchewan residents to be 

informed and consulted.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I sit on that committee, the Standing Committee 

on Crown and Central Agencies. And I for one, and I know my 

colleagues on this side of the House feel the same, we look 

forward to that opportunity to consult with Saskatchewan 

people on this very, very important issue about our future. 

 

There would be a side bonus to this, Mr. Speaker, as well for 

the members opposite. It would give them the opportunity to get 

out and see the rest of the province. For instance, the member 

from Regina Rosemont would have the opportunity to see the 

communities of Rosetown and Biggar, which he frequently gets 

mixed up on. 

 

This is not a new idea to have committees do this kind of 

consultation. All-party committees in the past have done this. 

There‟s been examples under the previous NDP government. 

On December 9, 1999, on a motion from a member from the 

former NDP government, Legislative Assembly created an 

all-party special committee on tobacco control. The special 

committee undertook investigation of a number of issues, 

including the impact of tobacco use especially on children and 

youth, the need for and content of provincial tobacco control 

legislation protecting children and youth, and also strategies to 

protect the public from the health risks of second-hand smoke. 

An all-party committee, Mr. Speaker, members from both sides. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Also in 1999, another special committee was constituted to 

address and to make recommendations on the issue of the abuse 

and exploitation of children through the sex trade. Those are 

just two examples, Mr. Speaker, of all-party committees doing 

consultation hearings around the province. 

 

On the whole issue of future energy needs, lately, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP are trying to have it both ways. They‟re opposed to 

nuclear development. Yet in 2005 the current Leader of the 

Opposition, who was then premier, had a very different 

approach. It was reported in the Leader-Post, and I quote, 

“Calvert said the province would consider any business case to 

establish a reactor or nuclear waste storage facility in the 

province . . .” 

 

But where was his consultation process? The NDP, they‟re 

constantly criticizing — not enough consultation, too much 

consultation. They‟re in favour of carbon capture; they aren‟t in 

favour of carbon capture. 

 

Talking about trying to have it on both sides, Mr. Speaker, on 

flip-flopping, my learned colleague from Carrot River Valley 

this morning, just a few minutes ago in his member statement 

made some very, very valid points on this topic that I‟d like to 

quote. I hold the member — regardless of the heckling from 

this side of the House, Mr. Speaker — I hold my learned friend 

in high esteem. 

 

He referred to a year ago when the NDP abandoned their 

climate change targets, but they now want to implement their 

original targets. But those targets come with a cost. Higher 

targets mean higher SaskPower rates — this at a time when the 

NDP are also demanding that we hold the line on rate increases. 

 

And I‟m quoting the learned member from Carrot River Valley 

this morning. 

 

The former NDP Environment minister said that people 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2835 

would happily pay more. They had no concern for the 

SaskPower customers when it came to the cost of their 

climate change targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP cannot have it both ways. They 

cannot demand status quo on electrical rates while 

demanding harsher climate change targets. 

 

I think that summarizes the whole topic very neatly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There‟s also been a significant number of other examples of the 

NDP changing their opinion on the whole future energy change 

issue. Another quote, Mr. Speaker, from November 2005 as 

reported in the Leader-Post. It says, “Calvert said the province 

would consider any business case to establish a reactor or 

nuclear waste storage facility . . .” 

 

And yet now we hear the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow 

saying exactly the opposite. They‟re all over the place on this, 

Mr. Speaker. A StarPhoenix article, December 4, 2008: 

 

Faced with the need to meet rising energy needs in 

Saskatchewan at a time of widespread concern about the 

global warming impact of conventional fossil-fuel fired 

generating plants, the former NDP government led by 

Lorne Calvert began to consider the nuclear option, even 

though Mr. Calvert has disparaged it as a “dirty” source of 

power. However, the nuclear option is still embraced by 

the party‟s sole leadership contender at this point, Dwain 

Lingenfelter. 

 

That‟s a quote from December 2008, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again with the back and forth on the opinion, a quote from the 

Whitehorse Star from January 2003, and it says: 

 

The notion that you could build a reactor that‟s economic 

is a very, very questionable assumption. And this isn‟t a 

clean source of power. It‟s probably the dirtiest given 

what comes out the tailpipe, nuclear waste . . . Lorne 

Calvert. 

 

That again is a quote, Mr. Speaker. And yet after having said 

that, July 12, 2006, from the Leader-Post: 

 

NDP Premier Lorne Calvert and Industry and Resources 

Minister Eric Cline travelled to France two weeks ago to 

meet with the head of nuclear giant Areva to sell the 

province as a site for a uranium refinery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting to see how, depending on the mood 

of the day, the members opposite can take both sides of the 

situation. The NDP leadership candidate, Dwain Lingenfelter, 

at one point in time was solidly in the pro-nuclear camp and yet 

lately has been speaking opposite. Probably my favourite quote 

him was, “If Tommy Douglas were here, it would be exactly 

what he would be doing,” said Lingenfelter. That‟s a quote 

from Leader-Post, October 2005. Yet now he speaks opposite. 

 

To wrap up, Mr. Speaker, just want to reiterate something I said 

a few minutes ago, and that‟s a quote from my learned 

colleague, the member from Carrot River Valley. The NDP are 

trying to cover both sides of this issue. They‟re talking about 

the need for higher targets, and yet as he said, the NDP cannot 

have it both ways. They cannot demand status quo on rates 

while demanding climate change targets. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 

to speak to the motion put forward by the member for Prince 

Albert Northcote. And a good motion it is because what it calls 

for, Mr. Speaker, is a comprehensive energy development 

program that studies, that looks at the future energy 

requirements of Saskatchewan, and it looks at how we can best 

fill those energy needs, utilizing a basket — if I can describe it 

that way — a whole basketful of energy resources that are at the 

disposal of Saskatchewan. 

 

There is no corner of the world, I‟ll argue, more blessed with 

resources than is Saskatchewan. We have not an unlimited 

quantity, but we have resources from a whole host of things. 

Our hydro is limited in the terms of the traditional hydro — the 

big-scale dams — but there‟s still a huge untapped resource in 

in-stream, small-scale hydro. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this consultation process is one that really should 

happen. And it‟s interesting that government members on the 

range of nuclear issues say we should have very, very few 

weeks of consultation, public consultation. 

 

And yet, and yet earlier today, the hon. member for Kindersley 

said with respect to the forest management lease agreement, 

well you know, we‟ve been discussing for more than 18 months 

now that they‟ve been in government, we‟ve been discussing 

and consulting for more than 18 months on that. How can we 

have a situation where on forestry, which is very important, you 

can have what seems like not quite endless but seems certainly 

to be ongoing consultation? We‟ve got all kinds of time for 

meaningful consultation with the companies, as the member 

said. 

 

And yet when it comes to a fundamental shift in how we 

provide our electricity in Saskatchewan, we‟ve got a timeline 

that is only a very few short weeks. How can that be? How can 

it be that we would have an administration that would commit 

Saskatchewan people to expenditures that, clearly if we go 

down the route of a nuclear power plant, we‟re talking $10 

billion? How can we just do that without pausing and looking 

and saying, well I wonder what options there might be? 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what we would get if we spent $10 

billion on demand side on energy conservation. How much 

electricity would Saskatchewan people save? And how much 

would our power bills therefore go down because what you‟re 

not using, you don‟t have to pay for through the meter? 

 

The same goes with energy. How much would, like with our 

natural gas, how much would the savings be if we spent . . . I 

mean $10 billion is . . . I‟m not sure we could spend that much 



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

money on our housing and our buildings and our vehicle fleets, 

but I suppose we could. But the savings would be enormous, 

particularly in the buildings. 

 

How much could we save in terms of energy if we spent $10 

billion on solar photovoltaic electricity, which is admittedly a 

very high cost form of electricity today, but $10 billion will buy 

you an awful lot of megawatts of solar electricity; $10 billion 

will buy you an awful lot more wind than there is existing in all 

of Canada today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we‟re saying is we need to have a 

meaningful consultation program. We think that the people of 

Saskatchewan have many good ideas. I know many have 

spoken to me directly about their ideas. People know what 

works for themselves. They know what works in their 

community. I know, Mr. Speaker, that there would be interest, 

for example, in a co-operative wind farm set-up. You could 

have it where communities banded together and built a wind 

farm and benefited as a community and that electricity be fed 

into the SaskPower grid. 

 

We have the reversible meters right now, but there‟s a few more 

steps that could be taken to help facilitate that, and really help 

communities to participate in the energy needs and the energy 

future of Saskatchewan. The same could be done . . . Pick your 

form of energy — almost any form of energy and certainly 

including energy conservation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are opportunities galore in Saskatchewan, 

just unlimited opportunities. I haven‟t even touched on waste 

heat from industry, from refineries, and other forms of industry. 

And we could look at, and we could in fact move to capture that 

waste heat to heat buildings. Because where is the upgrader and 

refinery? Well one in Lloydminster, one in Regina. And it 

seems to me what both have in common is significant 

population very nearby, so that waste heat that is currently just 

going up into the atmosphere could be captured. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that they spent a huge effort on doing 

that in Scandinavian countries. It‟s not like we‟d be inventing 

the technology in this case. It would just be a case of valuing 

that waste heat and using it and it could be captured and resold 

in a real win-win situation. There are people in Saskatchewan 

that propose this sort of innovative initiative. We need to have a 

blue chip consultation process with the people of Saskatchewan 

so that we can weigh what it is that this waste heat I just spoke 

of might benefit and what it might cost. 

 

We need to have this blue chip panel to look at the whole 

energy needs to determine what it is that wind power might cost 

and what the benefit would be. We need a panel to look at and 

recommend photovoltaic and identify the cost and the 

drawback. Clearly a drawback of solar photovoltaic electricity 

is the sun doesn‟t shine for significant hours, but surprise, 

surprise — my grandparents had batteries on the farm. I‟m not 

proposing that we go exactly that way, but they‟ve made huge 

developments in batteries and I think that with today‟s 

technology we could copy what they‟re doing in California and 

use huge batteries to store that electricity that we could generate 

either when the sun is shining, in the case of solar photovoltaic 

energy, or when the wind is blowing in the case of wind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an interesting problem in the province 

right now in that with the nuclear issue, nuclear power and that 

whole nuclear issue, the government has said we need this 

group, this committee, to look at it and yet with all else, well 

we‟ll just shuffle that off. That‟s what it feels like. That‟s what 

it feels like. And I want to have one group, if I can describe it, 

challenged and tasked with putting the whole pieces together 

and making recommendations. We have an all too rare 

opportunity right now in Saskatchewan to look at the entire 

picture and then to make the most sensible decisions to go on 

into the future. And the decisions that we‟re making this year, 

next year, are the decisions that are going to lead us way far 

into the future. 

 

[11:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m excited about the broadening of 

consultation. I just want it to be, as we‟re suggesting, let‟s put it 

in one umbrella and get it so we can actually compare all of the 

forms of electrical generation, all of the forms of energy 

conservation, so that we can put it all together. And the people 

of Saskatchewan, let‟s have a little trust in the people of 

Saskatchewan. I know that collectively we can all make the 

proper decisions that will benefit all of Saskatchewan now and 

well into the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

certainly pleased to enter into this 75-minute debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today is a bit of, in my mind, a bit of a historic 

occasion in that it‟s not often in this Assembly, particularly in 

these type of debates, where we find that both sides of the 

House agree on a particular issue. But I think we have before us 

today an issue that there is general agreement on both sides of 

the House. 

 

I listened quite carefully to the comments made by the member 

from Regina Coronation Park, and I must say that there isn‟t a 

lot that I could disagree with. I certainly agree, and I think we 

on this side of the House agree, that there needs to be this broad 

consultation dealing with this very important issue of the future 

energy supplies of this province. It is something that is vitally 

important to this province, but I think it extends beyond 

Saskatchewan. It extends to the rest of Canada, to the rest of 

North America. And I think that the eyes of the world, with the 

recent emergence of Saskatchewan on the national level, that 

there are people from around the world looking to see what is 

happening here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And it presents this province with a unique opportunity to show 

leadership that we have shown in the past, and that we are able 

to step forward on the national and international stage because 

of this hugely important issue. And Saskatchewan with all its 

resources in the energy sector, amongst many other sectors, can 

contribute to this very important issue. 

 

What we need to ensure when we move forward in plans for 

future energy production is that it needs to be safe. Certainly I 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

think the people of the province would demand that. It certainly 

needs to be affordable and also it needs to be sustainable. That‟s 

a huge challenge. And it has to be environmentally friendly. 

 

But the people of this province have risen to the challenges on 

other issues, and one of the issues that comes to mind, Mr. 

Speaker, is back in the ‟80s. One of the problems that we had 

here in Saskatchewan and across Western Canada was the very 

serious issue of soil erosion and degradation due to the current 

technologies used in agriculture. So if we look at what 

happened in that area and use that as the model to see what the 

potential of the people of this province has in dealing with the 

issues, we will see that we can feel confident that we will find 

the solutions to those very tough questions. 

 

Because what happened in agriculture, the entrepreneurs of this 

province said, look we can do things in a better way. We don‟t 

have to have our skies filled with dust every spring. We don‟t 

have to lose that very precious resource of fertile soil which 

feeds the people of the world. And they came up with the 

technology. And it required an investment by the industry, the 

manufacturers, the producers, but they invested. And today we 

don‟t see that massive soil erosion that we saw in the past. 

 

And I‟m confident if we give the people of this province a 

chance and bring them into the discussion, that we will see that 

same innovation. It‟s already happening. It‟s already happening 

in SaskPower where SaskPower is moving forward, and 

members opposite should know that. It hasn‟t been that long 

since they‟ve been government and they should know the 

innovation and the developments within SaskPower, whether it 

be with wind energy, hydro. We‟re moving forward in the clean 

coal area, which is hugely important. 

 

If we can solve that technological puzzle, it will have untold 

benefits not only to Saskatchewan and Canada but across the 

world. Because coal is still, is currently and will be a major 

source of energy production. And there are countries around the 

world that are looking at this issue and we are moving forward 

and are a leader in that area. 

 

Tied in with the clean coal initiative is the whole area of 

sequestering carbon from the emissions. It‟s all part of the 

piece. And that‟s another area that countries around the world 

. . . I was recently in Europe, in Great Britain, and they are 

looking very seriously at these issues — and they are looking 

towards Saskatchewan. They are aware of what is happening 

here, and they are moving forward on that. 

 

So what the motion that we are dealing with here today is, as 

I‟d said earlier, it‟s in the right direction. What our Minister of 

Crown Corporations has proposed, the Premier‟s talked about 

it, is that we in this legislature set up an all-party committee, the 

Crown‟s committee chaired by our very capable member from 

Weyburn, to look at this issue. And members opposite will be 

part of that. 

 

I heard the member from Regina Coronation Park said that we 

have to do this in a non-partisan way. Well as Deputy Chair of 

that committee, he will be involved in developing the mandate 

as to how this undertaking will move forward. And so I feel 

confident that if we move this issue towards the Crown 

Corporations Committee, a standing committee of this 

legislature, and give them the broad mandate that‟s required, 

they will consult with the people of the province and bring back 

what they heard. And I know they will have heard great things 

and great ideas because it‟s already out there. 

 

As I mentioned, SaskPower‟s doing great things, but there‟s 

great things happening in the private sector. And there‟s a 

couple of things that I‟d like to touch on. We have young 

entrepreneurs who have set up companies in this province to 

manufacture and install small wind turbines on farms as a result 

of the net metering policy that SaskPower has in place. Farmers 

are actively looking at it. It needs to be tweaked a little bit to 

make it somewhat more affordable. 

 

We have First Nations who are looking very seriously at wind 

generation. In fact I‟m proud to say that one of the First Nations 

in my constituency, the Gordon First Nation, has partnered with 

the Cowessess First Nation and set up the All Nations Energy 

Development Corporation. And they‟ve already looked at 

feasibility studies done and identified sites of wind farms. They 

are in discussions with a private sector company to develop a 

partnership. They are looking to SaskPower, who will be 

coming forward shortly with their plans as to where wind power 

fits in in the overall generation plans of the corporation. So 

those things are out there. 

 

There are people, entrepreneurs who are looking at solar 

generation. And if we send the right messages, we put the right 

policies in place, we need to gather the information as 

legislators so that we fully understand the potential out there, 

understand the intricate problems that are associated with this 

because it is a very complex issue. But I‟m confident that we 

will be able to find the solutions. 

 

And I know members opposite, they get hung up on the UDP 

process, and they feel that that‟s all that we on this side of the 

House are looking at. That‟s only part of the overall picture of 

energy production in this province. Geothermal is another area 

that helps in reduction of greenhouse gases and alternate ways 

of heating homes and reducing the energy consumption. 

 

All those things are already happening out there but what we 

need to do — and I believe it will be a very productive and 

useful process — is to bring all that information together. We 

can consult the experts that are needed. If the committee feels it 

needs expertise, I believe they will have the mandate . It‟s in the 

mandate already set by the rules of this legislature that they can 

go forward and get that expertise and have those experts present 

before the committee. 

 

As I said when I first started, Mr. Speaker, this is a unique 

situation here today in this House, where we find that both sides 

of the House seem to have a fair bit of common ground on this 

issue. It‟s a matter of semantics whether we do it with an 

independent committee or we use one of the vehicles of the 

House to accomplish the goal. And that‟s the important thing is 

we need to take a very serious look at this issue and lay out the 

plans for our future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I really can‟t see any problems with supporting the 

general intent of this motion, and let‟s move forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

and speak to the motion put forward by my New Democrat 

colleague, the member for P.A. Northcote, which instructs the 

Sask Party government to put the biased nuclear development 

process on hold while providing Saskatchewan people with an 

alternative, transparent process to determine Saskatchewan‟s 

energy future. 

 

Saskatchewan people have a promising natural heritage on 

which we have built the relatively prosperous province we have 

today. It is an inheritance at risk as Saskatchewan faces the 

challenge of climate change. We are not alone in facing this 

challenge. Climate change is a task that falls on every member 

of the human family everywhere on earth. 

 

Saskatchewan people know that the natural ground on which we 

have built our province is becoming more unstable and at risk 

as a result of greenhouses gases, and we know that the future 

health of our planet rests with the decisions that we make today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The presence of challenge has never deterred Saskatchewan or 

Saskatchewan people. In times of struggle, we come together. 

In times of relative prosperity, we have a renewed sense of what 

is possible when we work together and a sense of responsibility 

for the future. Yet Saskatchewan people are being left out of 

their right to decide the future of their province by the Sask 

Party government. 

 

Our decision about energy is not just about our economy, but 

also about the health of our environment. Climate change 

reminds us that the tired orthodoxy that accepts the black and 

white division of the economy and the environment is blind to 

the economy of the 21st century. We need to see the economy 

in full colour and the interconnected decisions of how our 

society impacts our home, our natural world. 

 

The Sask Party government has narrowed the debate on 

Saskatchewan‟s energy future. They paid millions for a 

closed-door, rubber-stamp board to determine not if, but how 

Saskatchewan should adopt one source of power — nuclear. 

 

Promising a short two-week consultation period with a biased 

report on nuclear power, the Sask Party government is steering 

towards an energy future without all the information, without 

all the energy options on the table, and without adequate time 

for Saskatchewan people to have a fair say. Card players would 

call it a stacked deck with the Sask Party government dealing. 

 

The daily phone calls, the stuffed inbox, and the numerous 

letters that I receive from residents of Saskatchewan all say the 

same thing, Mr. Speaker: Saskatchewan people are under no 

illusion that the Sask Party government is not playing fair. 

 

A Prince Albert resident writes about her frustration with the 

Sask Party government‟s rushed nuclear process. “I have been 

particularly disturbed by the apparent enthusiasm on the part of 

some decision makers . . . to push forward nuclear power 

generation without credible consultation with concerned 

Saskatchewan citizens.” 

 

A Saskatoon resident sends an email about the Sask Party‟s 

narrow focus on only one energy option. “I urge you to respect 

the democratic process by ensuring an open and accountable 

discussion on this very important decision.” 

 

And a Regina resident sends my office a copy of what he wrote 

to the Premier. “On an issue as important as the future energy 

path of our province, we owe future generations a wide-ranging, 

long-term public discourse on decisions that will bestow our 

legacy on them.” 

 

Saskatchewan people are clear, Mr. Speaker. More than one 

choice exists for Saskatchewan‟s future. To make our future 

about one choice only — nuclear or no nuclear — squanders the 

promise of our province and leaves our democracy worn and 

damaged. 

 

[11:45] 

 

New Democrats stand with these concerned individuals in 

demanding a credible, meaningful, and open debate about the 

future energy decisions of our province, and New Democrats 

offer an alternative approach. The New Democrat alternative 

seeks to take out the stacked deck for nuclear power, and 

instead places all the cards on the table for Saskatchewan 

people to determine how best to proceed with electricity 

generation in the future. 

 

New Democrats have before the elected members of this House 

a motion that would seek to examine the future energy needs of 

Saskatchewan, recommend the most effective way to meet 

those needs, and engage in meaningful consultations. 

 

The proposed process, called the energy development 

partnership, would seek to postpone the biased flaw approach of 

the Sask Party in favour of a transparent process, meaningful 

dialogue, and credible public consultation process for 

considering our energy future. 

 

First we must truly understand our energy needs. SaskPower 

would be charged with providing the best estimates for future 

demand growth, the infrastructure to meet those predicted 

needs, and the rate increase that would be required to meet the 

future capital costs. 

 

Next, three partnership panels would be created. One panel 

would seek to complete the Uranium Development Partnership 

report that has left too many questions unanswered, work left 

undone. The basic questions surrounding electrical costs per 

kilowatt, the proposed costs and strategy to deal with nuclear 

waste, the projected costs of the ultimate decommissioning of a 

nuclear reactor, and more detailed information about potential 

export markets would have to be answered. 

 

We need to finish the government‟s homework. After fixing the 

incomplete report of the Sask Party‟s near $3 million UDP, 

New Democrats would look at carbon-based options like 

polygeneration, currently proposed by the Belle Plaine project, 

and renewable energy options like wind, solar, hydro, 

cogeneration, geothermal, and biomass sources of energy 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

already abundantly available in Saskatchewan. Let‟s be clear, a 

debate about our province‟s energy future without looking at 

renewable energy is simply not credible. 

 

The former New Democratic government is proud to have made 

the first historic investment in wind power in Saskatchewan, 

moving Saskatchewan from no capacity to generate power from 

the wind to placing Saskatchewan in a leadership role. Our 

province has renewable energy and Saskatchewan people 

should be able to weigh this option against all others in a 

decision about our future energy needs. 

 

With the New Democrats‟ energy development partnerships, 

Saskatchewan‟s future electrical needs will be evaluated, with 

all the options receiving the same resources as the Sask Party‟s 

UDP. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the proposed energy development 

partnership would ensure that the work of each of the three 

panels — nuclear, carbon-based, and renewable — along with 

the initial report of SaskPower would be gathered into one 

comprehensive document prepared by a third party, 

independent consultant. This independently compiled report 

would then be the subject of extensive public meetings and 

dialogue for a near four-month period from mid-February 2010 

to May 31, 2010. 

 

Whereas the nine sites chosen by the Sask Party government for 

their biased, rushed consultation on nuclear is simply not 

accessible to the Saskatchewan population, the New 

Democrats‟ energy development partnership would ensure that 

the majority of Saskatchewan residents would be within 30 

minutes driving distance from a consultation forum. From La 

Ronge to La Loche, Lloydminster to Swift Current, Humboldt 

to Cumberland House, Saskatchewan people would have a real 

opportunity to engage in a meaningful dialogue about their 

future. 

 

The way forward for Saskatchewan meeting its energy needs 

are clear. We need transparency. We need credible, 

wide-ranging information, and we need meaningful and 

extensive public dialogue. The New Democrats‟ energy 

development partnership will allow Saskatchewan people to 

decide how we move forward on energy in a cost-effective and 

environmentally sustainable manner. 

 

The Sask Party government‟s politics of secrecy and spin over 

government documents and information in its narrow 

enthusiasm over one energy source, and the Sask Party‟s sloppy 

homework with its incomplete UDP report renders the current 

energy debate flawed and misguided. 

 

With the New Democrats‟ energy development partnership 

proposed today, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can once 

again work together to face the challenges of building a greener 

and more prosperous province. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I‟m very 

pleased to enter in this debate. I think it‟s a fundamental debate 

for the people of Saskatchewan to have. 

 

For the last 16 years, for a long period of time Saskatchewan‟s 

been in a position where the increasing power needs in this 

province haven‟t been there. The NDP were able to allow the 

system to deteriorate, allow the infrastructure to dwindle, and 

there wasn‟t a big demand for new capacity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this point in our province‟s history, where we see industry 

flooding into Saskatchewan, where people are coming home, 

young people that have left our province for decades are now 

coming home. They‟re buying houses. They want to turn the 

lights on. We hear from SaskPower that our energy needs are 

going to rise and rise dramatically in the short future. And this, 

this is a very valid conversation, and I applaud the members for 

their interest in it. I would like to point out though, Mr. 

Speaker, that they‟re somewhat confusing and overlapping two 

separate issues. 

 

These issues certainly intersect but they are not the same issue. 

Now the UDP looked at the value chain of uranium, and that 

goes right from prospecting new mines, mining, enrichment. It 

looks at all the way down the chain it goes through; through 

power generation, but it also goes to medical isotopes, it goes to 

research reactors. One of those has to do with power generation. 

The rest are all in the value chain and are all a resource in 

Saskatchewan that we have to look at. And the UDP had set out 

a structured format for this. 

 

Now what the member for Prince Albert Northcote has 

proposed is again a very valid discussion for the people of 

Saskatchewan and it is power generation. — again a long string 

of coal, clean coal, natural gas, solar, wind, and many more, 

Mr. Speaker, including nuclear. So on the nuclear energy 

production those two processes intersect, but in no way are they 

looking at the same problem from the same point of view. 

They‟re intersecting issues and both very valid, Mr. Speaker. I 

just wanted to point that out at the outset. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I read the motion put forward by the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote, it is to instruct the 

government to undertake the EDP. So obviously those members 

have asked our government, they‟ve looked across the floor and 

said, would you undertake this process? Now I applaud them 

for their initiative. I applaud our minister in charge of 

SaskEnergy. He reached back across the floor, Mr. Speaker, and 

he said, I think a bipartisan solution is something that would be 

appropriate here. 

 

He has extended the olive branch and I hope that those 

members grasp on o that, Mr. Speaker, because this is far too 

important. I think that there‟s good ideas on this side of the 

floor. I hope there‟s good ideas on that side of the floor. And at 

the end of the day I think it‟s important we have this discussion, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we move forward in this process we have a 

couple of things that we know: we‟re going to need more 

electricity; we‟re going to need to find new options. We know 

that there are constraints when it comes to carbon. Costs, all of 

these issues need to be considered as we move forward and 

make these decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

But with contributions, and valuable contributions from those 

members, valuable contributions from this side, and the ability 

of the two sides to work together to bring in expertise and to 

listen to the people of Saskatchewan . . . The people of 

Saskatchewan have really impressed me, Mr. Speaker, recently. 

Last week I did a series of town hall meetings in my 

constituency talking about all sorts of issues from the budget 

right through roads, highways. But the energy needs of 

Saskatchewan was something that I discussed at every single 

meeting. And I think that the people of Saskatchewan would be 

pleased to put forward their opinions on this topic and I think 

it‟s important that we work together as a committee, and I think 

the Crown Corporations Committee is the obvious right choice. 

We have a certain amount of expertise. We deal with the 

officials. 

 

SaskPower is of course going to be a major resource for us, as 

they have experts in the fields of wind, because we currently 

rely very heavily on wind, in a Canadian sense. We are up 

around 5 per cent of our energy mix comes from electricity, and 

that is the highest in Canada. And there is a lot of potential for 

more wind. We hear from SaskPower there is an upper 

threshold of how much of a component wind energy can put on 

our system, but I think that we need to explore that and all other 

options, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to say that coming from the other side, if we are 

going to work in this bipartisan way — and I certainly hope that 

we do, I will say again — there has to be a certain amount, 

there has to be an expectation of reasonable expectations. Every 

day we hear from the other side, often in the same question 

period, the member for Regina Coronation Park will stand up 

and ask very loaded questions almost demanding that the price 

of electricity does not rise, doesn‟t rise regardless of any other 

consideration. 

 

Under his government, they didn‟t have to build capacity 

because we were losing population. Industry wasn‟t ramping 

up. They had a model where you could draw down on your 

infrastructure, maintain your costs, not have to build capacity, 

and that was the price of electricity. 

 

We currently don‟t find that situation here because we see 

people coming home and the demand going up. So in the same 

question period where the member from Coronation Park is 

arguing you cannot raise electricity rates even though you have 

all these greater needs, we‟re hearing from the former minister 

of the Environment, the member for Regina Coronation Park, 

saying that in fact you have to decrease your greenhouse gas 

emissions. You have to set targets which are . . . And I don‟t 

disagree with either member. I think both have a valid concern, 

but I think that maybe they could talk before question period to 

decide what are the priorities of their government. 

 

If we go to a very stringent, and I mean a very stringent 

anti-carbon, there are, financially, costs. I think everyone would 

agree that burning coal, what I would call not clean coal, is the 

cheapest, least expensive form of electricity in any jurisdiction, 

and we have a great coalfield — 300 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So if the member for Regina Coronation Park would like to just 

build more coal facilities and pump carbon into the atmosphere 

at a ridiculous rate, maybe that‟s an option and maybe that‟s 

something we can discuss in this bipartisan committee. If the 

member for Regina Walsh Acres is very concerned about 

carbon and cost is no issue, Mr. Speaker, there is some . . . And 

our government is currently moving forward with clean coal. 

We have a large wind component but there are costs associated 

with that. 

 

So I think that those two members could talk before question 

period and decide — you know, so we don‟t contradict each 

other in the same question period and maybe look foolish — 

which way are we going to lean today. Or better yet, which way 

do we lean in general? And my hope is that this bipartisan 

committee will cut through some of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to also say that I do find a little bit of contradictory 

statements coming out of the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. She said in the newspaper, Mr. Speaker, that she 

would have voted with . . . Now I go back and I‟ll talk about the 

UDP and the motion put forward by the member from Meadow 

Lake, that the Legislative Assembly consider all options in the 

value chain of uranium. 

 

The members opposite, we didn‟t know if they‟d be split, 

against it, for it. Unanimously the members stood on both sides 

of the House and supported it. The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow was quoted in the newspaper — and I don‟t have the 

exact quote — that she would have voted with her members 

even though she was against the issue. Now, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the kind of leadership on an issue like this, that I don‟t 

believe in this but I would have done it that way? I‟m hoping 

that when we‟re working together as a bipartisan committee that 

that doesn‟t rear its ugly head, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Speaking of leadership candidates, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Lingenfelter, Mr. Lingenfelter, Mr. Speaker, has been flirting, 

flirting with the nationalization of our oil and gas industries, 

Mr. Speaker. If he wants to nationalize our natural gas industry, 

maybe, maybe, maybe building gas-fired turbines, Mr. Speaker, 

is the future for Saskatchewan. If his plan is that we can utilize 

our resources in a nationalized way to produce gas for . . . I 

would hope there be a price on it, but if he thinks that we can 

get it for free, maybe that is the least expensive way to move 

forward. 

 

I think it is reasonable that we recognize that natural gas is still 

a major carbon emitter. It‟s about a third what coal is. But if 

we‟re considering greenhouse gases and if we‟re going to take 

our contribution seriously, I think natural gas is — and it will be 

— potentially one piece in the pie as we move forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In my last couple of seconds, Mr. Speaker, I guess I would just 

like to reiterate: the olive branch has reached across. I hope that 

the member for Regina Coronation Park reaches out and he 

would play a major part in this process, Mr. Speaker, as the 

Deputy Chair of the Crowns committee. He would be involved 

in coordinating how we would move forward and what process 

would be used. I look forward to this discussion and I look 

forward to coming up with some bipartisan decisions. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed in the 65-minute debate. 

We‟ll now take questions. I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Reading a headline 

from Monday, April 6, ‟09, it says, “Métis steamed over lack of 

consultation on uranium development.” And so in that article, 

the president of the Métis nation, Robert Doucette, says this, 

and I quote, “You can talk all you want but you have to 

accommodate the interests of Métis people and that's the thing 

that I don't see or hear from the province right now.” 

 

And so he doesn‟t believe that there‟s proper time allowed for 

consultation, to which the minister reponsible‟s answer was to 

say this and that is, they got one day; that‟s one more than 

everybody else got. So I guess my question to the member for 

Lloydminster is: who‟s right, the minister or Robert Doucette? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 

the question. As I said in my speech, Mr. Speaker, there‟s two 

issues here. They intersect. The Uranium Development 

Partnership is a long process right from searching for new 

mines through mining enrichment all the way through power 

production, medical isotopes. And that is a discussion 

Saskatchewan has to have. 

 

It‟s going to be a broad consultation. We‟ve brought in a Chair 

of this consultation process which has announced yesterday that 

he feels comfortable and he‟ll be moving forward. And I am 

very confident that he will mould this process in a manner that 

the people of Saskatchewan are clearly heard and will have their 

say. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 

moving forward and looking to have a frank and open 

discussion on the future of the uranium industry in our 

province, as well as looking into what our future mix of power 

generation will look like. 

 

Under the NDP, we saw years of reports being hidden and a 

complete lack of public consultation. And I do realize, Mr. 

Speaker, that public consultation is a novel concept to the party 

opposite. But to the member from Regina Walsh Acres: do you 

support our party‟s fresh approach to being transparent in these 

issues while inviting public input? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I support an approach that is going 

to be all-inclusive of all the participants in Saskatchewan that 

want to take part in the process. And I support a process that 

provides expert information in that process so that the people 

that are participating in that process have access to all of the 

expert knowledge that they need. 

And I support a process, Mr. Speaker, that encompasses all the 

energy options that Saskatchewan has to offer so that the true 

process decisions can be made in the most viable fashion 

properly, and not in a biased fashion like the Sask Party 

government is offering on that side of the House in terms of a 

pro-nuclear, willy-nilly, no matter what it costs and no matter 

what the implications are, type of process that they‟re 

projecting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for 

the member for Lloydminster who spoke of the UDP and how 

all-encompassing it is on uranium issues and matters around 

that. And it‟s interesting that the government seems to trust one 

committee to do broad consultation on that but then chops it off 

there. 

 

Why is it that the government doesn‟t broaden the mandate so 

that we can look at all forms of energy? Why is it that the 

government doesn‟t want people to have access to information 

and then, if that happened, why wouldn‟t the government then 

trust people to make informed decisions? That‟s my question. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you. Thank you for the question. Mr. 

Speaker, as I said in my speech, the UDP was tasked with the 

value chain of uranium. One aspect of that is electricity 

generation as a potential. Now, Mr. Speaker, the UDP was 

tasked solely with that. It wasn‟t with other forms. 

 

What the members opposite put forward today was to instruct 

the government to undertake a comprehensive energy 

development partnership. Their motion had nothing to do with 

the UDP, yet I find it interesting many of their questions are 

directed at it. I think that maybe their motion could have been 

rewritten to more appropriately correspond with their interest. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that our government, by supporting 

this conversation and reaching out to ask them to join with us to 

have a bipartisan committee to move forward on this, I think is 

a positive thing and I hope that they grasp that olive branch and 

we can have this conversation together. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under our 

government, we have started the extensive public consultation 

process of the UDP report, looking at the future of the uranium 

industry in Saskatchewan. The NDP however want to delay this 

for months, preventing the public from having an immediate 

say in the process. Our party believes in the consultative 

process and offers to expand this by having public hearings 

through an all-party committee to look at the issue of power 

generation. 

 

To the member from Regina Coronation Park: do they support 

the all-party consultation process? 

 



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member from 

Biggar for the question. What we support is the people of 

Saskatchewan being informed on energy choices — all of the 

energy choices. If the people of Saskatchewan had that 

information, then we could have the broad public consultation 

that is required. 

 

As I said in my speech, we have a rare opportunity to look at all 

of the information and then trust the people of Saskatchewan 

with that information. I think they‟ll make the best from an 

environmental perspective, they‟ll make the best choices from a 

cost perspective, and they‟ll certainly make the best choices for 

themselves. I just don‟t understand why the government seems 

to not trust the people of Saskatchewan with that broad 

information. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. An 

important debate here we‟re having, but of course we‟ve seen 

the quality of reports over the last several months coming forth 

from this government. 

 

And I just want to ask the side opposite, in terms of how much 

support will they have for the quality of reports. We‟ve seen 

reports that have just . . . why for example, the member from 

Batoche, what happened to his report? The member from 

Rosetown, we have yet to see his full report. And some we see 

just white pages; some we see black pages. I want to know from 

the member from Rosetown, will he make sure that this 

committee is supported fully with the funds of $3 million to 

make sure they can get their work done? Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 

member opposite for the question. And the member opposite 

will be very interested to know that my top secret report is 

available on the website. It was available as of budget day just 

as the Minister of Education, our Deputy Premier, promised. So 

I welcome that member to review the report, which I‟m very 

proud of. 

 

Our all-committee, the standing committee on Crowns and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, I 

welcome the hon. member opposite to read my top secret report 

which has been on the website since budget day, as our Deputy 

Premier had promised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as far as resources, the all-party committee, the 

standing committee on Crowns and agencies, we‟ll certainly 

assure the member opposite it will have significant resources. 

That‟s one of the reasons that we feel that this is the appropriate 

vehicle that should be used for this, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has sent conflicting 

messages to consumers about their plans for power generation 

in Saskatchewan. They have called on our government to 

provide rebates to ratepayers, but are now advocating for higher 

climate change targets even though their government took no 

action on climate change. Well as I and the member from 

Rosetown said earlier, you cannot have it both ways. Higher 

targets are passed on to consumers as higher rates. 

 

My question is to the member from Regina Coronation Park: 

does he support lower rates for consumers or higher targets 

which have to come at a higher price? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. 

member for Carrot River Valley. It‟s interesting that he says 

New Democrats did nothing. We went from zero wind 

electricity in our term to having more wind generated per 

person in Saskatchewan than any other jurisdiction in all of 

Canada. That‟s what we did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: — We put in place a $300 million fund for energy 

conservation that was cut by that government, one of the very 

first acts they made when they came into power. That was an 

opportunity for Saskatchewan people to really benefit from 

energy conservation, and unfortunately . . . 

 

The Speaker: — . . . the 10-minute question period. Private 

members‟ . . . Order. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Support for Low-Income Citizens 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m pleased to have the opportunity to rise today and 

speak on the private member‟s motion and I want to, right from 

the beginning, Mr. Speaker, read the motion into the record: 

 

That this Assembly supports the actions of this 

government and recognizes that our government has done 

more to help low-income people fight poverty in 16 

months than the previous NDP government did in 16 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s the wording of the motion that I am moving 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of places I want to begin, but as 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

always or as it usually happens, Mr. Speaker, something in a 

previous debate really provides me with a starting point for this 

debate. And the first issue I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is 

this back and forth talk about what reports were made public 

and the secret Reiter report that is on government websites and 

was available on budget day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it‟s interesting. The member for Saskatoon Centre, I 

believe, that was questioning whether or not the report was 

made public, and then something about another member of the 

government and a report, whether or not it‟s public. 

 

I do recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that prior to the election, just 

prior to the election, there was a little bit of confusion in the 

NDP ranks whether or not there was a housing issue, a housing 

problem in Saskatchewan. And the member from Dewdney said 

there wasn‟t a problem. And I believe it was the member for 

Saskatoon, the Health critic, Saskatoon Eastview, who then 

later, a couple of days later contradicted the member from 

Dewdney. 

 

And the NDP at the time, in the summer of 2007, conducted a 

housing task force, Mr. Speaker, and I don‟t believe the 

recommendations were ever made public, Mr. Speaker. So that 

member really doesn‟t have any legs to stand on when he‟s 

questioning whether or not members of the government are 

forthcoming with reports and recommendations. And that is 

nothing to say of the work that was commissioned by 

SaskPower under the NDP and reports that were never put 

forward to the public. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, I just wanted to put that on the 

record before I got into the main part of my comments this 

afternoon. Before I begin, and I probably don‟t do this enough, 

but I do want to thank the staff in our caucus office for helping 

me prepare for today, particularly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Cole 

Schulz who‟s now on our research staff. And he did an 

excellent job. 

 

And I also want to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to make 

special mention of the resources that we do have here at the 

legislature, particularly at the Legislative Library. And I will be 

talking about some things that I came across in the library, and I 

want to thank the staff in the library for all their help that they 

give, not only to me but to all members of this legislature that 

use their services. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very serious topic in the province 

of Saskatchewan. The rate of poverty in our province, the 

reliance on assistance and on food banks, is something that I 

think that all members should be concerned about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I do want to first put on to the record some of the 

things that we as members of not only government but of this 

legislature and of this province, some things that we have to, 

that we really have to grapple with, some really tough issues, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[12:15] 

 

I‟m using a report that was done by the Canadian Centre for 

Policy Alternatives back in August of last year and using the 

census numbers from 2006, so it‟s a little dated based on the 

census numbers. But it still tells frankly a pretty sad record in 

this province that the overall poverty rate according to the 2006 

census, Mr. Speaker, is 15 per cent higher than the overall 

Canada poverty rate. For children in Saskatchewan under the 

age of 18, the poverty rate stands at almost 20 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker — nearly 5 per cent higher than the national average. 

In fact at the time of these statistics, Saskatchewan had the 

second highest rate of child poverty, Mr. Speaker. So certainly 

something that, regardless of where you sit in this Assembly, 

something that we all need to take note of because certainly 

there‟s always more work to be done on this front, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

In the course of the morning and early afternoon here, I want to 

talk about, obviously, as the motion says, I want to talk about 

what this government has done in 16 months of government, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also will be touching on what was done 

— or perhaps better stated what wasn‟t done — over the last 

16-year tenure of the government of the New Democrats and 

what‟s going to be . . . I thought is interesting when I was 

compiling the information for today, some of the things that 

we‟re hearing today from the NDP on what government should 

be doing. You know, they were in government for 16 years but 

now all of a sudden there‟s a problem and something needs to 

be done. 

 

So not only is it going to be a telling story of what the NDP did 

or didn‟t do in those 16 years, and also what they are now 

saying 16 months into being in opposition, but I also want to 

touch on — and as it works out it‟s about 16 months before they 

became government in 1991 — some of the things that they 

were talking about. So that‟s the general direction that I want to 

discuss this afternoon. 

 

I do want to begin by talking about what we‟ve done as a 

government. And I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s 

perhaps an impression or a feeling that the left wing socialist — 

if you want to call them — government would be the party and 

the government that would look after those that are having 

difficulties, that are low-income people, and that a party that 

isn‟t a left wing socialist government would certainly . . . 

Members opposite could probably fill in some adjectives and 

some descriptive words of what they believe that our concern is 

on this issue. 

 

But we, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think have a very good record 

16 months into government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that 

certainly what groups across the province have been saying 

about this government and the actions that we‟ve taken so far 

. . . And there‟s certainly more work to be done, but I‟m 

confident that we have the people on this side of the House to 

make it happen. 

 

And I want to point out, I do want to point out that there‟s been 

members, whether they‟ve been cabinet members, and I want to 

touch on the work of the Education minister. And I want to talk 

about a little bit of what the Minister for Advanced Education 

has done, but also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, private members. 

 

Certainly my close colleague from Saskatoon Northwest who 

has been a staunch champion of those who need assistance from 

government, those who are vulnerable in our society; my good 

friend, the member for Saskatoon Sutherland, who speaks 

passionately on this issue every time that she takes to the floor 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

of the Assembly. So there‟s a number of people and a number 

of different areas that people on this side of the House have put 

a great deal of time into. 

 

But I do want to say, and I want to single out our Minister for 

Social Services, Mr. Speaker. I couldn‟t be more pleased and 

proud to be associated with a Minister of Social Services who, 

for example, makes an announcement in this building and when 

she walks in the room the stakeholders give her a standing 

ovation. She hasn‟t even made the announcement yet, Mr. 

Speaker, and they are recognizing her. 

 

And I think the minister, the member for Humboldt, the 

Minister for Social Services, has been a tireless worker in this 

government on these important issues. She‟s certainly very 

passionate. I‟ve had dealings with her office, and her staff have 

been tremendous to work with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I just 

can‟t say enough about the work that she has done on behalf of 

this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I do want to touch on some of the initiatives that she has 

brought forward but the place I want to begin, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is . . . And I know members opposite aren‟t, you 

know, they kind of deride the record, for whatever reason, the 

record income tax cuts that we did as a government as what was 

announced by the Premier in October, and some that apparently 

they‟re not too in favour of. And certainly they put forward an 

argument that you can‟t just do tax cuts and that‟s going to fix 

the world, and we‟re not saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 

it‟s certainly been an important part of what we are doing on 

this entire file. 

 

The announcement that was made in October of the largest 

single-year income tax reduction in Saskatchewan history is a 

tremendous change for the people of this province, particularly 

when you look at for the longest time in this province . . . And 

this goes back even when the NDP were in opposition in the 

1980s, but in fact the record got a little bit worse at the 

beginning of their term. But, Mr. Speaker, the lowest income 

people in this province were the highest taxed out of any 

jurisdiction in Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

With the changes that we‟ve made, for example, a working 

family in Saskatchewan with two children now can earn up to 

$41,300 before they pay any provincial income tax, Mr. 

Speaker. And to put this in perspective, that is the highest level 

of any province. And I think it‟s another reason why 

Saskatchewan is continuing to see population growth, why we 

are continuing to see people move into Saskatchewan and few 

of our people leaving the province, as was the record under the 

NDP. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the basic personal exemption and the 

spousal exemptions will increase by $4,000 while the child tax 

credit will be increased by $2,000 per child. That means that a 

tax saving of $440 per year for an individual or $1,300 per year 

for a working family with two children, Mr. Speaker. This is 

significant. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the most significant parts of 

this . . . and my good friend from Saskatoon Northwest, I could 

hear him. It‟s hard not to hear him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 

could hear him say that this has taken 80,000 low-income 

taxpayers off the tax rolls altogether, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And to put this in perspective there was a time — and I will get 

into this a little bit later — but there was a time when the 

number of people, the percentage of people in Saskatchewan 

that live in poverty was at a certain percentage towards the late 

1980s, early 1990s. And when the NDP took over in 1991, the 

percentage actually increased, Mr. Speaker. And then there 

were some years of a reduction towards the late 1990s. And last 

night I came across a news release, and I believe the minister 

was Glenn Hagel at the time, and he said that one of the 

reasons, one of the big reasons why there is a slight reduction in 

poverty in Saskatchewan — this was in the late 1990s — was 

that income tax changes were going to take, I believe the 

number was about 35,000 people off the tax rolls. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if at that time it was going to take 35,000, 

imagine a province where 80,000 people — because of the 

things that we are doing — 80,000 people will no longer pay, 

be off the tax rolls altogether, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also want to talk a little bit about just the fact that the 

maximum tax credits for eligible families with children will be 

increased to $600 per year. That‟s more than, or it is double 

what it was under the NDP. And this will provide tax savings 

for 300,000 lower income provincial residents, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And one of the other things that I do want to touch on — 

because I think that it is important, and it maybe gets lost in the 

bigger numbers of 80,000 people being off the tax rolls or 

300,000 lower income people benefitting from the increasing, 

the doubling of the tax credits — is the fact that we are 

eliminating tax refunds from the income calculations for 

programs such as SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan] and TEA 

[transitional employment allowance] and the new income 

support for programs for people with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that, I think that‟s an important point — that if people are 

going to get a tax refund, lower income people are going to get 

a tax refund, they shouldn‟t see that clawed back on their 

calculations for other programs like it was under the NDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a little more that I do want 

to talk about on the income tax. I know that the members 

opposite will criticize the government that all we think that you 

need to do is cut income taxes and everything‟s rosy. And we 

certainly believe that income taxes should be low so that people 

of Saskatchewan are competitive with other jurisdictions. 

 

But nobody on this side is going to say that all we need to do is 

cut income taxes and everything is going to be great and 

everybody is going to have more money in their pockets. They 

certainly will, but there‟s other things that need to be done to 

help lower income people and those that are struggling with 

poverty and those working families, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

are just looking to be able to continue with their jobs and have 

appropriate and safe child care in the province. And I do want 

to touch on that in a moment. 

 

But I do, before I leave on the income tax piece, I do want to 

commend the government, our government, for the further tax 

savings of $22 million in 2009. And as the personal income tax 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2845 

brackets and personal tax credits are indexed to the national rate 

of inflation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so this is all very positive 

news. 

 

Now I do want to now move into another area. And I find it a 

little bit, I‟m not going to use the word hypocritical, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, although certainly people can make that argument. But 

passing strange is maybe a better way of saying it, where the 

member for Saskatoon, I believe Saskatoon Centre, for a 

number of days in this session — I don‟t know if he‟s done it 

every day; I don‟t know if he‟s got petitions every day, but 

certainly on a lot of days — and this was just yesterday, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and he introduced a petition calling for wage 

equity for CBOs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And he says, as we 

know, the research demonstrates that CBOs are paid . . . And he 

goes on. 

 

Now the interesting thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that under 

our government, in 16 months, we have increased funding for 

CBOs by 13.3 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was originally 

2.9 per cent, I believe, in the first budget, then there was a lift of 

another 7 per cent, which was 9.3 after the first year. And then 

this year‟s budget was 3 per cent. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Good news. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thirteen point three per cent. Certainly good 

news. 

 

And this goes back to the point on our Social Services minister, 

how she possibly is the most popular Social Services minister in 

recent history, certainly in my lifetime, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it doesn‟t, you know, it‟s funny the places where people 

stop you that are associated with CBOs — it happens in my 

constituency — and just how delighted they are. 

 

Because here‟s the record that the member opposite, who wants 

us to do more for CBOs — and certainly there‟s more that 

needs to be done on different areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but 

their record from 2004 to the end of their term was 8 per cent 

over four years. There was a 1 per cent lift, a 1 per cent, a 3 per 

cent, and a 3 per cent. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we certainly 

have done a lot better in that regard. 

 

And I‟m not quite finished; in fact I can go on and on. I was a 

little worried I wouldn‟t have enough to talk about. And as I see 

the time going pretty fast, there‟s going to be so much to talk 

about in this motion that demonstrates how we are really doing 

what the motion says, doing more in 16 months than the NDP 

did in 16 years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to talk about shelter rate 

increases. And I think this is something that‟s really key, 

especially in a growing economy. We are in a province right 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is . . . Certainly we are not 

immune to what is going on in the rest of the world and the rest 

of Canada, but I think I can safely speak for, not only members 

on this side of the House but I think for everybody in the 

province, that I‟d much rather be in Saskatchewan than 

anywhere else. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — And frankly, Mr. Speaker, I feel that way 

about our province in the worst of times — meaning an NDP 

government. So certainly in the best of times, as we‟ve seen in 

the last couple of years, there‟s no better place to be. 

 

But this means that there‟s going to be pressures on rent are 

increasing. And I certainly know that that‟s happening in the 

city of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, because we‟re seeing an influx 

of new families. So I think it was important that the shelter 

allowances increased in Saskatchewan to help those most 

affected by escalating housing costs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

is essential to a growing economy to help low-income people 

meet the rising cost of affordable housing. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was an increase by the NDP. 

There were two increases in the shelter allowance — one in 

1992 and one in 2005, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In a 16-year span, 

they increased it twice. What we are going to do is we will be 

— and this came out of the housing task force which, unlike the 

NDP housing task force, our recommendations were made 

public. Ted Merriman and former MLA Bob Pringle did a 

tremendous amount of work. Bipartisan commission, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Hopefully the members opposite will use that 

as an example on what we want to do on energy. But a 

bipartisan committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they did some 

great work. 

 

Their recommendations were made public, unlike the NDP 

housing task force in the dying days of their government which, 

I don‟t think, I‟m not even sure it‟s seen the light of day. 

Frankly I‟m not even sure it‟s on paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

How would we know, though? Nobody‟s ever seen it. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker on the shelter rates, the other thing 

that we are going to do on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 

province will now look at changing those rates twice a year, 

indexing those rates twice a year, based on the rental market 

data compiled for those individual communities. So the NDP 

record over 16 years is two increases. Period. Ours is going to 

be two every year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I was doing a little bit of . . . When I find some time, I like 

to spend some time in the Legislative Library. There‟s lots of 

good information, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of the things 

that I came across was a report — and I will give credit to the 

NDP because this was one of the reports that they did do that 

they did make public and it‟s certainly open for members of the 

public — and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the report was entitled 

Hunger and poverty: something can be done. This was 

published by the NDP caucus in November 1989, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. This was authored by Roy Romanow, Leader of the 

Opposition; Peter Prebble, Social Services critic — who I‟ll 

have a little more to say on a little bit, hopefully I get time to 

get to that — Herman Rolfes, the Advanced Education critic; 

Louise Simard, Health critic; Anne Smart, seniors and housing 

critic; Bob Pringle, family issues critic, who we‟ve already 

talked about this afternoon; Glenn Hagel, Labour and 

Environment critic; and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDPs 

Education critic at the time in 1989, the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

Now one of the things that they . . . There‟s a lot of 

recommendations in this report, most that they, I don‟t believe, 

got to in 16 years. They didn‟t get around to it. It‟s interesting 

the member for Saskatoon Centre wonders where the plan is for 

this government on poverty, on low-income issues. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP had a plan; they just didn‟t follow it 

apparently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And one of the recommendations which is interesting, that I 

found was interesting, was that the shelter allowance rates — 

which we‟re talking about, which I just talked about earlier — 

be increased. And it didn‟t say on a six-month basis or an 

annual basis, but at least they talked about an increase, but it be 

increased to reflect the real housing costs in each of those 

communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, apparently the NDP didn‟t get 

around to it in 16 years. The Minister for Social Services on this 

side of the House, on this Saskatchewan Party government, has 

put this into place, and it‟s something I‟m very proud to say that 

we‟re going to do and we‟re going to do twice a year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So one of the things that they just didn‟t get around to, even 

though they wrote a report . . . I mean if you‟re going to write a 

report, surely you‟re going to try to follow it, try to, you know 

. . . You‟re telling the people . . . This was two years before the 

provincial election, so you‟re trying to show the people what 

you‟re going to do if you form government, but one of the 

things that they just didn‟t get to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You probably need a drink of water. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — I do. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so one of the 

other things I do want to talk about — and this is certainly 

something that has been very important in my constituency, 

particularly in the city of Weyburn — we have a great, a fairly 

high number of seniors in the city of Weyburn and in other 

parts of the constituency. But I live in Weyburn and so that‟s 

where I would know that from, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we‟ve 

expanded the seniors‟ income plan to include over double the 

number of seniors who were previously eligible to receive 

assistance. That number is now 18,000 people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can‟t think of a better, you know, a 

better way to thank our seniors for what they‟ve done for our 

province, for building our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

know that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP, when they were in 

government, one of the ways that they honoured seniors was to 

put in place what was called the gold plan. That was for free 

park entry, free angling licence, a discount on STC, and a free 

photo ID and also a gold pin, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we‟ve decided that perhaps we need to look at the senior 

income plan, and have not only doubled the number of seniors 

that are eligible, but we‟ve also made changes to the income 

that they can report to be eligible for it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The other thing, what this does with increasing the numbers is it 

also increases the number of seniors that qualify for free eye 

exam, free chiropractic services, a reduced deductible on their 

drugs, a home care subsidy, and several other initiatives that I 

think are positive, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to talk about a few other 

things before I move into talking a little bit more about the 

record of the NDP. 

 

We‟ve improved and increased the mileage rates for Social 

Services clients for travel such as to medical appointments to, I 

believe it is now 22 cents a kilometre, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

from a low of 10 kilometres in the early days of the NDP. They 

did make some increases but we have had to increase that 

further, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also want to talk about something that our Social Services 

minister has done that is, I think, one of those stories — and I‟m 

certainly going to try to make sure that my constituents know 

more about it because the more that people know about it, you 

know, frankly the more that it shows that this government is 

doing good things for people that need some help from the 

government — and that is the rates for the food allowance in 

group homes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the last time 

the NDP touched the food allowance for group homes was in 

2000, so roughly the last seven years of their government they 

didn‟t see fit to increase it. And I think that was probably at a 

time when, in those seven years, costs were going up, food 

costs were . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sure, I think that that 

is true. 

 

So what we see now, not only the fact that we‟ve raised it after 

a seven-year window where the NDP didn‟t raise it, but when 

you put into context, how much we‟ve actually raised it. For a 

group home for adults with intellectual disabilities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the rate when the NDP left government was $4.85 per 

person per day. That rate is now $9 because of the work by our 

Social Services minister. Mr. Deputy Speaker, group homes for 

youth, the rate under the NDP when they left government was 

$5 per person per day. It is now $9 per person per day, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Certainly I want to again give a tremendous 

amount of credit to our Minister for Social Services for 

addressing this issue after years and years and years of neglect, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s things . . . I could talk about 

increasing the rates for those on the social assistance plan or the 

transitional employment assistance. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there‟s also increasing for the people, shelter aid for people on 

the provincial training allowance have gone up. I‟ve already 

spoken about the group home allowance that has increased and 

the CBO funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the list goes on and 

on of areas that I can talk about, and perhaps if I run a little 

short, I‟ll come back to these. But I do want to move on, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the things . . . And I want to commend, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the member for Lloydminster in a previous debate in 

this House who really did a great job of talking about the 

affordability issue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And he did an 

excellent job of making sure that people look at the 

affordability issue, not just in the cost of what you need to 

spend, whether it‟s food or shelter or clothing, but affordability 

is also the ability to pay for what you need. 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I want to refer to is the fact that 

in Saskatchewan the average weekly earnings are up over 

January by 6.3 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The average 

weekly earnings are over $800 in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That is the second-largest growth in wages in Canada, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it is the third-highest average weekly 

earnings on a total basis — not as a percentage, but on a total 

basis. We‟re number three. 

 

So when you look at the issue of affordability, people in 

Saskatchewan are . . . And certainly we‟re not saying that 

there‟s no issues out there. Certainly there‟s people that are still 

dealing with issues of low income and of poverty, but incomes 

are rising in Saskatchewan faster than almost anywhere in 

Canada. The number of jobs are increasing, I think, more than 

anywhere in the entire country. Certainly you wouldn‟t want to 

be living in any other province if you‟re looking for work, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So that‟s an important point. We have the 

lowest unemployment rate in all of Canada, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Now I want to refer back to that paper that was done by the 

NDP in 1989, the paper was Hunger and poverty: something 

can be done. Now, Mr. Speaker, I agree something can be done. 

The NDP just didn‟t do it. They didn‟t get to it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the clear . . . And I 

want to quote from the document. This is on page 4. It wasn‟t a 

very lengthy document, but page 4, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is, and 

this is a quote, “The one clear solution put forward by 

participants . . .” And this is in terms of reducing hunger and 

poverty. They travelled around the province to four 

communities or something like that, but, “The one clear 

solution put forward by participants was achieving full 

employment.” So the NDP solution, one of the solutions for 

reducing poverty was full employment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Certainly I‟m not certain whether we can ever say that there is 

full employment. I don‟t believe that you can say that there is 

never going to be anybody that is receiving some sort of 

assistance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But certainly this government 

can point to our record of job growth, of leading the nation in 

the low unemployment rate, leading the nation in the increasing 

wages. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we are certainly doing a 

good job in that regard ensuring that even in a time of economic 

uncertainty that people are still working in Saskatchewan and 

have opportunities to work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I know that 

the government website — I‟m not sure what the most 

up-to-date number is — but there are still jobs available in 

Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, one of my colleagues, I believe the member from 

Yorkton, says it‟s around 6,000 right now. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly we agree with what the NDP 

were saying in 1989 that you need to move people into 

employment. Now the record over those 16 years was driving 

people out of the province. So I‟m not sure if that was a part of 

getting to full employment, that, you know, you just get rid of 

those extra people that you have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m not 

sure of that. But now we all are also seeing good news when it 

comes to the number of women that are employed in the 

province growing by 3.8 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 

last year . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I believe it‟s the 

highest ever as members are helping me out, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So that‟s great news for people in the province. More work to 

be done. We know that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But whether you 

talk about the increasing number of women that are working in 

the province or increasing number of First Nations and Métis 

people that are working in the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

certainly we‟re committed to ensuring that our economy — 

despite what‟s happening in the economy, in the world 

economy and the North American economy — that we have an 

economy that is still strong and still producing jobs and enticing 

people back to Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I do want to talk a little bit about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

do want to talk a little bit about some of the things that 

members opposite have said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they 

were in opposition or leading into becoming the government. 

And one of the things that this report — and they talked a lot 

about it — but the report that they produced in 1989 was, 

essentially was their blueprint for ending poverty in the 

province of Saskatchewan which . . . It‟s certainly a laudable 

goal. I mean, I don‟t think there‟s a person in this province that 

would say that that‟s not a good idea, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 

certainly, you can‟t fault them for putting forward a belief, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that we need to end poverty. 

 

Now as the record of the NDP has turned out, it‟s a little more 

difficult than just putting together a report and saying that 

you‟re going to end poverty and you‟re going to have full 

employment. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. You got to do something. 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Yes. It‟s a little more difficult than that. I 

mean, that‟s about as easy as saying that by a snap of the finger, 

you‟re going to end poverty, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I mean, 

certainly it‟s going to take a lot of work to raise people out of a 

vulnerable situation, to raise them out of poverty, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Now one of the things that they talked about, one of the 

recommendations was a timeline by their government, once 

they formed government, to establish yearly targets to meet the 

goal of full employment. Well I don‟t think that lasted very 

long, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They certainly realized that that 

wasn‟t going to happen and so quickly abandoned that goal. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I want to quote from page 4 

again, quote: “Our goal is to build a province in which there are 

no hungry children or adults and therefore no need for food 

banks or meal programs in our schools,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Now 1989, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was about 10 years old, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, so I certainly don‟t remember members 

opposite and their goals. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly the 

benefit of Hansard and the Legislative Library bring a lot back 

to us. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn‟t just in opposition. And I 

know that this has been mentioned often, or a few times in the 

last couple of years, but the Leader of the Opposition when he 

was a member of, in fact when he was a new member of 



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2009 

government — he was elected I believe in 1986 and became a 

government member in 1991 — and, Mr. Speaker, this is what 

he had to say in the House on December 11, 1991 as a member 

of the new government that: 

 

And how can we forget for even a moment in this House, 

Mr. Speaker, particularly on a day when we have 

recognized the UN declaration for the child, how for a 

moment in this House can we forget that in northern 

Saskatchewan we have children living in conditions that 

are not unlike third world conditions? How can we for a 

moment forget that just blocks from this legislature, 

blocks from these marble steps, there are children who go 

to school hungry on a daily basis? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, now certainly he recognized that there was 

a problem, Mr. Speaker. And he went on to say, and I want to 

put this into the record: 

 

Mr. Speaker, we dream. We in this government dream of 

a province where at the turn of the 21st century, like the 

soup kitchens of the 1930s, the food banks of the 1980s 

and ‟90s will be a thing of the past. Mr. Speaker, we 

dream of an end to poverty in this province and we say 

why not? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, now certainly the record hasn‟t been 

favourable to the dreams of that member. And I don‟t want to, 

certainly don‟t want to in a personal way disparage the career of 

the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. He‟s certainly served this 

province for a long number of years and has achieved the 

highest elected office in this province. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it‟s one thing to talk about words; it‟s another to 

follow through with actions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they had 

16 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now whether or not we could even say that 16 years was 

enough to totally end poverty, that‟s one thing. Perhaps it 

wasn‟t. But even to put a dent into it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

the numbers didn‟t bear out. In 2005 Saskatchewan had the 

highest number of children using food banks, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Just a terrible, terrible record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there were other members. There 

was a former member of the NDP, former member of the NDP, 

Peter Prebble, who I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I 

get into what his remarks were, regardless of what you feel of 

Mr. Prebble‟s politics, in the short time that we served in the 

Chamber together I have to say that I on a personal basis really 

enjoyed speaking with Mr. Prebble, regardless of our 

differences. I think he was a person that, before he became a 

politician, before he was elected, his time in government, and 

after he left, he was fairly consistent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I 

give him that much, unlike members that I think we can name, 

but we won‟t, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we don‟t have the 

time. 

 

But in the final remaining moments he talked about ending an 

eight-year freeze in some of the income supports that were put 

in place by the government of the day in the 1980s, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, which certainly that‟s a very good point, a debatable 

point whether or not, you know certainly things change in eight 

years so shouldn‟t we see an end to a freeze in eight years. But 

as I‟ve already shown, Mr. Speaker, and as the Minister for 

Social Services has shown on a number of occasions, the shelter 

rate wasn‟t touched save for two occasions for 16 years — 1992 

and I believe 2005 — wasn‟t touched. There was another 

program that I talked about, in seven years. I think it was the 

food allowance for group homes wasn‟t touched for seven 

years. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s certainly difficult for members 

opposite. And they even tried it today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

some of the question period they tried it today to say, well that‟s 

your record; you‟re the government. And certainly we accept 

the responsibility. We want to be on this side of the House 

because we know that there are issues, a lot of them that were 

left over by the government opposite, and we want to deal with 

those issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But for the members 

opposite to have this, you know this attitude like as my mother 

would say . . . And by the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, happy 

birthday to my mother. It was her birthday yesterday so I want 

to say that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Duncan: — But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my mother 

would say, this holier-than-thou attitude, Mr. Speaker, that 

everything that they did was just in keeping with the social 

progress and the social principles of the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation], Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 

one of the proofs that that isn‟t the case is look at their 

membership numbers. Look at their membership numbers. 

 

In the face of a leadership campaign with four candidates, the 

first one for the NDP in I think seven or eight years and the 

numbers are, I mean they‟re not really there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They‟ve gone up a bit but they‟re not that great, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And it‟s interesting when we get into the 

House and the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow who, 

rumour has it she‟s running for the leadership for the NDP, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. You wouldn‟t really notice it from kind of 

what‟s going on out there. But she talks about questions of 

equality and in terms of wages between men and women. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they had 16 years. They talked about it. 

 

I have here the member from Saskatoon Nutana on April 2, 

1990, Mr. Deputy Speaker, complaining about the government 

freezing assistance for five and six and seven years. No 

different than their record when they were in government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I have her on the record, the member from 

Nutana, April 2, 1990 talking about making sure that there are 

employment opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Which we‟re 

doing as a government, Mr. Speaker, making sure that the 

economy is producing jobs, unlike the record of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the great ones from that member 

from 1990 is criticizing the government that they didn‟t put 

money into poverty in the 1980s because they were giving 

money to Cargill and they were giving money to different 

businesses. Little bit hard today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, based on 

their record of losing money all across the world. And the 

member from Wood River can certainly go an hour just on that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So as I get to the end of my time, I was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 



April 23, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

little bit worried that I wasn‟t going to have an opportunity to 

get to all of my comments, and I haven‟t. But I do want to 

move: 

 

That this Assembly supports the actions of this 

government and recognizes that our government has done 

more to help low-income people fight poverty in 16 

months than the previous NDP government did in 16 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — The member for 

Weyburn-Big Muddy has moved: 

 

That this Assembly supports the actions of this 

government and recognizes that our government has done 

more to help low-income people fight poverty in 16 

months than the previous NDP government did in 16 

years. 

 

It now being past the hour of 1 o‟clock, this House stands 

adjourned until 1:30 Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2821 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2822 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2822 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2822 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2822 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2822 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2822 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2822 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2823 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2823 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2823 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Prince Albert Toppers Volleyball Club 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2823 

 Saskatchewan Union of Nurses Celebrates 35th Anniversary 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 2824 

 2009 National Elks Curling Championship 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 

 Northern Athlete 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2824 

 Indian Head Blooms  

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2824 

 World Renowned Pianist Performs in Saskatoon 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2825 

 Climate Change Targets 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2825 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Forest Management 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2825 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2826 

 Cost of Living 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2827 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2827 

 SaskPower Rates 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2827 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2828 

 Support for Low-Income Citizens 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2828 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2828 

 Study of Energy Options 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2829 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2829 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2831 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2831 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2831 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Proposal for Study of Energy Options 

  Furber ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2831, 2841 

  Reiter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2834, 2842 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 2835, 2841 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2836 

  Morin ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2838, 2841 

  McMillan ....................................................................................................................................................................... 2839, 2841 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2841 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2841 



 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2842 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2842 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Support for Low-Income Citizens 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2842 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


