




















































Hansard: November 05, 2009


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 10A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 2009, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3455 

 November 5, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my great 

pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly a class of 22 grade 8 students, along 

with their two teachers, who go to St. Edward School in the 

heart of Saskatoon Massey Place constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

These students, Mr. Speaker . . . Well their teachers are Dustin 

Kasun and Mel Sysing, along with the 22 students. 

 

The teachers are involved with a unique program for these 

students. It‟s called the eco-justice education program and it‟s 

education through an environmental and social justice lens, Mr. 

Speaker. I don‟t know too much about this program, but from 

my first reading of it, it sounds quite like a promising and 

important thing that students will be learning here in the 

province. 

 

St. Edward School is a great school. I was there a few months 

ago for the Walk to Breakfast event. St. Edward School is one 

of the winners of the province-wide competition for nutrition, 

so we had a great event there with the Lieutenant Governor. So 

I welcome these students to their legislature and look forward to 

meeting with them later. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River, the 

Minister Responsible for Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly I‟d like to introduce a group of very special guests 

sitting in your gallery today. It‟s a pleasure to introduce Captain 

Greg Evans. Captain Evans is currently the area cadet officer 

for the army cadets. He has been an active leader in the cadet 

community since 1968. He is joined by Master Warrant Officer 

Brenden LaHaye representing the army cadet corps, Warrant 

Officer Second Class Todd Johnson representing the air cadet 

squadrons, and Nelly Zepeda representing the sea cadet corps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are currently seven royal Canadian sea cadet 

corps in Saskatchewan. There are also 16 army cadet corps and 

40 air cadet squadrons. As part of their training they learn about 

civic responsibility, leadership, and living a healthy, active life. 

They often show leadership qualities that exceed their peers, 

and are active and engaged in communities across our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members and the people of our 

province, I‟d like to express our appreciation for the 

contributions made by cadets in Saskatchewan. And I would 

invite all members to join me in welcoming these very special 

guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Through 

you and to you to members of the House, I would love to join 

with the minister to welcome Captain Evans and the group here 

this morning. 

 

I have the opportunity in Moose Jaw to attend a number of 

cadet activities and they‟re always enjoyable. And it‟s great to 

see young people in Saskatchewan have the opportunities that 

are provided to them through cadets. And also pass along an 

appreciation and a thank you for the many people that 

volunteer, support the organization, and have contributed a 

great deal of time to it. So again, thank you and welcome to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I note as well seated in the Speaker‟s gallery 

is Acting Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. David Wilkie. And I 

invite members to extend him a welcome to his chambers. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of the citizens of Mamawetan Churchill 

Health Region, where there is a great growing wait-list for 

long-term care beds and an increase in the aging population. 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by citizens of La Ronge and Air 

Ronge. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

these workers in community-based organizations have 

traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn poverty 

level wages. And research has shown that on average they earn 

8 to $10 per hour less than employees performing work of equal 

value in government departments. I‟d like to read the prayer 

now: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. And as in duty bound, your 

petitioners will ever pray. 

 



3456 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

And Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the city of 

Regina. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

to repair Highway No. 123 that goes to the community of 

Cumberland House, Saskatchewan This petition is signed by the 

leadership and community members of the village of 

Cumberland House and the Cumberland House First Nation. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and area. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for students here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, through the necessary expansion of 

the graduate retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water, who yet have no commitment of assistance. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good 

residents of Duck Lake. I so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand and present a petition 

in support of maintaining quality health care services. Mr. 

Speaker, residents of Saskatchewan are concerned and hope that 

the government realizes the value and range of professional 

skills offered by health care providers and hope that they 

promote this by addressing retention and recruitment issues and 

by ensuring safe workplaces. Mr. Speaker, the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by residents of Dalmeny, Wakaw, 

Maple Creek, and Piapot. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords residents who have faced notices of 

rent increases of 40 per cent and who face an accommodation 

rate that‟s very low. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are all residents of Killdeer 

Apartments in the city of North Battleford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m honoured 

to rise and present petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan 

residents that are concerned with the unprecedented 

mismanagement of their finances by the Sask Party. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens and good folks 

from Maple Creek, Estevan, Carievale, and Saskatoon. I so 

present. 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3457 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

make a personal statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to make a 

personal statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday in the Assembly, I made an inappropriate 

remark to the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to apologize for it and withdraw that 

remark. My remark may create the incorrect impression that I 

have influence over police investigations, which I do not. 

Therefore I apologize for that remark. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Honouring Canadian Cadet Corps 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure today to stand and recognize the thousands of cadets 

across our province. It was last year at this time when this 

Assembly passed the cadet recognition day Bill, which declared 

the first Saturday of November as Cadet Day in Saskatchewan. 

 

The cadet corps plays an important role in the lives of 

thousands of young people in Saskatchewan and Canada for 

close to 150 years. Mr. Speaker, graduates of the army and navy 

cadets served in both World War I and World War II. And in 

1940, the air cadets were formed. Graduates also served proudly 

in World War II. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was a proud air cadet from the 675 Bow Valley 

Squadron at Oxbow. However to dispel any rumours, I did not 

serve in World War II but I would have, had I been born and 

old enough. 

 

Cadets learn leadership, technical skills, discipline, teamwork, 

and citizenship as well as some of the fun things like sailing, 

mountaineering, abseiling, flying, gliding, and attending cadet 

camp. These are valuable traits which will help any young 

person meet the challenges of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Cadet Recognition Day recognizes the young men 

and women who belong to the air, army, and navy sea cadets. 

As well it also recognizes the work and dedication of cadet 

officers and leaders as well as the commitment made by parents 

of cadets. Through the cadets, our society is investing in today‟s 

youth as well as Canada and Saskatchewan‟s future. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

Saskatchewan Association for Community Living 

Family Gathering 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday evening I 

had the pleasure along with many other MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] to attend the Family Gathering event 

organized by the Saskatchewan Association for Community 

Living here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Family Gathering event is an opportunity for 

MLAs to meet with community members involved with the 

association. It‟s an opportunity to get to know one another on 

an informal basis, a basis of friendship. Mr. Speaker, probably 

the best way to get to know someone better is to share a meal 

together. I know I thoroughly enjoyed the conversation at my 

table as we filled up on pizza and chatted about life. 

 

Over the course of the evening, I heard about the issues that 

matter to families — whether that was about transportation 

needs, community supports, or recommendations on how things 

could be improved. 

 

I also heard about important initiatives like the self advocacy 

action group. I was pleased to hear about the goals and mission 

of this group, as well as the many accomplishments they have 

achieved. I was excited to hear about a trip they have planned to 

attend a world conference on self advocacy in Berlin, Germany. 

I wish them well in their fundraising efforts, and I‟m sure this 

will be a most worthwhile trip. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members, I want to sincerely 

thank the staff, families, and association members for their 

hospitality in hosting the Family Gathering. I know I speak for 

all MLAs when I say we are appreciative for the opportunity to 

meet and we wish the Saskatchewan Association for 

Community Living all the best as they carry on their important 

work for the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 

November 2nd to November 6th, our province is recognizing 

our manufacturing industry. Mr. Speaker, the focus of this week 

is to celebrate our province‟s manufacturing expertise, the 

successes our businesses and communities are achieving, and to 

highlight the training and career opportunities that are available 

in Saskatchewan‟s vibrant and innovative manufacturing sector. 

 

Saskatchewan produces a number of products which include 

machinery, transportation and industrial equipment, food, crop 

and beverage processing, wood products, and chemical 

manufacturing plants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a province we export about 75 per cent of what 

we manufacture, which is worth over $4 billion and employs 

over 31,000 people around the province. Some upcoming 

businesses that are putting Saskatchewan on the map include 

aerospace and defence, automotive accessories, and electronics 

and instrumentation. 

 



3458 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

[10:15] 

 

To recognize our province‟s industry, there are several events 

planned around the province. Events include workshops that 

focus on alternate energy, green jobs, and challenges facing 

manufacturing and building partnerships with other industries to 

grow our economy. Mr. Speaker, for dates and times please 

visit the Enterprise Saskatchewan website. And I call on every 

member of the Assembly to join with me in recognizing our 

manufacturing industry. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Pain Awareness Week 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 1st to 7th, 

2009 marks Pain Awareness Week across Canada. This offers 

an opportunity to not only shed light on pain and pain 

awareness, but also to highlight the gaps between what is 

known and what is practised in the treatment of all kinds of pain 

in Canada. 

 

National Pain Awareness Week offers us all an opportunity to 

reflect on the debilitating disorders that affect millions of 

people across our country. Approximately 3.5 million 

individuals across the country experience musculoskeletal pain 

affecting their overall health and well-being. While sometimes 

the cause of this pain is minor and easily remedied, others such 

as rheumatoid arthritis or fibromyalgia are much more serious. 

 

Fibromyalgia is a medically unexplained phenomenon 

characterized by chronic and widespread pain. This disorder 

affects 390,000 Canadians, over 80 per cent of which are 

women mostly in the 45- to 64-year-old age group. 

 

Events such as public forums, meetings, and information 

sessions are being held across the country this week to draw 

attention to pain and pain awareness. Representatives from the 

Canadian Pain Coalition are taking the time to provide 

professional and public education about the treatment and 

management of pain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in recognizing 

Pain Awareness Week and in congratulating the Canadian Pain 

Foundation on the great work they‟re doing to bring awareness 

to this very important issue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Community-Based Organization Workers 

Appreciation Day 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, the province has proclaimed 

November 6, 2009 as CBO Workers Appreciation Day in 

Saskatchewan. This proclamation is in recognition of the 

tremendous work being done by the staff of hundreds of 

community-based organizations, CBOs, across this great 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CBOs are an important part of the province‟s 

human service delivery service. These non-profit organizations 

and agencies are created by their communities to help address 

many of their local needs, including delivering services to about 

150,000 children, youth, families, and people with disabilities 

across the province. Some CBOs are supported by volunteers 

solely. Many will receive funding from a variety of sources 

including grants, donations, fees, and fundraising. The ongoing 

efforts of CBOs and their staff to help marginalized and at-risk 

Saskatchewan people deserve our utmost respect and 

recognition. 

 

Our government hopes that the proclamation of this special day 

will help raise awareness about the important roles of CBOs 

and their staff in our province. Hundreds of emergency shelters, 

group homes, daycares, crisis units, and many other much 

needed programs and services across Saskatchewan are staffed 

by CBO workers. They provide hope, dignity, and compassion 

to most of our most vulnerable citizens in our province. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join us in applauding this 

proclamation of November 6th as CBO Workers Appreciation 

Day in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Multicultural Council Anniversary 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Moose Jaw 

Multicultural Council, located in Moose Jaw Wakamow, is a 

non-profit organization which acts as an umbrella for other 

cultural groups in our community. It‟s operated by a volunteer 

board of directors and was formed in May 1974, making this 

their 35th anniversary. 

 

In 1989 the council began receiving funding to coordinate the 

programs that would ensure that newcomers had services 

available to them for successful integration. This is provided 

through programs and activities that respect the positive aspects 

of cultural diversity. 

 

The council promotes and encourages the retention of language 

and culture as essential components of multiculturalism. Many 

other services are provided including a quality and culturally 

sensitive daycare for newcomer children, a summer program for 

school-age children, volunteer interpreters and translators, as 

well as a quarterly production of a newsletter. 

 

Volunteers of the council also work to maintain the city-owned 

Happy Valley Park. This is a beautiful park that‟s home also to 

an annual three-day outdoor multicultural festival called Motif. 

 

I‟m pleased to join with the council and their supporters this 

evening as we celebrate, from many cultures, one community. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the staff and volunteers of the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council 

on their 35th anniversary. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw’s Strong Start Family Centre 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3459 

the exciting experience of bringing greetings at the grand 

opening celebrations of the Strong Start Family Centre in 

Moose Jaw. 

 

The Strong Start Family Centre had been a concept of family 

support and child care for over a decade as a group called the 

child action committee identified the need back in 1998. 

 

In 2007 the YMCA [Young Men‟s Christian Association] 

became involved as an initiative programming partner, which 

led to finding a suitable location that has now become the 

Strong Start Family Centre. The centre is a multi-service or 

one-stop shop for parenting support. There are programs for 

children aging from newborns to five years of age. It‟s a bright, 

clean environment for the staff and the parents and the children 

alike. The centre has a library, an indoor play space, parenting 

resources, a spacious boardroom, and a kitchen. It hosts an 

array of family service agencies including KidsFirst, parent 

mentoring, the Moose Jaw Transition House, the Literacy 

Network, and the Five Hills Health Region. 

 

The hard work, dedication, and community support from 

businesses as well as the public and separate school boards, plus 

the leadership of the YMCA . . . The Strong Start Family Centre 

is a valuable resource centre for the children and parents in 

Moose Jaw and the area. I‟d like to take this opportunity to 

congratulate them on their grand opening. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Public Safety Procedures 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is 

to the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. Last 

week the member from Dewdney asked the minister a number 

of times about a dangerous sexual offender who was released 

and at large illegally. And the minister, at that time, hid behind 

what he said was the police telling him not to release the 

information to the public. And on a number of occasions the 

member from Dewdney asked the minister which police force? 

The minister replied that the police had told him not to release 

the information. 

 

My question is this and it‟s a very serious question, and the 

public wants to know: which police force told him not to release 

the fact that a dangerous sexual offender was at large? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, that question was 

posed yesterday, and I will give my answer from yesterday. 

Plus I said I‟d take notice, and I have information that I will add 

to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to quote from paragraph 1 on page 1 

again, of CPSP‟s [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] 

incident reporting policy: 

 

Determination of whether or not an exception will be 

made regarding the issuance of a media advisory is at the 

discretion of the Deputy Minister, informed by advice 

from police and senior corrections officials. 

 

After my deputy received advice from senior Corrections 

officials who had several conversations with police, his 

recommendation to me was a news release would do nothing to 

enhance public safety because the individual was not aware he 

was unlawfully at large, was in full compliance with his 

probation conditions, was employed, and had a known address. 

In short the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] knew 

where he lived and worked and were in the process of picking 

him up. 

 

Now the addition I‟ll add today, Mr. Speaker, is I stated in my 

response yesterday that the RCMP were the police service that 

senior Corrections officials had several conversations with. I 

wanted to be sure that there were no other police services also 

involved before I answered the member‟s question yesterday. 

After discussion with my officials yesterday afternoon, I can 

confirm, all discussions with police occurred with the RCMP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question to the Minister of Policing is 

this. I understand that there were conversations and that there 

was consultation. But the minister told the House that a police 

force had told him not to release the information of a dangerous 

sexual offender at large. Nowhere in his answer has he 

indicated which police force told him not to release the 

information. That‟s the question. And the public deserves and 

we demand an answer for the public. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, if the member knows 

something more, I wish he would release it to me because I 

have stated — and I have stated again today — that senior 

Corrections officials talk to the RCMP. They talk to the RCMP. 

That‟s the way it is done. They talk to the RCMP. Then they 

make a recommendation to the deputy minister, and the deputy 

minister then makes the recommendation to me. That is exactly 

the process, and that‟s exactly what was followed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question again, my 

question again to the minister is simple. Did the RCMP tell the 

minister not to release the information that a dangerous sexual 

offender was at large illegally? Did the RCMP tell him to do 

that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know how 

much clearer I can be to the member opposite because I have 

stated already; it was senior Corrections people that talked to 

the RCMP not myself. 

 

The senior Corrections people made the recommendation 

because of their conversation with the RCMP to the deputy 

minister. The deputy minister did not speak to the RCMP. It‟s 



3460 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

the process that‟s established. It‟s the process that I read out. 

I‟m not sure what part of this that the member opposite does not 

understand. I can read the whole process again for him if he 

wishes, but I‟m sure he can read it in Hansard tomorrow to find 

out exactly what the process is. 

 

I did not speak to the RCMP. I acted on the advice from the 

senior Corrections people who did talk to the RCMP. I don‟t 

know what more I can tell the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — My question to the minister, because he 

still hasn‟t answered the question: which police force told him? 

Because his explanation to this Assembly and to the public was 

that the information was not released about the dangerous 

sexual offender because the police had told him not to release it. 

My question is, did the city police tell you not to release that 

information? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know if I 

have to write a note over to the member or not. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I can once again 

explain exactly what happened. I, I did not speak to the RCMP 

myself. I did not speak to the RCMP . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — I don‟t know how much clearer I 

can be. I did not speak to the RCMP. The process is Corrections 

officials spoke to the RCMP, and they advised the deputy 

minister who then advised me. I, again, did not speak to the 

RCMP. I, again, did not speak to any other police force. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, to be clear, the 

minister has told this Assembly on a number of occasions that 

he and his department were told by the police not to release the 

information about a dangerous sexual offender. 

 

My question to the minister is this. My question to the minister 

is this: did the RCMP tell the officials of the department of 

policing not to release the information? Did they say that to 

your department officials? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, from the 

conversations that the senior Corrections people had with the 

RCMP, the recommendation came forward not to release the 

document. 

 

I don‟t know what more I can say to the person. I do not have 

transcripts of what transpired in a telephone conversation or a 

face-to-face conversation. The member opposite should know 

that. 

 

I mean, I think the question here is more leading as to why 

some of the documents have not been returned. Here we have, 

here we have an injustice that‟s being faced by members in the 

Corrections, and documents have not been returned yet to the 

Corrections department. I think that‟s more of the question that 

we need to answer right now. Has the member from Dewdney 

apologized to the correction workers for his actions, and has he 

returned the documents he has to the deputy minister of 

Corrections? 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move on to the next question, I just 

want to remind members of the long-standing rule of placing 

the question through the Speaker. I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the 

minister. Just a few moments ago the minister rose in this 

House, with agreement from all the members of the Assembly, 

to apologize for the bullying that has gone on in this Assembly 

to the member from Dewdney, accusations about the RCMP 

would be coming to the home of the member from Dewdney, to 

his house, to arrest him. And he held his hands out like this, 

showing how it would happen. 

 

He rose and apologized. And now he‟s saying we‟re going to 

continue the witch hunt for the people who released the 

documents. In today‟s editorial in The StarPhoenix, and I quote, 

“In government, the Saskatchewan Party not only has shown 

zero interest in resurrecting the bill or living up to the 

principles, but we now have Mr. Hughebaert threatening a 

witchhunt for the whistleblower.” 

 

And he continues that today. I ask the minister: is the witch 

hunt over, Mr. Speaker, or does it continue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member wants 

to yell from his seat. In the preamble to a lot of questions today 

of the minister, the Leader of the Opposition has characterized, 

mischaracterized the comments in the original answers to this 

question from the Minister of Corrections. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Here‟s the Hansard, Mr. Speaker. In this 

House when asked the question when the details of the incident 

finally came out, the minister said: “. . . I would suggest, where 

in consultation with the police services whether it‟s at the best 

advice of the public whether it‟s notified or [it] is not. In 

consultation . . .  



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3461 

An Hon. Member: — Pick and choose. Pick and choose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well here‟s another quote. He says pick and 

choose. He said . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member‟s asked the question, had 

the opportunity to present the question without interference. I‟d 

ask the member now to allow the Premier to respond without 

interference. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — He also said the decision was made: 

 

. . . not to make a public announcement of this [This is in 

Hansard.] is because we were under the impression, with 

the police services [after consultation with the police 

services] that it might drive Mr. Wiebe underground. 

 

That‟s what the minister said. Now the minister has highlighted 

that the exact, right policies of the government have been 

followed, that officials at Corrections and Public Safety, after 

consulting with the RCMP, made a recommendation to the 

minister, actually to the deputy minister then the deputy to the 

minister, which he followed. He followed the recommendation 

of officials who gave him that considered opinion after 

consultation with the police service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is consistent with the remarks that he made 

when he originally answered the question, and it‟s consistent 

because it is the truth of the matter, Mr. Speaker. And I invite 

members opposite to consider these comments in Hansard, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier, 

and I‟m glad he‟s entered in the debate because there‟s a very 

serious question I want to ask him about the role of ministers. 

 

In The StarPhoenix editorial today, and I want to quote: 

 

So what happened to the principles of the Saskatchewan 

Party that, when it sat in Opposition, felt safeguarding the 

public was so important that it introduced its own 

whistleblower protection bill in 2004 to protect employees 

being fired, demoted, or otherwise punished for raising 

concerns about a provincial government agency or 

department, Crown corporation, health authority, 

municipality, university or school division? 

 

My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, my question to the 

Premier is this. In light of his statement a few moments ago, can 

he ensure and guarantee employees in our government that they 

are safe to speak out when public safety is at risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what you noted 

or what you perhaps didn‟t note in the hon. member‟s follow-up 

question, he had the opportunity just now to stand up and 

apologize for mischaracterizing the words of the Minister of 

Corrections. He didn‟t do it, Mr. Speaker. He didn‟t do it. 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — With respect to the particular question that 

the hon. member has asked, Mr. Speaker, contained in this file 

that has not yet been returned by the hon. member for Regina 

Dewdney is inmate information. That is confidential, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to be very clear, and I know the minister has directed his 

deputy to be very clear with officials in his ministry. And I 

made it clear to all the ministers of this government that they 

should do the same thing to officials of their ministry. That if 

they are concerned about any particular issue affecting the 

public as a result of the ongoing function of government, that 

they need to take those concerns to the appropriate official, Mr. 

Speaker. And if, Mr. Speaker, if there‟s no action taken as a 

result of that, then there can be certainly other actions taken by 

those civil servants to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier may finalize his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is a right way and a 

wrong way to bring this information forward. The wrong way is 

to potentially take confidential inmate information in violation 

of privacy, Mr. Speaker, and then provide it immediately, 

without going to any of these other steps, go immediately to a 

member of the opposition or even a member of the government 

for that matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome officials to be fully engaged 

in public safety and in the matters of public interest. But there is 

a right way, and there is a wrong way to do it. And right now, 

Mr. Speaker, the question remains, why have these files that do 

not belong to the member from Dewdney, these inmate 

confidential . . . why have they not yet been returned to the 

deputy minister of Corrections and Public Safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s not only the opposition 

who‟s accusing this government, the Sask Party government of 

a witch hunt. The StarPhoenix, which isn‟t a well-known 

supporter of the New Democratic Party, also says in today‟s 

editorial: “In government, the Saskatchewan Party not only has 

shown zero interest in resurrecting the bill or living up to its 

principles, but we now have Mr. Hughebaert threatening a 

witchhunt for the whistleblower.” That‟s in the editorial of one 

of our major newspapers. 

 

My question to the Premier: will he please stand in the House 

and apologize for the minister who started the witch hunt and 

fire that minister today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to say this. In this 

incident the Minister of Corrections has followed the advice of 

senior officials of the government. Mr. Speaker, it is senior 



3462 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

officials of this government who are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, senior officials of this 

government have highlighted how this information, this 

confidential inmate information is not to be taken from the 

workplace under any circumstances. And we know now that it 

is because the hon. member for Dewdney still has the file. We 

would ask the hon. member, through the Leader of the 

Opposition, to again to return that to officials. 

 

And with respect to the conduct of the Minister of Corrections, 

Mr. Speaker, and frankly the previous minister of Corrections, 

we have sought out . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There are a number of members on the 

opposition side who continue to interject when government 

ministers are trying to respond. It‟s totally inappropriate. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — For many years, Mr. Speaker, the practice 

of the previous government was no disclosure when there was a 

situation like this. Mr. Speaker, this government has . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres will come to order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this government has taken 

steps through the previous minister and of the current minister 

to address this situation. It‟s going to be a work-in-progress, but 

I‟ll tell you what. Erring on the side of disclosure, erring on the 

side of disclosure and providing that kind of service is a choice 

this government will make every single time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Proposed Stadium Development 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Crown 

Investments Corporation is funding a feasibility study into the 

government‟s proposal to build a new domed stadium in 

downtown Regina. All the media reports to date have placed the 

cost of this stadium at approximately $350 million. To the 

Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan]: can she confirm that the cost of the Regina 

domed stadium is only $350 million? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker, for the question. It is indeed a pleasure to answer 

questions on the feasibility study that has been undertaken. It‟s 

a partnership undertaken by the federal government, by the 

provincial government, by the city of Regina, and the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. The approximate cost of the study 

is $1 million to be shared by the province, 40 per cent; the 

federal government, 40 per cent; the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders, 10; and the city of Regina, 10 per cent. The study 

is under way. It began in the midsummer. We hope to have the 

information back in January-February of 2010. 

 

Very recently all members of the Legislative Assembly from 

Regina and area were invited to an open house to receive more 

information, and none of the members opposite confirmed that 

they wanted that information. But I‟m happy to share it here in 

the House or at any time. It‟s something that we‟re looking at 

very seriously, and I look forward to further questioning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, this often occurs with the 

Sask Party. The meeting was supposed to be tomorrow, and 

they pushed it back to December, so interesting that that‟s not 

brought forward in the minister‟s remarks. 

 

The minister should be aware that the team of consultants 

studying this project have briefed community groups. The 

consultants have said publicly that there are two options only on 

the table. One is a domed stadium with a retractable roof. One 

is a domed stadium with a permanent roof. And the costs range 

from $480 million to $600 million not counting the cost of the 

land, parking, and other extras. 

 

To the minister: can he confirm that the costs of the stadium are 

as much as $600 million, and does the government support a 

stadium at that price? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, what we have done 

indeed is hire the very best consultants that we know of in 

North America — or certainly they‟ve had experience around 

the world — to provide us with cost estimates. What we will 

know at the end of this, we‟ll have the very best information in 

front of us and be able to make decisions accordingly. Not only 

will they involve the government, but they will involve the 

private sector. We‟ll be going out to the private sector for that 

type of information. 

 

Regarding the proposed meeting, we asked all members from 

the opposition, from the Regina area if they wanted to attend. 

We had three maybes. So the meeting . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well three maybes is not enough to have a 

meeting. But I would say, the meeting‟s on tomorrow. Let‟s 

hope that everyone is there. Okay? The meeting‟s on. Let‟s go 

there. I‟m happy to make sure that . . . If you can tell me that at 

least one of your members will be there, the meeting will be on 

because when you were asked, nobody confirmed. Three 

maybes, the rest, no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ll certainly be there. We‟ll 

certainly be there. So if the minister from . . . maybe wants to 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3463 

have the meeting, we‟ll have the meeting. Absolutely. 

 

The government talks about private sector contributions to this 

project but has yet to produce a single one. Now it‟s all well 

and good to get the people‟s hopes up about a new stadium, Mr. 

Speaker, but this government needs to start providing some 

hard details. To the minister: which private sector companies 

have said they will support this project? And exactly how much 

of the $600 million price tag have they committed to provide? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well I certainly don‟t want to 

pre-empt tomorrow‟s meeting because it sounds like we‟re 

going to have 100 per cent attendance which is something that 

we certainly want. 

 

But no, more seriously, Mr. Speaker, what we indeed have done 

is consulted with some 100 groups within Regina and area, 

groups that have an interest in this facility. It is indeed 

something that is of interest to all the province. 

 

[10:45] 

 

And in various conversations, I know that various members 

have had, they‟ve expressed their support. And certainly when 

we‟ve gone to the city of Regina, for example, there was 

unanimous support for this study from each and every one of 

the councillors there. So it‟s something that we should take 

serious. I think that the members are trying to have some fun 

with this here. 

 

But seriously, Mr. Speaker, each of the members are invited. 

We want all information to be put forward. And yes, we do 

want to go out to the private sector to ensure that those that are 

interested have an opportunity to tell us their ideas to make this 

province a better place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to numbers 

and details from this side, you know, as was plainly observable 

in the last budget, we‟re very suspect to the numbers come 

forward. And you‟ll note that the minister can‟t come forward 

to this House with either confirmation or denial of the 480 to 

$600 million price range. 

 

So we‟ll ask him one more time, Mr. Speaker. In terms of the 

private sector contribution that is supposed to be backstopping 

this, which private sector partner is coming forward with that 

contribution? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly what 

we‟ve hired the consultants to do, is to determine the cost of 

this facility. In previous announcements and in the information 

forward, consultants have identified similar type of stadiums 

elsewhere in the world that cost approximately $270 million 

American. What needs to be determined is the cost of the roof, 

the options available. 

 

That‟s why we‟ve hired the very best consultants to be able to 

tell us that information. Not only to tell us, but we‟ve opened it 

up to opposition members, to all members of the legislature that 

want to attend to ensure that they have that information and that 

we can make those decisions going forward. If the members are 

against the stadium, I guess we would like to hear that on the 

record today. But I don‟t think that we‟ll be hearing that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, can the minister confirm that one 

of the so-called private sector contributions to the domed 

stadium project will actually be coming from Saskatchewan‟s 

publicly owned Casino Regina? 

 

The information that the opposition has is that the government 

has offered up the annual profits of Casino Regina to backstop 

potential operating shortfalls at the domed stadium. Is that the 

case? And can the minister explain how that qualifies as a 

private sector contribution to this project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had 

discussions with about six private sector corporations and 

individuals representing corporations. But what we are going to 

do, going out on Saturday, is advertise for request for proposals 

from those private sector groups. We‟re not talking about 

Crown corporations. We‟re not talking about government 

departments. We‟re talking about private sector. 

 

And yes, to answer that question, I indeed have had face-to-face 

conversations with those individuals. We‟ll be asking them to 

make formal proposals. If members opposite know anybody in 

the private sector that would be interested in making those 

proposals, we would ask them to have those meetings, to 

forward that information because we want the very best facility 

for the people of Saskatchewan. They deserve no less, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Cadet Recognition Day 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, as Provincial Secretary, it 

is my privilege to oversee the provincial honours and awards 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask members to come to 

order, giving the minister the opportunity to make her 

statement. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — As Provincial Secretary, it‟s my 



3464 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

privilege to oversee our provincial honours and awards 

programs. Last November my colleague, the member from 

Wood River and the military liaison for Saskatchewan, 

introduced the air, army, sea and navy league recognition day 

Act, designating the first Saturday of every November 

provincial cadet day. 

 

Today I am proud to announce that a new recognition program 

will be established in order to further recognize the contribution 

of cadets in Saskatchewan. Starting next year, the top air cadet 

squadron and the top army, sea, and navy cadet corps will be 

formally recognized for their contributions they made to our 

community at an event that will be held on a provincial cadet 

day every year. 

 

Recognition programs in Saskatchewan have been successful in 

offering new roles and thanking people for their contributions to 

the quality of life we enjoy. It is a way we build our society one 

good effort at a time. As you know, Mr. Speaker, our 

government is committed to recognizing the contributions and 

achievements of these citizens that make Saskatchewan the best 

province in Canada. This is especially true of the young people 

in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cadets is one of Canada‟s oldest youth programs. 

With approximately 30,000 cadets participating across the 

country, it is also one of the largest. The mission of the cadet 

program is to contribute to the development and the preparation 

of youth for the transition to adulthood, enabling them to meet 

the challenges of modern society through a dynamic, 

community-based program. 

 

The program accepts young people from the ages of 12 to 19 

and teaches citizenship, personal discipline, as well as general 

military knowledge. National Defence Canada co-sponsors the 

cadet movement, along with the civilian sponsoring bodies, the 

Navy League, the Army Cadet and the Air Cadet League. 

 

In Saskatchewan the cadet movement began with the creation of 

the Prince Albert Army Cadet Corps under the authority of a 

militia order in 1903. Today it is thriving. We currently have 

seven royal Canadian sea cadets corps, 16 army cadet corps, 

and 40 air cadet squadrons and over 2,000 cadets in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Cadets learn about the individual traditions of their corps or 

their squadrons as some learn about sailing and seamanship, 

basic orientation, and field camping, which can lead to the 

Canadian Forces parachute course. Some learn about air 

navigation and training, which can lead to civilian pilot 

qualification in their respective fields. 

 

However the cadet programs provide more than military 

training. In fact, even though it is partnered with the military, 

the core values the program teaches are loyalty, 

professionalism, mutual respect, and integrity. And there‟s no 

obligation on the part of the cadet to join the Armed Forces. 

The cadet program provides training and knowledge of civic 

responsibility and leadership. It teaches and promotes physical 

fitness and encourages youth to make healthy lifestyle choices. 

It encourages cadets to be actively involved in their 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for introducing the 

Act and for his work as a senior staff officer for cadets at Air 

Command headquarters in Winnipeg overseeing the Prairie 

region cadets from 1992 to 1994. I also want to thank all the 

other officers and leaders who contribute to the success of the 

cadet programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a group of young people most worthy of 

formal recognition. I want to take this opportunity to once again 

express our appreciation for the contributions of the cadets in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We would also like to 

congratulate the cadets and also the minister for introducing this 

program which recognizes the cadets here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think all of us in our families have various people who have 

been involved with cadets in their own local communities. And 

to hear the stories over the years, and it doesn‟t matter what age 

of cadet you talk about — once a cadet, always a cadet — but 

it‟s always fun to hear about the experiences that they‟ve had in 

their training, both in the local community but also when they 

go either east or west with cadet camps in the summer. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we also are pleased to have this 

recognition for this group and for the good work that they do in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the 

Bronson Forest Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 606, The 

Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act now be 

introduced and read for a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Lloydminster has moved 

first reading of Bill No. 606, The Protection of the Wild Ponies 

of the Bronson Forest Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3465 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 107, The Weed Control Act be 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved first 

reading of Bill 107, The Weed Control Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have received from 

the Chief Electoral office the reports, detailed expenditures for 

the fiscal year of Elections Saskatchewan for 2007-2008 and the 

report of the Cumberland by-election for June 25th, 2008. And I 

table this report under section 286 of The Election Act, 1996. 

 

Order. Order. I believe the member was rising to his feet. I 

didn‟t recognize him. Why is the member on his . . . Pardon 

me? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of privilege. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave to rise on a point 

of privilege. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Pardon me. Yes, I‟d ask leave to rise on a point 

of privilege. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, as required by the standing orders 

of this Assembly, this morning I delivered to you, Mr. Speaker, 

notice that I would be rising on this motion of privilege. 

 

At issue are the statements made by the Minister of Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing to the media on October 4th, 2009. 

The statements on the record to the media confirmed that the 

minister made other comments inside the Legislative Assembly 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Pardon me, November 4th. 

 

The relevant section of the media interview is as follows: 

What have you been yelling at him [referring to Mr. 

Yates]? 

 

Minister: Well, I‟ve been getting a lot of push from the 

other side in relation to this story and I‟m getting stuff said 

to me on a continuing basis and I think my push back to 

him was, “Have the police . . . have you got a visit from 

the police yet?” I think that was my exact comment and 

that was it. 

 

That‟s a direct quote. 

 

Reporter: Is that appropriate? Is that appropriate for the 

Minister of Corrections and . . . 

 

Minister: In the heat of the House when the push back . . . 

it was just something that come up, I just said to him, 

“have the police visited you?” 

 

The interview continues: 

 

Reporter: And is it appropriate for the minister in charge 

of policing to ask another member if the police have come 

to visit him yet? 

 

Minister: Probably not appropriate but in the house, in the 

heat of the discussions that go on in the house, it‟s 

something that come out and it‟s just my push back for 

what‟s coming my way. 

 

Reporter: Sir, you‟re a Minister of Corrections and you do 

have some authority in relation to police departments. Do 

you understand how many people in the community might 

interpret this? 

 

Minister: This was not publicly said . . . 

 

Reporter: It was in the House. 

 

Minister: It was just a banter back and forth in the House. I 

wasn‟t standing up speaking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue of these statements being made outside 

the Assembly is irrelevant. The minister was simply confirming 

statements he made inside the Assembly, by his own admission. 

Statements made in the Assembly, even though they do not 

appear in Hansard, are clearly inside the purview of the 

Speaker to rule on. 

 

My assertion is that the comments of the minister made inside 

the House, and confirmed outside the House, do in fact act as an 

assault by word on the fundamental rights and privileges of a 

member of the Assembly. My assertion is that these statements 

were intended to be perceived as threats, and therefore to have 

discouraged me from the performance of my duties and the 

exercise of free speech. 

 

I would quote from Beauchesne‟s Parliamentary Rules & 

Forms, 5th Edition, page 26, section 99: “Direct threats which 

attempt to influence Members‟ actions in the House are 

undoubtedly breaches of privilege.” 

 

So the crux of this matter is thus: if the minister‟s comments 



3466 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

can be assumed by a reasonable person to invoking the 

possibility of a trial at some future time, then it is a threat. If it 

is a threat, then it is an issue of privilege. 

 

Can the statement, have you got a visit from the police yet, be 

construed as intimidation? This minister is the minister 

responsible for police in the province. He, via his ministry, has 

already invoked the legal and moral obligation to protect 

information in a letter to myself. Furthermore, the minister 

himself recognizes these comments were inappropriate. This 

would clearly indicate that there is at least a prima facie case of 

privilege. Therefore I would move the following motion: 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be instructed to examine the issue of the statements made 

to this Assembly by the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing on November 4th, 2009, and report 

back to the Assembly; and that, until such time that the 

committee reports, the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing shall be removed from his position as 

a minister. 

 

I so move. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

to respond to the point of privilege. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to respond. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member of Regina Dewdney argues that he was 

threatened and intimidated by the minister‟s remarks, and that 

those remarks are discouraging to his exercise of free speech. 

 

The remarks made by the minister were never intended as a 

threat or an attempt to discourage free speech. However, even if 

the member of Regina Dewdney took the comments as a threat 

and felt that his right to free speech was discouraged, the 

minister apologized. Therefore there is no threat; there is no 

intimidation. No member should feel that their rights to free 

speech is being discouraged. The minister has explained that his 

comments were made and never intended to be a threat. He 

apologized, and he withdrew his remarks. This having been 

done, I believe the question of privilege is not in order. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — This morning the Opposition House Leader 

raised a question of privilege under the provisions of rule 12, 

the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. And upon receipt of the notice in accordance 

with the rules, both House leaders were informed of the details 

of the case and the proposed question of privilege. 

 

It is the responsibility of the Speaker to determine if a prima 

facie case of privilege has been established. Given the serious 

nature of the charge, it requires careful examination, and I‟m 

not at this time prepared to make a quick ruling. I will review 

all of the comments that have been made, including the 

comment made by the minister this morning, and will come 

back with the ruling at the next sitting of the Chamber. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Surgical Wait Times 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 

end of my comments today, I will make a motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the Government of 

Saskatchewan‟s bold new goal to reduce surgical wait 

times to three months or less as an effective part of our 

strategy to truly put patients first. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to begin, I want to open by saying how much I 

respect — I know my colleagues on this side of the House 

respect and I‟m sure that our colleagues on the other side of the 

House respect — and admire the contributions that our health 

care workers make to our health care system in this province. It 

is widely recognized as one of the best health care systems 

around the world, although it does fall short in some ways. 

 

For many years, I‟ve said quality in this province I don‟t feel 

was the problem. The quantity is what the problem is. Mr. 

Speaker, I came to that kind of a realization many years ago, on 

sort of a personal note, when my son was diagnosed with 

cancer. I got to share some of the story with the enjoyable new 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale yesterday, and that‟s where 

I kind of came to that conclusion.  

 

The issues that we faced and the treatment that we needed, I 

never found quality an issue. We had great doctors. We had 

great nursing staff, all the way down through the cleaning staff 

of the hospital were all very supportive and unbelievable in that 

respect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But my statement is that the quantity is the problem. And that‟s 

where we find the issue in our province today with the terribly 

long wait times for specifically surgeries within our province. 

Getting some of these surgeries done in a timely manner has 

been quite an issue. And I think, you know, what we talk about 

— putting patients first — the wording in that motion may be 

the key to what I want to touch on today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We get so wrapped up in the process that at times we forget 

about the people. Sometimes we get so wrapped up in the health 

care system, we forget about the true important part of that 

whole equation, and that‟s the patients. That‟s the customers, 

Mr. Speaker. In my past history in business, I always focused 

on my customers‟ needs, and that‟s without my customers, Mr. 

Speaker, I didn‟t really have a need to be in business. 

 

But with that, we‟re not about to discuss a whole bunch of 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3467 

philosophy. We can discuss philosophy. We can discuss the 

process. But like I said, the most important thing is the people. 

The people of this province in Saskatchewan in need of surgery, 

from the conversations I had, they‟re not too wrapped up in the 

process or how this is going to happen. They‟re not too hung up 

on the delivery as long as it‟s publicly funded, publicly 

administered, and we don‟t have a whole lot of queue-jumping 

and the like, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s the intent of our 

government‟s bold new goal to reduce these surgeries to three 

months or less in the next four years. 

 

In my home constituency of Yorkton, we get a lot of calls in the 

office and specifically on surgeries and wait times and people 

waiting to get back to work. Because of our older demographic, 

we have a lot of seniors in Yorkton. We get a lot of calls about 

specifically joint replacements, cataract surgeries, and things 

that do affect our seniors. I‟ve seen it in my own family with 

my father waiting for cataract surgery, other family members 

waiting for different surgeries, and how long they wait. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be the first to admit that at times, you 

know, maybe we don‟t get on those cases for family members 

as quick as we would for constituents solely because of the fact 

that as representatives, we don‟t want to be perceived as using 

our influence to forward surgeries or using our influence in 

improper methods. So you know, I guess apologies to some of 

my family members and people very close to me that at times 

we let those cases wait a little bit longer than we would 

otherwise for constituents, but eventually we do, you know, we 

do advocate on them as strongly as we can. 

 

There are so many surgical waiting needs that we do find in our 

constituency and not only for seniors. But quite often we see 

young people needing, you know, maybe a knee surgery or 

something. They‟re wanting to get engaged, in their senior year, 

of sports or sports in high school, and they‟re held back because 

of the need for surgery. And specifically for somebody so 

young, waiting for surgery and the effects it‟d have on them can 

be quite devastating. 

 

As I touched on, some of the effects of some of these long-term 

waits can be quite difficult for not only seniors but our young 

people. Some of these effects that we see, coming into our 

office anyway, Mr. Speaker, so many difficulties in just 

engaging in everyday life, the day-to-day activities. They may 

have limited ability or no ability at all. And what we see 

happening is a decline overall, health, maybe some cases of 

depression. Sometimes there‟s a need for excessive use of 

prescription drugs for painkilling and inflammation, Mr. 

Speaker. And that, as we all know, can lead to other difficulties 

as well. 

 

For those that are still employed, we see a difficulty engaging 

back into work which can take real life impacts, work life 

impacts, income impacts, physical effects. And as I stated, 

emotional and physical impacts as well, Mr. Speaker, where we 

see people wanting to get back to work, wanting to contribute 

but for weeks, months — well more than weeks — months and 

sometimes years, waiting to get on to that surgical wait-list to 

get their surgeries done to return to work to engage in everyday 

life so they can be effective and contributing members of 

society. 

 

I‟ll touch on some — without getting into specific names, Mr. 

Speaker — I‟ll touch on some local cases that we‟ve dealt with 

that have been quite alarming. A local senior gentleman, whose 

wife was awaiting surgeries with some of the treatment she 

needed, Mr. Speaker, not only awaiting some medical 

diagnostic imaging but the treatment surgeries, Mr. Speaker — 

waiting months and months and years — and seeing personally 

the effect that it is taking on her husband and her as well, Mr. 

Speaker. How you know, time and time again, the conversation 

may end up in tears being shed that the wife is in such dire need 

of services and yet can‟t access the services and is waiting, and 

in her senior years having depression set in and other health 

issues that creep up because of that wait. 

 

We see other, Mr. Speaker, other constituents, 12 months 

waiting on a waiting list. And time and time again, we do 

access the quality of care coordinators, which again, health care 

professionals, I can‟t say enough about the services that they 

provide, Mr. Speaker — time and time again showing the 

compassion, just the work ethic, and the want to do better. And 

time and time again, they are able to help us, but still with some 

of the wait times, there‟s only so much they can do. 

 

We‟ve had constituents that have had to go on their own to 

different provinces and get surgeries in Winnipeg and Calgary 

and Edmonton, Mr. Speaker. I agree we need to build capacity 

here, whether it‟s partly with our own system, partly through 

outside providers, maybe bringing other health care 

professionals in to utilize the facilities that we do have 

operating in this province to start addressing that wait time. 

 

We have numerous cases of people with shoulder injuries, back 

injuries, knee injuries, Mr. Speaker, awaiting surgeries or 

replacements. Again quite young — one individual here in his 

20s, another female here in her 40s, another fellow I went to 

school with, Mr. Speaker, that is awaiting back surgery in his 

mid-40s. And really, Mr. Speaker, just wanting to get better, get 

back to work, but waiting in that queue for that surgery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll emphasize that the system that we‟re looking 

at, the way we‟re going to address this, there will be no 

queue-jumping. It is still a totally publicly funded, publicly 

administered health care system with providers that may be able 

to help us to diminish this wait-list and address these needs. 

 

Some of the cases that really touch me, Mr. Speaker, get close 

to my heart. And I understand that the pain with joint surgeries 

and the pain that is associated with those and how we want to 

get those dealt with. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what really affects me, really gets to me is 

when we see some of these cancer care cases — people waiting 

for cancer care, cancer surgeries, and waiting for quite a long 

time for diagnosis and then quite a long time for treatment and 

surgeries. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Life and death situations. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — And we realize the need, the quick need to 

respond to some of those cases where a matter of a few weeks 

could mean the difference between life and death, as my friend, 

the member from Saskatoon Northwest, just pointed out.  

 



3468 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

You know, we just have so many needs in this province that we 

have to start addressing them, and I‟m really excited about this 

goal that our government has embarked upon. 

 

Let me just touch on a few other quotes. I‟m going to have a lot 

of trouble getting through all of my notes here, Mr. Speaker, but 

I‟m fine with that. I‟m wanting to allow my colleagues to speak 

to this as well. We have an individual in Regina that wrote: 

 

Having been struck down with arthritis, which will require 

[both hips being replaced], the waiting time has been on 

mind — a lot. I might get the first hip done in 18 months. 

 

We have enough specialists, but we don‟t have enough 

space in operating rooms and immediate recovery to deal 

with the building number of patients needing hip surgery 

. . . any surgery. 

 

And this individual states, Mr. Speaker: 

 

It doesn‟t matter to me if a private clinic performs the 

surgery so long as my provincial health care covers the 

cost and I can get the surgery done much sooner. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s about people, not process. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — That‟s what people are saying, Mr. 

Speaker. And as my friend from Saskatoon Northwest has 

pointed out, again it‟s about the people. It‟s not about the 

process. It‟s about getting our people of this province treated in 

a timely and effective manner. 

 

What‟s really encouraging to me, Mr. Speaker, as well, when 

we first announced this initiative in the Throne Speech, my own 

thought was, you know, this is a very lofty goal but then let‟s 

look at this as a big picture. We do have to set those goals to 

measure ourselves. If we can‟t measure up to that goal, we have 

a more measurable benchmark to look at, to see where we fell 

short and how we can address it in the future. 

 

Is it possible? I know it‟s possible, Mr. Speaker, as many 

members across the floor and people in communities pointed 

out to us with the nursing goal, thought to be way too lofty a 

goal to recruit 800 nurses in this province. Just over one year, 

largely due to the work of the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle, Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Secretary to the 

Minister of Health, I think the numbers are well over 575, 580 

nurses. We‟re less than 30 per cent to go to that goal, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when we look at that goal, seeing that we have come so far 

in that goal — I think it‟s only right that we recognize that goal 

— we set a new goal to deliver proper health care and expedite 

health care in this province for the people. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now when we talk about that short of a time, we wonder, what 

is the reaction going to be from the industry, from the health 

care professionals? Time and time again, we‟re seeing many 

quotes from health care professionals. They‟re excited. They‟re 

encouraged. They‟ve been waiting for this for so long, Mr. 

Speaker. They want to do this. They want to deliver health care.  

And again I can‟t say how much, I can‟t really verbalize how 

much respect and admiration I have for our health care 

professionals, the treatment we‟ve gotten through different 

family issues over the years and the respect and gratitude that I 

have to those that we have dealt with and their professionalism. 

They‟re excited about this goal, Mr. Speaker, and so am I. It‟s 

just such an exciting goal and many people are really excited 

about that as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How are we going to deliver these initiatives, Mr. Speaker? We 

are going to explore all avenues to deliver this commitment. It‟s 

not privatization as I‟ve said. Outside resources, private sources 

used by other political parties over the years, in and 

out-of-province, it‟s been standard practice. 

 

We‟re just going to follow on what has been done for years 

before, follow best practices, fund that through our provincial 

government, and deliver those services to the people of the 

province. Ways we can improve, Mr. Speaker, areas we can 

improve, human resources, infrastructure investments which 

has been time and time again talked about and invested in. 

Creating different pathways and looking at different methods to 

deliver those services and increased efficiency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to close my comments there. My notes are much longer 

than that. I want to allow time for my other colleagues here to 

speak to this motion. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

move: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the Government of 

Saskatchewan‟s bold new goal to reduce surgical wait 

times to three months or less as an effective part of our 

strategy to truly put patients first. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Yorkton: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes the Government of 

Saskatchewan‟s bold new goal to reduce surgical wait 

times to three months or less as an effective part of our 

strategy to truly put patients first. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Yorkton prefaced his remarks by talking about respect and I 

think I will also. I think the first thing that we have to do is 

respect the people by giving them the correct information and 

not the pumped-up rhetoric that we‟re getting that promotes the 

Sask Party agenda, which I think is leading people to say, sure, 

okay; let‟s go public. I don‟t care about if it‟s a public facility 

or private provider, but that‟s where this kind of rhetoric leads 

people. It‟s almost like leading them there. 

 

So I think we have seen a disrespect for the public by giving out 

information that isn‟t correct, when I spoke to orthopedic 

surgeons who are calling and saying this is just simply not 

correct; there is not the urgency, the pathos of people waiting 

and languishing on wait-lists. That is basically presented or 

implied by this motion and certainly by this press release on the 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3469 

wait times. 

 

The orthopods are saying that the wait times are being 

significantly reduced and that there is significant capacity 

within the system, in particular in Saskatoon. But the same 

message is coming from Regina, that there is capacity within 

the system to actually do our own surgeries here in a timely 

fashion. And I think that the rhetoric that we‟re hearing is 

leading the public to say, sure, then we should not be thinking 

that this is respectful or this is a respectful treatment of the 

public. 

 

And also when we talk about respect, we should be respecting 

our health providers. We are not respecting our health providers 

when we have them sitting without a contract for a year — 

more than a year. And we are not respecting them when we 

bring in something like Bill 5 which has certainly undermined 

collective bargaining. That is not going to help put the patient 

first. 

 

And when we talk about the patient first, Tony Dagnone 

actually talked about putting the surgical centres in. Well this 

government has cut the funding to the Regina surgical centre. 

It‟s actually contradictory. It‟s contradictory to everything that 

they‟ve been saying about what is needed and it‟s certainly 

contradictory to what their own commissioner said. He 

suggested in his report, on page 26 and page 27 under 

recommendation 4, that we actually do this. And he was 

encouraged by the fact that there was money and was a 

commitment to a surgicentre in Regina. Now that funding has 

been removed. 

 

If there is capacity in the system — and there is certainly that 

indication from Saskatoon — then the money that‟s needed, 

that‟s needed, or that‟s taken away from the Regina surgicentre 

should be moved to Saskatoon to start one there, not be moved 

off to BC [British Columbia]. And it‟s interesting when the 

minister denies that there is any conversation going on with BC. 

Then we find out that yes, there is. And the Health minister in 

BC is quite convinced that we will be having, we will be having 

an agreement — an MOU in fact, a memorandum of 

understanding — that will be signed with Saskatchewan to 

actually do 400 surgeries at a premium. 

 

The Premier‟s flippant remark about, do people care where their 

surgery is, here, there, or in Surrey? Yes people do care, 

because people will have to travel which is not paid for. They 

will have to eat which is not paid for. They will have to stay 

some place which is not paid for. They will not be able to take 

anybody with them and they need support and people who have 

surgeries — hips and knees in particular, which is what we‟re 

talking about — they need recovery. You can‟t get on an 

airplane when your knee‟s been replaced. So you‟re going to 

have to stay someplace and you‟re going to have to have some 

rehab. Is that going to be on the plane or is there going to be a 

premium for that as well? Having had both of my knees done, I 

understand clearly what‟s involved in knee surgery. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m thinking that this motion is disingenuous 

at best and I know disingenuous is a favourite word of some of 

the Sask Party people. 

 

I think that when we‟re talking about all . . . We‟re talking 

about all surgeries when numbers are thrown out and then we 

talk about particular surgeries, hip and knees. But when all 

surgeries are added to the mix, it certainly takes away some of 

the reality of the hips and knee wait-list. And we certainly have 

heard from the orthopods themselves — I should say 

orthopaedic surgeons — that they do not agree with what‟s 

being put forward and that these wait-lists are not what they 

have been purported to be by the Sask Party. 

 

And it‟s interesting in the press release that the government put 

out when they announced this, they talked about initiatives to be 

considered in health promotion. So that would also decrease the 

wait-list for some procedures by getting ahead of some of the 

things that happen to people that require surgery. And one of 

the first things they talked about — under health promotion and 

primary heath services, working with patients before they 

require surgery — was pediatric dental programs. 

 

Well it‟s extremely interesting that one of the very first things 

the Sask Party did after being elected in November of ‟07 was 

cancel the dental sealant program in schools. This was 

something particularly geared to children to prevent exactly 

what this is saying that they should do, to reduce the need for 

dental surgery among children and youth. That was what the 

program was there for. So without any real information, any 

consultation, any conversation with providers, they axed the 

program. 

 

It was just simply mean-spirited. It followed along with the 

axing of Station 20. And it just got caught up in that 

mean-spirited, sort of retribution sort of thing that the Sask 

Party was into after the November 7th election. And I think 

now we‟re seeing an admission that that‟s a program that 

should have been kept. And it‟s interesting that now, all of a 

sudden, it‟s their good idea. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that has been said about 

these programs that will be, or these surgeries that will be sent 

to BC is that we have done some of that. We‟ve sent people out 

of the province. Well of course we have, Mr. Speaker. There are 

procedures that we cannot do here. There are specialists that we 

do not have. There‟s technology and equipment that we do not 

have here. There are certain instances where there always will 

be surgeries that have to go out of the province. 

 

The difference, Mr. Speaker, is that there is no pre-purchasing. 

There is no pre-paying and there are no premiums. There‟s an 

interesting three P. I‟ll repeat that — no pre-purchasing, no 

pre-paying, and no premiums. I think that this is something we 

should consider when we talk about whether we have to rush to 

get ourselves over to BC or some other place for this, like I 

said, this rhetoric that is pumping up people‟s concern about 

whether they are waiting too long. And according to the 

orthopaedic surgeons in the biggest centre in Saskatchewan, this 

is not true. 

 

So when we talk about what information we‟re giving to the 

public . . . Because we do want the public to make a good 

decision and have information, and this is sort of that shared 

decision-making process. And it will be putting the patient first. 

If you want the patient first, then the patient has to have the 

correct information. And we are not giving it to them now with 

this sort of rhetoric. 



3470 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

It‟s certainly something that people do want to have — timely 

surgery. But they don‟t want to be pushed and goaded into 

making a decision that leads them along a path to say, okay I‟ll 

travel to BC if I have to. Okay I‟ll go into a private clinic if I 

have to. You don‟t have to. That information simply isn‟t there. 

The minister can‟t provide it. No one else has provided it. But 

it‟s simply out there in the public for them to, I don‟t know, 

accept on its face value, which I don‟t think is respectful at all 

to the public. They will not actually accept that. I don‟t think 

people will accept that at all. 

 

And I know Tony Dagnone — and I‟ve mentioned this before 

— Tony Dagnone‟s report was certainly something that was 

really looked forward to by a lot of people, because people were 

expecting lots of things to change for them in their particular 

circumstance. And basically the recommendations were pretty 

vague. And if the demonstration so soon after the 

announcement of the commissioner‟s report has already taken 

one of his recommendations and thrown it out the window, I 

have really no hope for any of the other 15. And the 

recommendation I‟m talking about is to access wait times which 

is under convenient, timely care. 

 

And he says in his report and the aside that only 16 per cent of 

people had waited longer than 12 months. This is a different 

kind of comment than what we‟re hearing about how all these 

people are languishing on the waiting list for 3 years and more. 

 

And he says, “The current situation provides an opportunity to 

innovate, and planning is underway for a freestanding 

ambulatory surgery/diagnostic centre in Regina . . .” He 

supports this. He mentions it in his report and then boom — the 

funding is gone, reduced. It certainly doesn‟t give a lot of public 

confidence to the facts that we might . . . or the government has 

promised that they will act quickly and take seriously all his 16 

recommendations. One of them already has hit the chopping 

block. 

 

So I don‟t think it leaves us with much confidence in the 

government‟s handling of the patient first or actually that the 

government does put the patient first. I think what the 

government puts first is the government and the Sask Party, and 

I think that‟s going to be demonstrated more and more often. 

And I don‟t think people will be fooled by rhetoric. I think they 

want good information. If they don‟t get it, they‟ll ask for it. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party came to 

power in 2007, we inherited a huge infrastructure deficit from 

the previous government. That included a health care system 

that was on life-support. Under the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] they promised a 30 per cent drop in the wait-list, and 

unfortunately it increased by 67 per cent. That was a 90 per cent 

miscalculation. We inherited a health care system with 27,000 

people on the waiting list. 

 

Our government has and will continue to take steps to 

improving our health care system. We have strengthened cancer 

care. We added more training seats for doctors and nurses. We 

launched the Patient First Review. Now in the Throne Speech 

we have set a new goal for the health care system that no one 

waits more than three months for surgery. To achieve this goal 

we are exploring innovative approaches to delivery services. 

 

What is the situation like here in Saskatchewan? Well according 

to an article in the Edmonton Journal, November 3, 2009, 

surgical wait times in Saskatchewan has gone from 28.8 weeks 

in 2008 to 25.2 weeks in 2009. So we‟ve had a drop under our 

government. 

 

There is a significant wait time for back surgery. Patients are 

waiting from 12 to 18 months currently. For one patient, that 

has meant they had to sell their business as they were physically 

not able to work and had been on disability. Their surgery was 

scheduled. Well they were waiting to go in and found out it was 

cancelled due to the surgery ahead of theirs being more 

complicated. While the patient understood that these kind of 

delays are unavoidable, it still means a longer wait time for 

surgery when they had been waiting for 14 months. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Some patients have been waiting for more than one procedure, 

and concerns arise when it comes to scheduling as each surgeon 

does not coordinate with the other and it is left to the quality of 

care coordinators to ensure that there is adequate time to heal 

between procedures. 

 

Orthopedic surgery is a large area of concern. When a patient‟s 

hip is bone on bone, simply everyday tasks become impossible. 

But the wait-list is 18 months. Any wait time, even a short one, 

bring about some formula of pain and suffering, mental 

anguish, lost productivity at work and leisure, and stress on 

personal relationships. 

 

I would like to discuss a couple of examples of how wait times 

have affected the lives of individuals. A first-year university 

student on an athletic scholarship tore their ACL [anterior 

cruciate ligament] and had to wait nine months for surgery. 

Unfortunately, due to her deteriorating health condition, she lost 

her scholarship and was unable to attend university in the fall. 

What a heart-wrenching experience, Mr. Speaker, and it 

should‟ve never happened. 

 

I would like to mention a story that was published as part of the 

Patient First Review. It‟s Emma‟s story. I quote from the 

Patient First report: 

 

Emma is a 68-year old woman who recently had a hip 

replacement. She lives in a town outside of a large urban 

centre in Saskatchewan. She is a single mother of three 

grown children and still cares for one of her children who 

has a disability, at home. She is self-employed so that she 

can maintain her job and care for her child. 

 

After complaining about some pain, she was prescribed some 

Tylenol and that helped. After some time, the pain continued, 

and was later given medication for arthritis. I would like to 

quote from her story in the Patient First report. 

 

After two years of suffering, Emma urged her family physician 

to refer her to a specialist about her hip pain. Her physician 

agreed to refer her to an orthopedic surgeon. Emma waited six 

months for a consultation to visit the orthopedic surgeon. On 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3471 

the day of her visit, the specialist took her medical history, 

asked her to explain the problem, and examined her. He then 

told her that she would have to go for several tests to determine 

if she was a good candidate for surgery. 

 

Emma received a CAT [computerized axial tomography] scan, 

a CT [computerized tomography] scan six months later and, 

because of a cancellation in her orthopedic surgeon‟s schedule, 

was able to see him within two weeks after the scan was 

completed. After waiting for a test, she was once again put on a 

wait list for surgery and was told it would be 24 months for 

surgery. After cancellation and postponement, Emma finally got 

her surgery. 

 

I would like to quote again this time, and this time Emma 

reveals something important: 

 

In the end, Emma looked back and wished she had pushed 

her family physician sooner for a specialist appointment. 

She had lived with the pain for so long she hadn‟t realized 

what a difference surgery would make in her life. Now her 

other hip is starting to feel the same pain and she fears 

having to live through the process a second time. 

 

People should never fear our health care system, Mr. Speaker. 

They need to know that our health care system is there for them 

and will do whatever it can to make life better. It is because of 

stories like Emma that we need to reduce wait times. And our 

government will look at any opportunity to . . . [inaudible] . . . 

pain and suffering for our people. It is not about politics or 

process. Reducing waiting times is all around people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can we get ourselves out of the mess 

of long wait times? I don‟t know if we can find the answer to 

that, but I think we need to explore it. As legislators and 

residents of Saskatchewan, we must move beyond politics and 

the rhetoric that plague the health care debate and let health care 

policy reform be guided by serious examination that delivers 

universal health care insurance without waiting times. We 

should be ashamed that people have to be put into wait-lists for 

medical necessary care. 

 

People in Saskatchewan are generally proud of our health care 

system which provides access to care regardless of ability to 

pay. But as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Beverley 

McLachlin, and Justice of the Supreme Court, John Major, 

stated, “Access to a waiting list is not access to health care.” 

 

I don‟t know a single person who wants to wait 10 hours or 16 

hours or even longer in pain and mental anguish to be admitted, 

let alone diagnosed and treated. I believe the best wait time is 

not the one that minimizes medical harm but the one that 

minimizes waiting altogether. A patient-focus health care 

system is one that truly delivers care without systematic delay. 

The patient must always come first because of their health. 

 

When the Minister of Health launched the patient-first review, 

we wanted to know how we could make the health care system 

better. Mr. Speaker, who knows how to make the system better? 

The patients. And our review looked at the health care system 

through the eyes of the patient. To quote the report: 

 

Patient- and family-centred health care considers the 

patient‟s needs and interests first and foremost. Patients 

who shared their stories and perspectives wanted their 

needs, values, culture and spirituality respected. They 

want support during times of illness and trauma, and 

effective, compassionate communication that can help to 

relieve fear and anxiety. They want complete information 

about care and treatment options. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan spoke clearly. They want their 

health care system to be safe, readily accessible and timely and 

well coordinated. 

 

We here in the Assembly are working for the people of 

Saskatchewan who want a better health care system, and our 

government is working to make their health care system better. 

For years government thought long wait times was acceptable 

as long as it didn‟t have serious consequences. That mentality 

unfortunately is embedded into our thinking. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our government doesn‟t believe wait times 

needs to be part of our health care system. The first step to 

overcome a problem, an individual must notice is that there is a 

problem. In the case of wait times, we are noticing a problem 

and that patients are waiting too long. And our government is 

going to work along with health care workers, health care 

experts, to find options that will bring down our wait times. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our health care system has the capacity 

and more than adequate resources to serve patients and meet the 

demand for health care, but realizing that potential will require 

change. Until that change happens, patients across 

Saskatchewan will continue to suffer on wait-lists, and their 

surgeries will continue to be pushed off. 

 

When former Premier Roy Romanow conducted his 

examination of the health care system, he noticed that wait 

times were a concern for many people. I would like to quote 

from his report: 

 

One approach for addressing the problem of wait lists is 

establishing “care guarantees.” This option was 

recommended in Senate Committee‟s (2002) recent 

examination of the Canadian health care system and the 

Premier‟s Advisory Council on health in Alberta . . . Care 

guarantees provide patients with a guarantee that they will 

have access to the treatment they need within a certain 

period of time. They have been implemented in several 

European countries including the United Kingdom, 

Sweden, and Denmark. 

 

We can do it here. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when you sit in the legislature here, it truly is a 

political arena where we see a great deal of activities. 

Sometimes maybe a little more exuberant than what we would 

like, but as politicians that‟s what we do. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I also believe firmly that, as politicians first 

and foremost, our commitment should be to Saskatchewan 



3472 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

residents, those residents that we represent but also to residents 

right across the province. And I think part of that commitment 

to residents is a commitment that we strive to implement with 

all of our initiatives good public policy, good outcomes, and 

good benefits for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can go back over the history of this 

legislature, and we can clearly see that there‟s a considerable 

difference in decisions that are made purely for political reasons 

and those decisions that do have a foundation of good public 

policy. I mean it‟s obvious in their final outcomes, and it‟s 

obvious in the lasting benefits for our residents. 

 

And this issue today and this motion today is clearly one of 

those examples. This wait time motion . . . which we find this 

government, I think, rather prematurely patting itself on the 

back over their wait times resolution. They‟ve announced it. 

They haven‟t actually done anything yet. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can go back. There is mountains and 

mountains of information and facts and data, and this has been 

an issue for many years here in the province. And I know the 

previous government was able to reduce long waiters and wait 

lists for surgery by over 1,600 persons in the ‟05-06 budget 

year. And that year was also a year when we took a significant 

step, not having the resources that this current government has, 

but we did some careful work. And after consideration, we 

undertook a study that focused on ambulatory surgery and 

surgical processes. 

 

And out of that report — which I could go on for much longer 

than 10 minutes — there was a recommendation that further 

work be done on an ambulatory surgical centre option. And that 

was under way with the Saskatoon Health Region and also the 

Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region to look at the feasibility and 

develop a business case for surgical centres in the province of 

Saskatchewan. There was feasibility studies that were done. 

And in the end result, it was proposed that these centres would 

contain probably three operating rooms, two procedure rooms, 

and that they could achieve an additional capacity of 

approximately 4,500 ambulatory surgical cases and 5,000 

cataract cases annually. 

 

And these centres, one of their big advantages would be that 

they would do day surgeries. And you would see operating 

rooms and the regions‟ capacity to really perform ambulatory 

surgery and free up existing in-patient hospital capacity to be 

able to improve the system and move things along. Mr. 

Speaker, this concept was also discussed and supported by 

Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network and its surgical services 

subcommittee. 

 

So this process moved along, and all agreed that this would be 

very good for wait times here in Saskatchewan. All of the 

professionals had been involved. And budgeting and capital 

funding was projected in the budget, in the provincial budget 

for . . . I believe it would have been this year in the budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in April 19th of 2007, this actual plan was 

announced for the day surgery centre here in Regina. And this 

was done in conjunction with the federal government who had 

put in place a wait time guarantee. So there was money 

designated to the provinces, and this was what the province of 

Saskatchewan felt and the health care system felt was most 

appropriate to address one of the concerns of Saskatchewan 

residents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what happened after the November 1907 

election, the Sask Party government was elected. And here we 

get into how political decisions override common sense and 

good sense and good public policies. And what we saw after the 

November election was that the surgical centre in Regina that 

was to address wait-lists in this province and give services to 

citizens close to home, here at home, and build capacity and 

build infrastructure in the province of Saskatchewan quietly 

disappeared. It was gone. The team that was working on the 

planning were dispersed back to their jobs that they had been in 

formerly. Everything just went silent for a number of months. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here you see a decision. It was not based on 

good public policy. It was not based on any informed 

discussion. It was not based on a concern for patient care. And 

it was not based on any desire to shorten the wait-list. It was 

purely a Sask Party political decision to get rid of anything they 

perceived as an NDP project that was moving forward. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s all it was. 

 

So then, shortly after that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we again saw 

this project begin to come to life. I am sure that the Department 

of Health and people in the health care sector made a pitch to 

the minister to say this is a good plan. This is what we need to 

make a dint. The work‟s been done. Let‟s just continue, start up 

again, and move it ahead. 

 

So what we saw in the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health Region, this 

was their service and financial plan summary for the fiscal year 

of ‟08-09. And besides a number of issues that were listed, we 

find on the second page under “Construction projects [that] will 

improve health care delivery,” there is a point, “Planning for 

development and construction of a free-standing Ambulatory 

Surgery Centre with a scheduled opening in 2010.” That‟s next 

year, Mr. Speaker. So that actually sounds pretty good. 

 

So again now we have the political decision. We can start this 

good idea back up again because now we can put the Sask Party 

logo on it. We can have the pompoms out. We can make the 

announcement, and it will be under our name and our direction. 

Purely political. A good project that would have benefited 

Saskatchewan residents, reduced wait times in this province 

delayed for more than a year and a half just purely on the basis 

of politics. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, then we see the Saskatchewan Party 

government run into trouble with their financial projections 

with a release of the first quarter financial report. There has 

been a number of projects that have been reduced. And in 

October of this year, not even a month ago, the Finance minister 

announced $102 million in government savings. Well 

government savings, but purely a detriment to Saskatchewan 

residents because what gets pulled? Well $3 million was 

deferred from Health for the ambulatory surgical care centre in 

Regina. So there we again. The Finance department has trouble 

with their budget, and what did they pull — the funding for the 

surgical care centre here in Regina. So again a political 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3473 

decision. It‟s purely a choice of that government, Mr. Speaker. 

They felt they could just push aside the wait-list again for 

purely political reasons, to cover their own butt. 

 

So now what have we got? We have the Regina Health Region 

has their service and financial plan summary for the fiscal year 

‟09-10. And what‟s the point there, Mr. Speaker? Well we turn 

to the same place, same station, and it says, planning for 

development and construction of a free-standing ambulatory 

surgical centre with a scheduled opening in the next few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project has been pushed back and pushed 

back by that government. They have absolutely no one to blame 

but themselves for making political decisions that were not 

based on good public policy, that were not based on informed 

discussion. They were not based on concern for patients across 

this province. They were not based on a concern for the 

wait-lists and reducing those wait times. They were decisions 

made purely to appease the Sask Party politicians, and they 

could care less what patients felt. 

 

Now the minister is coming out, the minister comes out and 

says, we‟re going to reduce all these times in four years. Well 

do you know what, Mr. Speaker? If that minister had kept up 

with the plan that was in place, that surgical care centre would 

be open today in the city of Regina serving the people of this 

province, reducing the surgical wait-lists, and people would be 

receiving timely care in a number of areas. It‟s that minister‟s 

own fault for wait-lists in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m proud and privileged to enter into this debate on 

wait time. Our Saskatchewan government, Sask Party 

government set a goal by stating that no patient should wait 

more than three months for surgery in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very, very bold initiative put forth by the 

Minister of Health, very bold. The reason he did it is because 

the people of Saskatchewan want it. And what amazes me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Members will come to order. 

Members will come to order. I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a 

very, very bold initiative by our government and especially by 

the Minister of Health. This is what the people want. 

 

And what amazes me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Throne 

Speech which was just delivered, this was the main focus of our 

Throne Speech. And every one of the members on that side 

voted against wait time — every one of them. 

 

This will be the centrepiece policy of the Saskatchewan Party 

government, squarely focused on health care, for the upcoming 

session. The target for the government is that in four years no 

surgical wait times will be longer than three months. Doctors 

say patients have been complaining about wait times and call 

the three-month goal a very good target. This goal came out of 

the Patient First Review. 

 

In the Patient First Review, Mr. Dagnone made a profound 

statement. He said, I quote, “. . . are proud of this province‟s 

health care heritage but they want to see the „care‟ restored to 

„Medicare‟.” 

 

Three themes emerged as guiding principles for the report. 

Number one, patient first must be embedded as a core value in 

health care. Number two, health care in Saskatchewan needs to 

function as a cohesive system. And number three, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, front-line providers must be empowered to deliver 

patient- and family-centred care. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let‟s take a closer look at these three 

themes for Patient First Review and the progress our 

Saskatchewan Party has already made to already implement 

them. 

 

A patient-first value should be embedded into the health care 

system. Well what does this mean to our Saskatchewan Party 

government? To our government, patient first means that we 

must do everything within our power to deliver the best care to 

the people of Saskatchewan. To our government, patient first 

means every patient should leave a health care facility happy 

with the care they received from admittance to discharge. 

 

To our Saskatchewan Party government, patient first, that 

means that when we set a goal to cut wait times, we will work 

tirelessly to reach that goal. This is unlike the NDP that made a 

promise in 1999 election to cut wait times by 30 per cent. The 

NDP followed up this promise by doing nothing for four years. 

In reality the wait-list increased by 60 per cent under the former 

NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, increased wait times is an example of what could 

occur when a government is too concerned with . . . [inaudible] 

. . . and ideological appearances. The former government 

refused to look at initiatives, new options to deal with wait 

times based on politics. The NDP were placing politics ahead of 

concerns of patients within the health care system. Their 

approach was not to put patients first. 

 

Our Saskatchewan government believes Saskatchewan people 

just want to get on the road to recovery after the surgery. 

 

Now I‟d like to give some illustrations of what we mean when 

we say the wait times are too long. And I‟d like to talk about 

myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Up until I became an MLA 10 years ago, I spent very little time 

in hospitals. In 1999 after I was elected and 2000, I came down 

with sugar diabetes and I‟m on insulin right now. But through 

the time I‟ve spent in the hospitals, I‟ve learned a lot. I‟ve 

learned a lot from inside the hospital which gives me, I believe, 

the power to speak to this motion. 

 

Not only did I have sugar diabetes. Then I had an accident with 

my knee and I had to use the services in Prince Albert to put my 

knee back together again, which I spent a long time in a 

hospital. I‟ve suffered from an aneurysm and I‟ve lived through 



3474 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

it. I‟ve gotten cancer. I‟ve still lived through that. In fact two 

years ago, I ended up in ICU [intensive care unit] in Prince 

Albert in a coma and I‟ve lived through that. 

 

The only thing I haven‟t had is a heart attack and I‟m just 

waiting for that to come and I‟ll get that out of the road and I‟ll 

be good. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, during the time that I spent 

in the hospital, I learned a lot from the RNs [registered nurse], 

the LPNs [licensed practical nurse], and all the people that work 

in the hospitals, even the doctors. I spent a lot of time in a 

hospital and I don‟t think any member on the other side has 

gone through what I‟ve gone through, which gives me the right 

to speak because I know it from inside, not just from an outside 

perspective. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that a lot of the people 

within the health system said, we have to reduce the wait times 

for surgery. We have to. We also have to recruit more 

physicians in our system, especially physicians that will work in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When it comes to rural Saskatchewan, my home community of 

Spiritwood only has two doctors; therefore we don‟t have a 

doctoring system that is open 24 hours a day. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, hopefully with the initiatives our Health minister has 

initiated, that will cause some of the problems. 

 

Now I know the member from North Battleford who was the 

Health minister before hollers from his . . . [inaudible] . . . we 

did, we did. It‟s an old saying with the NDP. We were going to 

get to it; just never did do it. This government under this 

Premier and this Health minister has set goals and initiatives 

that will solve some of the problems. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another incident, and this is evident from a 

letter that was written in the Leader-Post on November 4th, 

2009, and it goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

Having been struck down with arthritis, which will require 

replacement of both hips, the waiting time has been on my 

mind — a lot. I might get the first hip done in 18 months. 

 

We have enough specialists, but we do not have enough 

space in operating rooms and immediate recovery to deal 

with the building number of patients needing hip surgery 

. . . any surgery. 

 

It doesn‟t matter to me if a private clinic performs the 

surgery so long as my provincial health care covers the 

cost and I can get the surgery done much sooner. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is written by Michael Hegan from 

Regina and it was in the Leader-Post. 

 

I just want to make comment to the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, said that it just happened here just in November 

past. Well this issue of wait times didn‟t happen November 7, 

2007. This issue has been going on for a long, long time. And 

who was in power up until November 7, 2007? I believe it was 

the NDP. 

 

It‟s funny. From the members opposite they think that 

everything that they‟re hollering about now just started in 2007. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I went through this health system and I 

know different. I‟ve talked to many of those people and they 

will also agree with me. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Saskatchewan government has begun 

to implement one of the most aggressive physician recruitment 

strategies in the country. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that 

today there are 78 more physicians in the province of 

Saskatchewan than in December . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of those 78 positions, nine of them are 

practising in rural Saskatchewan — nine of them. We need 

more practising in rural Saskatchewan, but we are going to 

build on this, build on the initiative that we put forth, and deal 

with the wait times. And also deal with the recruitments 

because the recruitment of doctors will bring down the wait 

times. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are increasing our training capacity for 

physicians and nurses in hopes of retaining more physicians and 

more nurses. It‟s already been mentioned about the nurses that 

we brought into the province, and also we are also 

implementing the increase of medical school enrolments by 

adding 40 new training seats and 60 additional residency 

training positions by 2011. This government has done more in 

the last two years and will do more going forward than that 

NDP has done for 16 years. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today and enter the debate on this motion, Mr. Speaker. 

And a motion, Mr. Speaker, as I read it I almost choked on my 

coffee, Mr. Speaker, because nothing could be further from the 

reality here in the province. Nothing could be further, Mr. 

Speaker, from speaking to the true issues that are affecting 

Saskatchewan people. And nothing could be further, Mr. 

Speaker, from a genuine attempt by members opposite to do 

something about these issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My remarks today, Mr. Speaker, will be divided into three 

sections. The first section, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk 

about, is what I see as the Sask Party‟s motivation, their 

motivation for introducing this motion, and their motivation to 

stand up — backbenchers opposite — Mr. Speaker, and wave 

some pompoms about this motion. And I think their motivation 

in bringing this motion forward, Mr. Speaker, while indeed wait 

times, while indeed health care is important, it‟s important to all 

people in Saskatchewan — all of us are touched individually by 

the health care system and it‟s important to all people in 

Saskatchewan. There‟s not a member in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, that would argue with that point. 

 

But I say that, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that‟s their true 

motivation. Because there‟s another factor, Mr. Speaker, that 

affects every person here in the province. There‟s another 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3475 

factor, Mr. Speaker, that determines how well Saskatchewan 

people are able to be served, how well the government is able to 

provide services to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is the fiscal management of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And in my opinion, this motion that they put forward 

is nothing more than a channel changer — a channel changer 

from their brutal record, Mr. Speaker, of managing the books of 

this province. 

 

[12:00] 

 

When the budget came out last spring, boy, Mr. Speaker, there 

were a lot of pompoms here. There were some cakes. There 

were some balloons. The celebration, the approach of members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, was over the top. In fact some of the 

members opposite said this was the best budget in Canada. 

They said this was the best budget in North America. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they said perhaps the best budget in the world. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think now when we have learned about the 

Premier‟s Saturday afternoon phone calls, his attempts to 

meddle in the budget, his attempts to call the shots on his own 

— his fingerprints, Mr. Speaker, are all over this budget. And 

that‟s why, Mr. Speaker, his fingerprints are all over this motion 

and this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, that we‟ve recently 

debated. Because he needed to change the channel. He needed 

to change the channel away from his brutal, Mr. Speaker, his 

brutal management of the budget and the fiscal situation of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not bold. This is directly coming out of the 

Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, a Throne Speech that members 

and individuals across this province have said is the weakest 

Throne Speech that has come out of this Assembly in decades. 

It was nothing but looking back. Out of the points that were 

raised in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 50 or so were about 

the past, were about looking back, trying to relive those 

pompom and balloon moments. And about 10 of them were 

looking to the future.  

 

And so now we find ourselves having passed the Throne 

Speech — and, Mr. Speaker, I did not agree with the Throne 

Speech, and I voted against it — now we find ourselves once 

again engaged in this attempt by the members opposite to 

change the channel away from their bad track record. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m not buying it. So that‟s the first area what I think 

is their true motivation — the channel changing.  

 

The next part, Mr. Speaker, this is about wait times. This is 

about health care. The evidence does not support this motion 

that this is bold, that this is new, that this is well thought out, 

that this is anything more than the Premier on a Saturday 

afternoon jotting down some ideas and writing the Throne 

Speech, nothing more. 

 

Let‟s look at the evidence. The health care system, Mr. Speaker, 

depends on many individuals, many different institutions, many 

buildings. One of those buildings, Mr. Speaker, the academic 

health sciences building, a building that will train health care 

workers, provide services, certainly an important part of the 

health care system and certainly important to our ability as a 

province to deliver health care services to people. 

 

They have a sod-turning ceremony, again balloons, ribbons, 

cake, the works. Photo op, great, I think the minister wore his 

favourite tie. It was a good day for him. Three days later, they 

cut the funding. They cut the funding from the project. They 

pull it back, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we‟re supposed to believe these same individuals that 

deliver a $1.3 billion blunder that somehow, somehow 

magically they‟re just going to be able to make ends meet as 

they go along. They‟re going to be able to pay-as-you-go. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, pay-as-you-go might work. It might work for cell 

phone plans. It might work for small-scale projects. But with a 

track record of this government who have delivered a blunder 

that we have not seen since ‟86 with the Devine government . . . 

And I know many of them love this comparison to the Devine 

government. It brings back the glory days, Mr. Speaker. But in 

my opinion, I just don‟t trust them on the ability to deliver the 

health sciences building when they‟re clawing money back. 

 

Children‟s hospital, similar situation, Mr. Speaker, pulling 

money back from the project, slow walking this project like you 

wouldn‟t believe . . . Some philanthropist, Mr. Speaker, donates 

6.5 million to the children‟s hospital. I wasn‟t there because 

members opposite aren‟t great at notifying opposition members 

about news releases and such. But, Mr. Speaker, $6.5 million 

and, as far as I could tell, not a minister in sight — $6.5 million 

donated to a project being built in the province and not a 

minister. The person that does the speaking on the news, Mr. 

Speaker . . . backbencher from Sutherland. And when the donor 

said, well what‟s the holdup; why don‟t you get going on this? 

The excuse, oh we got to make sure the parking lot‟s in the 

right spot. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not saying we don‟t need to plan this 

project properly. I‟m not saying we don‟t need to think it 

through. But, Mr. Speaker, I see some slow walking going on. I 

see some avoiding of the issue. I see some ministers not 

wanting to tie their face to the slow progress and the pulling 

back of funding that‟s occurring through the children‟s hospital. 

 

Surgical care centre, my colleague from Saskatoon Eastview 

has commented on this, Mr. Speaker. Clearly, you know, in the 

patient-first plan here that was put forward, talks about the need 

for surgical centres. What do they do? They pull back the 

funding from the centres. Instead, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not a 

Saskatchewan-first policy; it‟s a BC-first policy. Let‟s not 

address the issues here in the province they say. Let‟s ship it 

away because it‟s convenient right now as opposed to fixing the 

root causes, Mr. Speaker. So I think when you look at the 

actions in health care, the evidence shows, Mr. Speaker, that 

this motion is nothing more than channel change and is not 

addressing the issues. 

 

The last area, Mr. Speaker, of my remaining two and a half 

minutes that I want to address is how this government, Mr. 

Speaker, does not focus on health promotion but focuses on 

self-promotion. Mr. Speaker, if there‟s a ribbon to cut, if there‟s 

a balloon to lift in the air with helium, if there is a cake to eat, 

these ministers, these members are all over it, Mr. Speaker. But 

when it comes to addressing the real issues through a surgical 

care centre, through properly funding institutions, it‟s not there, 

Mr. Speaker. And the troubling aspect, Mr. Speaker, not only 

do we see self-promotion most of the time, but we see an 



3476 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

approach of self-preservation. When the going gets hot, Mr. 

Speaker, when they have the option to do the right thing, what 

do they do? They don‟t do the right thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in a scrum outside . . .  

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the members not to 

drown out their own member who‟s speaking. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in a scrum outside of the 

Assembly on a very serious issue, on an issue about due 

process, in an issue about this cabinet treating the people of 

Saskatchewan responsibly, on an issue about letting the official 

opposition do its work, Mr. Speaker, the member outside, the 

Minister of Corrections and Policing and Public Safety made 

some comments on tape, Mr. Speaker, shocking comments. 

When giving his rationale he said, oh well I was giving push 

back. They were saying things, you know. And you know, I‟m 

the minister; I‟m just not used to that because they should really 

respect me because I‟m the minister. And what do they say? 

And then when pushed further, he said well you know what? 

The reporter said, well you‟ve said some things about them. He 

said, I have not said those things about them; I said Tommy the 

comic, Tommy the comic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the member opposite, in his Throne Speech, 

I mean his maiden speech, his first opportunity to speak in this 

Assembly and he says quote, from 2001: 

 

. . . as a fighter pilot was I was part of a defensive structure 

in the free world to defend against the spread of 

communism. Now isn‟t that ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

Here we spend millions of dollars — billions worldwide, 

— [we] put lives on the line to stop and arrest the spread 

of communism, and lo and behold, here in Saskatchewan 

we vote in a party that has the same ideologies. 

 

Here‟s a member on every opportunity — there‟s not one 

member over there who could deny this — on every 

opportunity has hurled insults like that across the floor, denies it 

by saying Tommy the comic. Not believable. Members 

opposite, instead of self-promotion, instead of self-preservation, 

they need to look at the issues, address the issues, and come up 

with a real plan that‟s bold. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Sixty-five minute debate having 

ended, we go into a 10-minute question period. I have 

recognized the member from Moose Jaw . . . 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s been established that the 

former government — that former government, the NDP — 

during their watch closed hospitals especially in rural 

Saskatchewan but more particularly one of the newer hospitals, 

and that was the Plains hospital here in the Queen City. They 

got rid of medical staff, lowered the seats in universities, and 

severely hampered the health care of this province. In their 

1999 election campaign, they promised to reduce waiting lists 

by 30 per cent. And that promise was never kept. After breaking 

their promise, they reduced the medical system in this province. 

They turned around and sent 366 patients out of the province 

for hip and knee surgery. 

 

To the member of Saskatoon eastward who indicated she had 

such surgery: was she one of the chosen friends of the NDP 

who was chosen to go out of the province for this surgery? And 

what has changed now that they wouldn‟t send the people who 

are suffering for months, perhaps years, for surgical . . .  

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Question has elapsed. Recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Eastview, yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. 

The member was asking a question about the 52 hospitals. I‟m 

asking back: what have they done in two years to open any of 

them? I mean the criticism is not anymore on what we did. The 

criticism now is what have you done? We‟ve had two years. 

Nobody buys the hiding behind what we did or didn‟t do. 

Nobody cares. They want to know what this government has 

done, what this government plans to do. And frankly this 

motion says this government really has nowhere to go, nowhere 

to go. 

 

All they‟re interested in is putting forward information that 

clearly the public isn‟t going to accept when orthopedic 

surgeons have said it‟s wrong. The public will not buy that. And 

the red herring throwing out by the ministry yesterday about 

sending surgeries out of the province has always been done. 

When we don‟t have the service, we don‟t have the technology, 

we don‟t have the specialists — we do send them out. We don‟t 

have a certain type of surgery, always have. The difference is, 

we don‟t pre-book. We don‟t pre-pay, and we don‟t have 

premiums. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is to the member from Saskatoon Northwest. As he 

bellows from his seat speaking about their health care system, I 

want to see if he spoke up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if he got up 

and he spoke up loud and clear about the problems the Sask 

Party‟s having in relation to sending patients to BC, of being 

fair to all the health care workers. Did he speak up when they 

cancelled the surgical care centres? Did he speak up and be 

loud, ripping apart Station 20 West? Did he speak up about not 

dealing with the increasing youth suicide? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as he stands up and pontificates from where he 

sits, he has not spoken up for all these issues that we are raising, 

and yet he has the audacity to say that they got a better health 

care system. Why didn‟t they speak up then, and why is he all 

of a sudden being very quiet now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the previous 

government ignored the call for a guarantee, our government 

has set the bold goal to reduce surgical waiting times to no 

longer than three months within four years. That‟s what I‟m 

standing up for. I am standing up to help ensure patients that 

they can be able to have hip replacements within four months 

instead of ten months or two years so that they can see an 

orthopedic surgeon. 

 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3477 

So I would like to quote the Edmonton Journal which came out 

Tuesday, November 3, 2009, in support of our government‟s 

action to reduce wait times. That‟s what I‟m standing up for. 

I‟m standing up for the people of this province to alleviate the 

pain of years of waiting for surgery. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There‟s been quite a bit of talk going 

back and forth. I‟m having trouble. If we have to, we‟ll either 

cancel it or have some members ejected. Government‟s turn to 

ask the question. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, we should never have to debate 

the idea that the patient must come first. We must ensure that if 

a person is in pain, they get the relief they need in a timely 

manner even if that means sending them to Ontario. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the next question from the 

government side. You‟re asking? Okay. Okay. Okay. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — I am asking to the member of Saskatoon 

Massey Place, why do they prefer to have someone wait in pain 

for surgery when it could be performed in another province 

sooner? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Who was the question to? I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s surprising that the member opposite doesn‟t seem 

to realize that a great deal of work was done by the former 

government. There is mountains of information that the 

Minister of Health has access to. There was a number of 

initiatives that were put in place and a number of initiatives that 

were based on good public policy and extremely well thought 

out planning that we‟re seeing significant improvements, and 

more on the way. And this government and these members 

cancelled them purely because of politics. They wanted the 

Sask Party to look better. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It‟s their turn. I recognize the 

government, or the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Rosthern-Shellbrook gave a number of examples 

that he felt needed to be addressed, the doctor shortage in his 

community, also in Shellbrook, where I know Shellbrook has 

been campaigning and lobbying for a number of years for 

capital funding for a hospital. How exactly does this Sask Party 

plan, that they‟re all patting themselves on the back over, help 

his community? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to the 

member opposite from Moose Jaw, how does it help the 

residents of Shellbrook, which is in my constituency? This 

Health minister approved 13 long-term care facilities in the 

province of Saskatchewan — 13, one of which of those 13 was 

Shellbrook, was Shellbrook. 

 

Also part of the long-term plan that Shellbrook got was also in 

addition to a new hospital. That‟s what this minister did under 

our government . . . who chose that because they have the 

doctors in place in Shellbrook. It adds to their facility and their 

community to go ahead and build a long-term care facility to 

help that community. That‟s what we have done. 

 

[12:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Saskatoon Massey. Mr. 

Speaker, when the members opposite were in power, they 

routinely sent patients out of the province to have their 

surgeries performed. Many times in session the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview had argued that this practice creates a 

two-tier health care system — one tier for those who can afford 

it and one tier for those who can‟t. 

 

My question is to the member from Saskatoon Massey. In this 

position, does their party that‟s sending patients out of the 

province for treatments without covering the medical cost, 

create a two-tier health care system? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the question 

from the member opposite. It‟s sad, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member opposite is displaying his lack of knowledge in terms 

of how the referral system works here in Saskatchewan with 

physicians, here in the province and out of province. It‟s been 

for a long-standing reality here in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

There are subspecialties that are so specialized that indeed these 

specialists are out of province. And it‟s been the practice of 

governments past, as it is now, to send those individuals out of 

province. 

 

The question here, Mr. Speaker, is the deviation from that 

policy the members opposite are pursuing and how now 

exporting out-of-province is the first option as opposed to one 

aspect of the entire health care system. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member of Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, a long-standing tradition of the 

New Democratic Party is to have balanced budgets. What we‟ve 

got with this band of men and women opposite us is a $1.3 

billion oversight on their budget — a huge budget blunder on 

one item. 

 

So how is it that anybody should trust them on health care when 

all they‟re concerned about is people moving past their $1.3 

billion blunder on potash and turning the page to something 

else. And how is it they set a date two years after the next 

election for this health care plan? 

 

So to the member from Saskatoon Northwest: how is it that 

anybody should trust them with health care when they mess up 

the budget as badly as they did? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 



3478 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we‟ve 

reduced the debt by 40 per cent. We gave the largest tax 

reduction in the history of this province. Because we care about 

the people first. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Seventy-five minute debate has 

ended . . . [inaudible] . . . the motion. I recognize . . . Why is the 

member from Regina on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Regina South. There we go. Mr. 

Speaker, leave to introduce guests please? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina South has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. I recognize the member for 

Regina South. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

direct the members‟ attention to the west gallery. There are two 

individuals seated near the front row there. Mr. Hans Moor who 

is a special envoy representing the ambassador to Canada from 

the Netherlands. His particular portfolio is economic 

development. And my lovely wife Jocelyn, who was recently 

elected to her second term in Regina City Council. They‟re 

here. Certainly welcome them. Thank you so much for coming. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Motion No. 1 — Loss of Support for the Government 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Boy, Mr. Speaker, with that kind of 

welcoming it feels good to stand up as a New Democrat on this 

side of the House. And it feels even better, Mr. Speaker, to be 

standing up as a New Democrat for the real issues day in, day 

out. And I look at the week in review. My goodness, what a 

good week to be raising the real issues that are affecting people 

and the many failures of the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

I‟m pleased today to address the motion that we‟re going to be 

discussing here today. The motion that I‟ll be moving here 

today is: 

 

That due to this government‟s financial mismanagement 

resulting in a reduction of government services, most 

notably in primary health services, this government no 

longer enjoys the support of the Assembly and the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So that‟s the motion that we‟re going to be discussing here 

today, Mr. Speaker. And I have to say I don‟t know if I‟m going 

to have enough time here to cover thoroughly what I do want to 

get to here, Mr. Speaker. As I look to the clock here today I 

think I‟m only going to have about 40 minutes. I was hoping for 

certainly hours, Mr. Speaker, to address the kind of 

mismanagement that we‟re recognizing here in this Assembly 

and across this province. 

 

A Hippocratic government that‟s been elected, one that not long 

ago the Saskatchewan Party that promised fiscal 

mismanagement to the people of this province, spoke about this 

for many years, and their years toiling in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know what, Mr. Speaker, a few people in this 

province thought that they could trust them with the finances, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

On other promises as it relates to health care and wait times, 

Mr. Speaker, the rhetoric was thick and rich as well, Mr. 

Speaker, from the Saskatchewan Party. But what we‟re hearing, 

Mr. Speaker, in two short years, two short years, Mr. Speaker, 

that it was all bluster, no delivery, all talk, no gain, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know our member from Massey Place 

highlights so well today, Mr. Speaker, and on a regular basis, 

that the Sask Party government is so focused on spin and 

communication of their message and cheerleading as opposed 

to the real issues and the real challenges Saskatchewan people 

are facing. 

 

They‟re not willing to recognize the flaw in their erred 

economic policy. They are not willing to address the 

mismanagement of their finances. And it‟s worthy, Mr. 

Speaker, to just make sure that Saskatchewan people are aware 

at this point in time . . . And the member from Moose Jaw 

North, I know, has no worries about the mismanagement of his 

government. Because I‟m confident, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member from Moose Jaw North doesn‟t understand what‟s 

going on because I know he doesn‟t sit in many of those 

meetings. 

 

But I know he does sit in the back benches of this legislature 

and I would implore, I would implore the deputy minister or the 

minister sitting in the back here to sit down with the member 

for Moose Jaw North and to brief that member, to brief that 

member on what‟s going on, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to our 

finances. Because other than some backbench MLAs that might 

not understand what‟s going on, I can assure that our Finance 

minister is starting to realize what‟s occurring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know our member from Prince Albert Northcote just 

highlighted, Mr. Speaker, that we had the biggest blunder in this 

province‟s history on one resource, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

that our current Premier and the Sask Party, they like to talk 

about making history, Mr. Speaker, and they do it lots of times 

with really small achievements and really low bars, Mr. 

Speaker, and they talk about the history that they‟re making. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is making history — no 

doubt. It‟s making history from a financial mismanagement 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, because never in the history of this 

government, of this province, has a government ever misjudged 

a revenue assumption the way this government has. Never, 

never has a government missed a revenue source from one 

resource such as potash this year by over $1 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I put forward a written question to the Finance minister, Mr. 

Speaker, to ask when such a blunder had occurred in our 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3479 

province‟s history, Mr. Speaker. Most people would say, well 

this likely happened during the Devine era in the ‟80s, Mr. 

Speaker, because it‟s so renowned with financial 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. But I think it‟s important that 

Saskatchewan people know that this is a record blunder and far 

surpasses anything that Devine mismanaged with respect to one 

revenue source and missing that revenue assumption, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So right now we don‟t know the exact extent of where the dust 

is going to settle on this revenue source, Mr. Speaker. We know 

right now that it certainly was . . . Well you know they‟re 

claiming it was $1.3 billion at first quarter. We were saying this 

number seems to be really soft, Mr. Speaker. We were saying 

we think that the blunder is larger than this, Mr. Speaker, and 

we‟re starting to hear that maybe this government‟s finally 

starting to recognize that. 

 

We hope that the information we‟re receiving from this 

government is accurate and factual, Mr. Speaker. We‟re looking 

forward to mid-year, Mr. Speaker, but it seems that we‟re 1.5 

and beyond, Mr. Speaker, out on that one revenue source, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the result of this, Mr. Speaker, is that at a time where we 

have no excuse for this but for Sask Party‟s own 

mismanagement, we see a shortfall that‟s growing, Mr. 

Speaker, and right now a shortfall that can accurately be 

described as a billion dollar shortfall, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

growing and it can only be attributed to the Sask Party‟s own 

mismanagement, because in fact we don‟t have a revenue 

shortage in this province, Mr. Speaker. Things have softened 

off a little bit but there‟s certainly . . . The revenues are strong. 

Well over $9 billion in revenues, Mr. Speaker. For a Finance 

minister and a Premier not to be able to balance the budget and 

manage its priorities within that context, Mr. Speaker, is 

reckless and it‟s deplorable. 

 

And I guess what we‟re starting to recognize, Mr. Speaker, is 

that what we‟re seeing is actually we‟re building a structural 

deficit into the finances of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Because 

at a time where, as I say, revenues are still strong, they‟re 

certainly less than the wild ambitions of the Premier, who 

thought his gut feeling told him that potash would be $2 billion, 

Mr. Speaker, and then of course the reality it was going to be 

far less than that in a world recession. 

 

But what we see is a structural deficit being built in, Mr. 

Speaker, because we have a time where revenues are in fact 

strong, Mr. Speaker, and we have a government who‟s running 

a massive shortfall at this point in time. And the member from 

Lakeview highlights this well. And what we‟ve created is a 

burn rate on government resources, burn rate on revenues. And 

certainly if you‟re in business, Mr. Speaker, from a corporate 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, a burn rate is not a good thing. 

You‟re utilizing your resources that you might have, and you‟re 

not sustaining your own budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And right now we see this government, I guess, going and 

tearing out equity in our Crown corporations at a time where 

that should not be going on, at a time where those Crowns in 

fact need those resources, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s causing all 

sorts of precipitous problems for the Crown corporations from a 

debt to equity perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we know these guys don‟t believe in Crown corporations 

anyways. So it kind of plays into their best interests to strip that 

equity from the Crowns, weaken the Crowns, put them in a 

position that they‟re no longer financially viable, and then they 

can sell them off for pennies on the dollar, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But really what‟s fundamental to the structural deficit that‟s 

being created by this government, Mr. Speaker, is runaway 

spending, spending that this province simply can‟t afford. And 

at one point the jokers on the other side, the Sask Party, 

pretended that they were going to restrain spending to I believe 

5, 4, 3, and 2 per cent in consecutive years, kind of an average 

of 3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve seen the exact opposite. And 

I think if you can look from the budget tabled in 2007 to the 

budget tabled in 2009, we‟ve recognized that we‟ve had a 32 

per cent increase in spending, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Wow. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview says wow. You know, this is a number that you share 

with individuals in the community, individuals across this 

province, whether in Weyburn, whether in Kelvington or 

whether you‟re in Batoche or whether in North Battleford or 

Lloydminster. And people are astounded with that kind of 

spending, Mr. Speaker. Because whether in balance of their 

own family‟s finances or in balance of their business or in 

balance of their farm operation, Mr. Speaker, they recognize 

that you can‟t crank up spending to that kind of an extent, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly when you‟re doing it with faulty revenue 

assumptions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we talk about a structural deficit, the problem with 

that, Mr. Speaker, is that we see something where we see a 

summary deficit on a given year, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not going 

to be remedied in the out-years. It‟s not going to be a better 

circumstance next year or the year after that, Mr. Speaker, 

without the government addressing the actual fundamental 

problems within their budget. 

 

So very different, Mr. Speaker, wherein odd years have passed 

where New Democrats always brought forward prudence and 

responsibility and balance to budgets and in the odd 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker, where we had oil of $20 a barrel 

and we had crop insurance payments as respect to drought, Mr. 

Speaker, where we ended up having a shortfall from a summary 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, we had the resources to backfill, Mr. 

Speaker, to backfill when revenues had dropped off in an 

anomalous circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is distinctly different. We 

have revenues that skyrocketed from a red-hot economy that the 

New Democrats handed over to the Saskatchewan Party in 

2008. And with that, we handed over one-time revenues in the 

form of rainy-day funds and surpluses like a government had 

never experienced before. They came into unprecedented 

wealth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now while the numbers from 2008 have cooled, Mr. 

Speaker, when we look at where the dust is settling on 2009, 

Mr. Speaker, we have a very, very healthy revenue stream, Mr. 



3480 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

Speaker. Sometimes we hear from the Premier, and he goes 

around this province and they say to him, I think, why have you 

mismanaged the finances so significantly? And he blames it on 

potash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What he doesn‟t point to is the fact that we have a very strong, 

solid revenue base in this province in 2009. We have over $9 

billion flowing into government coffers, Mr. Speaker. Our 

budget just, you know, a few years back was 7 and $8 million, 

Mr. Speaker. So really what a gifted position, even in 2009, this 

Finance minister should be in here. But as a result of the 

mismanagement of the minister himself and the Premier and the 

incompetence, here we have a major problem. 

 

[12:30] 

 

How do you rein in spending at this point in time when you‟re 

moving forward with a structural deficit, Mr. Speaker? Well 

these are the kind of tough questions, tough challenges that that 

government has in front of them, Mr. Speaker. What I 

understand is that this government still isn‟t showing the kind 

of restraint and caution on these fronts that it should, and in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, it has further expenditure pressures, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I don‟t know when they‟re actually going to get real with a 

plan that reconciles their errors and addresses it for the future. It 

seems that they‟re truly, with a hope and a prayer, crossing their 

fingers, their toes, and thinking good thoughts and hoping that 

they can somehow eke out the next two years with some sort of 

assembly of balance, Mr. Speaker. But that‟s not going to be the 

case. 

 

And I chat with so many individuals in my team of financial 

advisors in my role as Finance critic, Mr. Speaker, who . . . And 

I‟ll say this, Mr. Speaker, certainly not all of them are New 

Democrat party members. They‟re from the broader business 

community and corporate community across this province. And 

what they‟re looking at is, they are really perplexed with how 

so quickly, Mr. Speaker, not only did they make huge financial 

errors but in the end, political errors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, you know, I think that the member from Athabasca says 

that the crows are coming home to roost and others say that the 

chickens are coming home to roost. Whatever birds are coming 

home to roost, Mr. Speaker, they certainly are, you know, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we talk about a structural deficit and we see a weakening in 

the economy, Mr. Speaker, and certainly reflective of the poor 

economic policy, the flawed economic policy believed in and 

espoused by and deployed by the government opposite. And 

when we see the kind of job loss that‟s occurring in this 

province at this point in time in 2009, Mr. Speaker, we do have 

concerns about what this means from a perspective of economic 

weakening — what that means for corporate income tax, what 

that means for personal income tax, and what that means for 

availability of dollars within this province for consumption. 

And of course then affecting the consumption taxes that are 

very important to our province‟s treasury. 

 

So we see it on many fronts. We see the direct mismanagement 

of the finances and we see the mismanagement of the economy, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s going to have a profound and negative 

impact on resources available to government and is all part of 

this structural deficit that Saskatchewan New Democrats are so 

opposed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you talk about a structural deficit, Mr. Speaker, and 

shortfalls, this goes against every grain of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, who I believe and know, Mr. Speaker, 

believe so much in responsible management, planning for the 

future. And they realize, Mr. Speaker, that taking on debt at 

times when that shouldn‟t be going on, running deficits at times 

of revenue strength, really hamper the kind of opportunities that 

Saskatchewan people should rightfully achieve in a 

resource-rich province as we move forward. 

 

And they see the Saskatchewan Party who‟s mismanaging 

priorities, mismanaging their finances, and they recognize that 

this is squashing many of the hopes and dreams that individual 

communities or families have for themselves, business within 

this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It doesn‟t bode well for Saskatchewan people. That‟s where 

Saskatchewan New Democrats are so proud, Mr. Speaker, to 

stand up to make sure that that kind of balance is re-established. 

We shouldn‟t be in the circumstance we‟re in here right now. 

We shouldn‟t be anticipating the kind of further disarray that 

we‟re going to hear about in two weeks or a week from now in 

the mid-year report, Mr. Speaker. But that being said, that‟s the 

point that we‟re in and the Saskatchewan New Democrats are 

going to continue to call for this circumstance to be righted, to 

be fixed, and we‟re going to be putting forward constructive 

solutions, as we have all the way along, to make sure that this 

never happens again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we recognize in this province . . . And we‟ve travelled. 

We‟re regularly meeting in all constituencies in this province, a 

fairly intensive tour throughout the summer but more 

significantly on a regular basis. And I know it‟s something that 

I think the members opposite might not be recognizing but if 

you‟re in the coffee shop at Indian Head or if you‟re talking 

with businesses down the strip in Carlyle or whether you‟re up 

in Lloydminster, the story is that of financial mismanagement. 

 

And when people have a few of the facts shared with them as 

well, in fact they‟re almost in disbelief at first, Mr. Speaker. 

And you have to of course bring forward the information 

because they don‟t believe that this could be the circumstance. 

And we hear regularly from — whether we‟re in the coffee 

shop in Indian Head and they‟re talking about the disarray of 

the finances or if we‟re up in Lloydminster and talking with 

people in around Lloydminster — we hear about the 

recklessness that they just don‟t appreciate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know I was having good conversations with individuals 

through Carlyle and Stoughton who were speaking more 

directly to incompetence and a lack of ability to fulfill the kind 

of responsible management that Saskatchewan people expect. 

 

And Saskatchewan people are a very pragmatic people, Mr. 

Speaker. And they certainly, when the Saskatchewan Party 

wants to bluster about things that they pat themselves on the 

back over — many times pretty nominal achievements, Mr. 

Speaker — Saskatchewan people question that. And they 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3481 

question why the Saskatchewan Party spends so much time 

patting itself on its back when it should be addressing the reality 

of the circumstances that it‟s created. 

 

Further to this, Mr. Speaker, we see a government that‟s never 

been less transparent, at least in the last 18 years, Mr. Speaker. 

We see a government that‟s put itself into hardship and put 

Saskatchewan people into hardship as it relates to our finances, 

and this government doesn‟t make that information available. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we saw this government delay a very 

important function of reporting and accountability for 

Saskatchewan people here this summer as it related to our first 

quarter update. And it‟s important every year, Mr. Speaker, that 

these accountability measures are adhered to, Mr. Speaker, but 

particularly important, particularly important when you have 

the kind of mismanagement that‟s going on this summer, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And my colleague from Regina Elphinstone says, did the dog 

eat their homework? Why were they late, Mr. Speaker? It 

actually had nothing to do with that, Mr. Speaker. It had a lot 

more to do with spin again, Mr. Speaker. Because what we had 

going on was we had a Premier actually that had the premiers 

from across Canada here for meetings, Mr. Speaker. What we 

know, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier doesn‟t like bad news. In 

fact when he has bad news, he lets other people carry it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We also know that the Premier is really liking to hear that some 

people think that he should maybe be the leader of the 

Conservative Party federally one day. And the last thing he 

wanted to do was sort of let the cat out of the bag in advance of 

the premiers‟ meeting here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think it‟s a real shame, Mr. Speaker, that a premier and a 

government would put forward one person‟s career ambitions 

above that of fiscal transparency and accountability back to 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And the fact being that 

most people in this province had recognized that the revenue 

circumstance, from what this government was purporting, had 

changed significantly and that the reality was that the 

Saskatchewan New Democrats were bang on with their 

projections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as we near mid-year, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s important, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government get the message loud and clear 

that that won‟t be acceptable. And I think they know that 

because I know they likely had a desire to push this reporting 

outside of session, Mr. Speaker, into December, right, maybe 

on Christmas Eve or something like that, Mr. Speaker — the 

night before Christmas. But I think this government recognizes 

from their own constituents, from their own supporters, that you 

can‟t play those kinds of games with Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker. People don‟t appreciate that one bit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why have we gotten here? We talked about the runaway 

spending, but as I understand, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got broken 

down processes within government. We have processes that are 

so important, long espoused. We even see it from legislation. 

But certainly we see that through Treasury Board at this point in 

time. We see a process that‟s not functioning properly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Now part of this, Mr. Speaker, gets to the direction given by 

this government. Another part of it gets to the fact that they‟ve 

really hurt our civil service. They‟ve threatened our civil 

service, and they‟ve in fact gutted our civil service. And they‟ve 

done so at a significant cost to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And when we spend $13 million to fire lifelong civil servants in 

this province, it doesn‟t serve long-standing processes that are 

very good for responsible and accountable government well, 

Mr. Speaker. So we see that lost capacity within our civil 

service. And now we have, you know, revenue assumptions that 

are being put forward from the Premier‟s gut feeling, Mr. 

Speaker, with the same sort of thought process that you might 

put into about who‟s going to win a football game from a 

prognosticator‟s kind of perspective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as much as we‟d love to see every single revenue source in 

this province fly through the ceiling of expectations and provide 

plenty for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we need to 

plan for the real circumstances, Mr. Speaker. That‟s not what 

this government has done in any way, shape, or form. 

 

I‟d like to highlight specifically back to spending, Mr. Speaker. 

And the government, the Sask Party when it was in opposition, 

put forward a . . . “Securing the Future.” Now we might call 

that document mortgaging the future, Mr. Speaker. But what we 

saw in this document here is we saw increases, Mr. Speaker, of 

5 per cent, 4 per cent, 3 per cent, 2 per cent, Mr. Speaker, as it 

relates to expenditures. And they put this forward to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

The member from Wood River probably took this down around 

and said, we‟re going to be responsible. This is how we‟re 

going to spend your dollars. Because we‟re conservatives, 

we‟re going to be careful with your dollars. Now nothing, Mr. 

Speaker, could be further from the truth. 

 

The people of Wood River, the people of Prince Albert, the 

people of Canora realize now that securing the future really 

should‟ve been spelled mortgaging the future, Mr. Speaker. 

And the Deputy Premier says, is this a prop? I guess I‟m just 

reading from . . . It‟s actually your document. Oh sorry that I 

held it up here. I‟ll just reference it. 

 

But what I think is important is this is the Sask Party‟s plan and 

promises, Mr. Speaker. So what‟s really important is that the 

deputy minister reacquaint himself with these promises. So the 

Deputy Premier should be aware that what these promises were, 

were 5 per cent increase, 4 per cent increase, 3 per cent 

increase, 2 per cent increases. That was your promise to your 

constituents and the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I remind the member to address all 

his remarks through the Chair. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But what‟s 

important is that when we see 5, 4, 3, 2, as what the constraint 

was supposed to be on spending, what we realize is that this 

government, in two years, increased the spending 32 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker — 32 per cent, you know. And a couple of 

members smile. I think a couple out of embarrassment, others 

out of, I tried to stop that, and others because they were behind 



3482 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the Deputy Premier needs to recognize he needs to balance 

his priorities. He talks about a few of the things that he‟s done, 

but they have to be done in a measured context and they need to 

be balanced, Mr. Speaker. So that‟s pretty important, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When I look even to that document specifically, Mr. Speaker, I 

see that expenses in 2009-10 as promised by this document 

were supposed to be, in 2009-10, 8.9 billion; 8.9 billion. That 

was the promise. That was the Sask Party promise. Well what‟s 

the reality, Mr. Speaker? The reality is we‟re well over $10 

billion. The initial budget came out with a ten billion to six 

hundred million dollar expenditure, this year at this point in 

time. Well that‟s a concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I go to open up the ‟08-09 budget, Mr. Speaker, which . . . 

something about readying for growth. I guess it could‟ve been 

named readying for deficit. What we see in this document, Mr. 

Speaker, was that we then had operating expenses of $8.8 

billion planned for this calendar year right now, Mr. Speaker, 8 

billion. So they were sticking to a measured kind of a focus a 

year ago, just a year ago. So committed to $8 billion. 

 

But was the reality, Mr. Speaker? Well here we are in 

2009-2010. This government comes out with a massive 

spending increase, runaway, unsustainable spending, and its 

expenses are $10.2 billion. Well what happened? What 

happened? What happened? The Deputy Premier is asking 

questions about what would we not do and what not. 

 

It‟s a matter of balancing priorities. What I wouldn‟t do, what 

we wouldn‟t do, to the Deputy Premier, is put the people of 

Saskatchewan in the kind of structural deficit that we see at this 

point in time when revenues are strong for this province, and 

we see a $1 billion shortfall. 

 

The Deputy Premier goes on about different programs that 

they‟ve administered. I think the question that needs to be put 

forward, the question that needs to be put forward is, does that 

government, does the Sask Party not measure what sort of 

programs it‟s putting forward? And where are its processes to 

put forward a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker? Where are their 

processes to make sure that their budgets balance, Mr. Speaker? 

Because at this point in time there‟s no excuse, Mr. Speaker, no 

excuse to be running the kind of structural deficit that we‟re 

experiencing. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — With leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

[12:45] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a real 

honour to stand and introduce a very special guest here today. 

Behind the bar on this side is Brian Masse. He‟s the MP 

[Member of Parliament] for Windsor West. He represents the 

NDP in the federal House of Commons. And we‟re really 

excited to have him out west here. He‟s here as part of the 

PNWER [Pacific NorthWest Economic Region] meetings that 

are going on. But he wanted to come visit and talk. And I 

wanted to really highlight his involvement, particularly around 

Bill C-273. 

 

Bill 273 was the right to repair Bill that has made great progress 

championing the rights of individuals to choose where they 

want to have their vehicles repaired. And there‟s been great 

progress. And I should report to this House . . . I made a 

member‟s statement last spring. In fact I asked all the members 

to write their MPs, and they did. And as a result this Bill has . . . 

now actually the Bill‟s been withdrawn but there‟s been parallel 

agreements to see that the intention of the Bill will take place. 

And so Mr. Masse withdrew his Bill last week but there‟s been 

great progress. 

 

And I want to thank everybody who did participate in that 

letter-writing campaign in contacting their MPs. So I do ask all 

members here to give a warm welcome to Brian Masse. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Loss of Support for the Government 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So I‟ve 

highlighted, I believe, specifically the concerns around 

spending of this government, runaway spending, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think what we will highlight now is our concerns as it relates 

to revenue projections and the foundation of the budget that‟s 

been put forward by this government. And you know, we hear 

lots about potash and, you know, we hear the Premier kind of 

try to excuse himself of responsibility because he points to 

potash, Mr. Speaker. But he needs to be pointing to himself. 

The responsibility is directly on his shoulders, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it‟s important to look at this in the context of what kind 

of revenues has potash provided Saskatchewan treasury for the 

past so many years. And when we look at 2008, Mr. Speaker 

. . . And Saskatchewan people know full well that the 

Saskatchewan New Democrats handed to this government an 

economy that was firing on all cylinders. As a result, there was 

lots of revenues moving in and many resources were really 

sought after at that point in time. So if we exclude that 

anomalous year of 2008, Mr. Speaker, and we go back to potash 

revenues for this province, five-year average has provided this 

province $260 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I say $260 million in that five-year average disregarding 

the anomalous year of 2008 because it‟s important that we 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3483 

recognize then that, last year when this budget was being put 

together, we knew the world was in full recession — worldwide 

recession like we hadn‟t seen in a generation or more, Mr. 

Speaker. And this government forged ahead with numbers that 

were completely unrealistic. In fact, they came from some sort 

of a fantasyland, Mr. Speaker, and they put forward a budget of 

$2 billion for revenues to come in from potash. 

 

Well think about that. Five-year average, $260 million. The 

world is in recession. Our biggest buyers, India, China, and 

Brazil, are in recession and they‟re signalling that they‟re not 

going to be buying near as much potash if they‟ll be buying any 

at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In our own backyard, Mr. Speaker, we have producers scaling 

back production in historic ways. Now the reason they‟re 

scaling back production, Mr. Speaker, was to ensure that they 

were managing the supply to reflect the reduced demand, Mr. 

Speaker. But this government misses all of those signs, Mr. 

Speaker, and forges ahead with a budget of $2 billion. 

Historically 260, worldwide recession, signs in our own 

backyard, and they put forward a reckless, irresponsible budget 

assuming $2 billion of its revenues on potash, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And beyond that point, Mr. Speaker, it‟s one thing to book the 

revenues as a assumption on the budget, but they spent every 

single last dollar, as we talked about in the spending, Mr. 

Speaker. So we do see historic — historic — mismanagement 

on that front. 

 

We highlighted during budget time our concerns as it related to 

gross domestic product and the different assumptions that this 

government had. The Sask Party disregarded the private sector 

averages, the banks, the analysts, Mr. Speaker. And they went 

on again the Premier‟s gut feeling, Mr. Speaker, that we realize 

doesn‟t provide good business sense, Mr. Speaker. And they put 

forward, you know, a budget that had three times what the 

private sector averages were suggesting. 

 

What we‟ve realized has come true, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

private sector was a lot closer to what was going on, Mr. 

Speaker. And in fact we see contractions in this economy under 

the Saskatchewan Party and their flawed economic policies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In 2009, right now, the projections stand that the Conference 

Board of Canada says that we‟ll shrink or decline, contract by 

negative 2.7 per cent, Mr. Speaker. From Royal Bank, RBC, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re seeing a contraction of 1.3 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker — a shrinking economy. When we look at TD 

[Toronto Dominion] Bank, what are they saying? Well they‟re 

saying the economy‟s shrinking under the Saskatchewan Party 

to the tune of 1 per cent. And IHS Global Insight are also 

calling for a shrinking economy. You average these together, 

Mr. Speaker, the private sector averages . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And you 

know, I think that when we recognize right now private sector 

forecasters are challenging this government on its policies and 

on their projections daily — we read it in the financial papers 

across this country in fact, Mr. Speaker — and what we realize 

is that while they‟re still sort of, they‟ve got the pompoms in the 

air and pretending that things are happening which aren‟t, what 

we realize, the reality is that private sector forecasters are 

saying that we‟re shrinking our economy in 2009 under the 

flawed policies of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. And 

that‟s too bad. 

 

But I think it‟s worthwhile, Mr. Speaker, that we‟ve said so 

many times that this is a problem of the Sask Party‟s own 

making. And it is, Mr. Speaker. And some say that no one could 

have predicted this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They set themselves up on this one, Mr. Speaker. What were 

they handed? Well they were handed more revenues than a 

government had ever been handed in the history of this 

province. They were handed an economy hotter — hotter, Mr. 

Speaker — than this economy had ever been. And that came 

from Saskatchewan New Democrats, the business people of this 

province, the workers in this province, and the resource base 

that we have, Mr. Speaker. And we‟re proud of that, Mr. 

Speaker, very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I go back to budget time, Mr. Speaker, and there are some 

different things that were said at that point in time on budget 

day, Mr. Speaker. And I guess I‟ll quote from Hansard a little 

bit, Mr. Speaker, just to show how out to lunch and how the 

Premier and his cabinet had not a sniff, Mr. Speaker, not a sniff, 

not a clue, not a clue as it related to their economy and their 

finances. 

 

I heard from one individual, one individual who said that if 

clues were shoes, this government would be shoeless, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s right. That‟s how bad it is. Anyways the poor 

humour shouldn‟t really occur because what we have is a 

massive error that‟s costing Saskatchewan people.  

 

But some of the quotes, Mr. Speaker, some of the quotes. Okay 

just to prove that this government knew full well that the world 

was in economic recession . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Didn‟t have a sniff. Didn‟t have a sniff. But they certainly 

knew, Mr. Speaker, that the world was in global recession. And 

I quote from March 18, 2009, the Finance minister. I quote, 

“This Provincial Budget comes at a time of global recession . . . 

a complete 180 degree shift from one year ago.” 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who said it? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Who said that? The Finance minister. 

When? At budget time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Finance minister knew that the world was within global 

recession. I don‟t know how you couldn‟t know that. It was 

every single headline at the point in time. But the point of 

making the point, Mr. Speaker, is that it‟s the global economy 

that buys the resources from this province, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

China. It‟s India. It‟s Brazil who we rely on, Mr. Speaker, to 

purchase our potash. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are we going to vote today, Trent? 

 



3484 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2009 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Deputy Premier asked me the 

question about voting, and certainly we‟re going to vote in a 

little while.  

 

But I remember very clearly, very clearly, Mr. Speaker, just 

before, just before last session in the spring, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it would have been about May. And the Deputy Premier 

sat in his chair as we were challenging his government about 

potash revenues, and he sat there kind of excited and confident. 

 

We recognize now, unfortunately clueless at that point in time, 

saying, just wait guys, just wait. The big potash contracts are 

going to be here in June. And we looked at him and said, well 

boy, you sure have a lot of confidence. But unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, he had not a sniff what was going on in the world 

economy and how it related back to our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m going to go back to a couple other comments, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the Finance minister on budget day. The Finance 

minister says . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to quote again 

the Finance minister on budget day. And I quote: 

 

This “new balance” is built on strong, but cautious, 

revenue estimates.  

 

Cautious revenue estimates. 

 

We don‟t expect to see the massive jump in provincial 

revenues that we enjoyed last year . . . 

 

However, this year, we‟re expecting revenues to be up by 

$1.3 billion dollars from the 2008-09 . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, what an embarrassment. You know, members 

opposite, you know, I know they kind of . . . sometimes they 

still have to have bravado on this front, but what an 

embarrassment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now the problem, Mr. Speaker, is it‟s this kind of 

mismanagement, it‟s this kind of cluelessness that actually hurts 

and dashes the hopes and opportunities for Saskatchewan 

people. It hurts business people in Canora. It hurts business 

people in Swift Current. It hurts business people and 

opportunities in Prince Albert. It‟s indiscriminate of where we 

live, Mr. Speaker, or where we represent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m going to go on, Mr. Speaker, just to talk about a little bit 

what the opposition was offering because, you know, someone 

can say, you know, hindsight‟s 20/20 or, you know, it‟s pretty 

easy to rear-end quarterback, Mr. Speaker. So I think I‟m going 

to highlight at this point in time — just so that the public is 

crystal clear, Mr. Speaker — that there were individuals, Mr. 

Speaker, pointing to the very specific problems of that budget 

last budget day, Mr. Speaker. So this isn‟t rear-end 

quarterbacking. We‟ve been bang on and direct with our 

criticisms from the moment it was tabled. 

And, Mr. Speaker, so what I hear at that point in time, our 

Finance critic put forward, Mr. Speaker, a house is only as solid 

as its foundation. And so it is with budgets. A key component 

of the foundation for a solid budget is its economic outlook. It 

goes on to question the assumptions, Mr. Speaker, as it relates 

to GDP [gross domestic product], that were wildly optimistic 

and completely out to lunch and out of line with private sector 

forecasters, Mr. Speaker, completely out of line. 

 

And it went on to challenge specifically the revenues that this 

government was assuming they would reap from potash 

revenues that were completely out of line with the signals that 

were going on in our own backyard with historic scaling down 

of production, Mr. Speaker, and completely out of line of what 

was going on from the major buyers in the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we put those criticisms to this government. We offered 

ourselves constructively to work with that government. And 

what we‟ve seen is ignorance, Mr. Speaker, and a forging ahead 

that is causing huge damage for Saskatchewan people. 

 

We‟ve seen runaway spending of 32 per cent in two years. It 

simply has to stop. That government needs to figure out the 

priorities that it values and needs to bring this back in line. 

 

We see the creation of a structural deficit that‟s going to 

damage the future prosperity of Saskatchewan for our children, 

for our business people, for our communities, Mr. Speaker. And 

it‟s unfair. We need the Saskatchewan Party to address the 

circumstance that‟s been there. 

 

And I hear it from members. We‟ve seen this with Devine 

before. We sure have, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve paid that price for it, 

Mr. Speaker. But never, not even Devine, Mr. Speaker, never 

did Devine‟s government — as terrible of financial managers as 

they were — never did they miss one revenue source. Never did 

Devine‟s government miss one revenue source by over $1 

billion. The record goes to this government, Mr. Speaker, of 

financial mismanagement. It‟s unprecedent and it‟s their record. 

And man, they must be embarrassed to have it. 

 

We‟re going to continue to challenge this government to clean 

up its financial act. We‟re going to put forward constructive 

solutions. We‟re going to stand up for the people and the 

businesses of this province, Mr. Speaker, because that‟s what 

our job is to do, and that‟s what the legacy of this party, the 

Saskatchewan New Democrats, is all about. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to move something 

that‟s very important to Saskatchewan people. With concern for 

the compromising mismanagement of this government, the 

Saskatchewan Party, that compromises the programs and future 

of Saskatchewan people, I move: 

 

That due to this government‟s financial mismanagement 

resulting in a reduction of government services, most 

notably in primary health services, this government no 

longer enjoys the support of the Assembly and the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and a couple people on the other side want to 

make sure they hear that again. And I know a few of them are 

feeling and know this full well, Mr. Speaker, “That due to this 



November 5, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 3485 

government‟s financial mismanagement resulting in a reduction 

of government services . . .” And at this time I‟d like to move 

the motion as read. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved a motion: 

 

That due to this government‟s financial mismanagement 

resulting in a reduction of government services, most 

notably in primary health services, this government no 

longer enjoys the support of the Assembly and the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Being past the time of adjournment, this House now stands 

adjourned until 1:30 Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3455 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3455 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3455 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3478 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3482 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3455 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3455 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3456 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3456 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3456 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3457 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Honouring Canadian Cadet Corps 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 

 Saskatchewan Association for Community Living Family Gathering 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3457 

 Saskatchewan Manufacturing Week 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3457 

 Pain Awareness Week 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3458 

 Community-Based Organization Workers Appreciation Day 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3458 

 Moose Jaw Multicultural Council Anniversary 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3458 

 Moose Jaw’s Strong Start Family Centre 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3458 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Public Safety Procedures 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3459 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3459 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3460 

 Proposed Stadium Development 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3462 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3462 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Cadet Recognition Day 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3463 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3464 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 606 — The Protection of the Wild Ponies of the Bronson Forest Act 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3464 

 Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3465 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3465 

PRIVILEGE 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3465 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3466 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3466 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Surgical Wait Times 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3466 

  Junor .............................................................................................................................................................................. 3468, 3476 

  LeClerc .......................................................................................................................................................................... 3470, 3476 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3471, 3477 



 

  Allchurch ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3473, 3477 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3474, 3477 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3476 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3476 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3477 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Loss of Support for the Government 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3478 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium Development 

Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

 Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

Government House Leader 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. James Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




