




















































Hansard: April 06, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 45A  MONDAY, APRIL 6, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2675 

 April 6, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, may I request leave of 

members of the Assembly to give an extended introduction? 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you to members for granting that 

request. It’s a pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of this House someone who 

truly needs no introduction at all. Brent Butt, originally of 

Tisdale, Saskatchewan, Canada, now of Vancouver, has joined 

us this day, seated in your gallery, to help the province 

announce that next Monday, April 13, will be Corner Gas Day 

in the province of Saskatchewan — a practice, by the way, we 

encourage in other provincial capitals and across the country — 

as Canada’s most successful sitcom signs off next Monday. 

 

Over 100 episodes, Mr. Speaker, a viewing audience at any 

given time up to 1.4 million people, never dropping below 1 

million viewers in any given week, Mr. Speaker, and it is all 

due to the vision and the perseverance of the gentleman that we 

honour today with this introduction. I think Brent Butt had this 

idea; perhaps there was another collaborator. And after a 

successful pitch and a pilot, here we are all these years and 

episodes later celebrating just a great television success in any 

country as this now airs in two dozen countries around the 

world, soon to go into syndication, I expect with the agreement 

of Mr. Butt and others involved in the production. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we just want to say to Brent, we want to 

thank him for the vision for the show, for the great contribution 

he’s made to Saskatchewan, to the film and television industry 

in this province. We want to acknowledge all the cast that 

brought Oscar and Emma and Hank and all the others to life 

every week for Canadians right across the country. But we also 

want to thank the production crew that were largely, principally 

from the province of Saskatchewan, who made the show 

possible week in and week out. 

 

We want to acknowledge the previous administration who 

undertook some important infrastructure investments with 

respect to this industry and taxation policies — ones we’re 

working hard to continue — that are certainly an important part 

of this success story as well. 

 

And, wholly inadequate as it is, we want to say to Brent, thank 

you for this vision and for his perseverance that brought Corner 

Gas to our province. We know that for generations to come 

many, many people from across our province, across our 

country are going to drive by Rouleau just a little bit more 

slowly maybe than they would otherwise. 

 

So, Brent, to you on behalf of a grateful province, we say thank 

you very much and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly want to, 

on behalf of the opposition, on my own behalf, extend a warm 

welcome to Brent Butt to the Legislative Assembly this 

afternoon and, with the Premier and all members, to thank him 

for the creativity and the leadership that he has given to Corner 

Gas. 

 

I understand tonight the Premier has a cameo appearance on 

Corner Gas. I recall having a similar experience several years 

ago, having rejected one or two scripts that Brent suggested. 

But I think I also share the dubious honour, and I’m not sure the 

Premier will end up there, of being on the blooper reel of 

Corner Gas for a period of time. 

 

Corner Gas symbolizes so much of what is great about our 

province. It is that creativity of the artist; it is the determination 

to succeed. And it is in the genuine warmth of the 

Saskatchewan population that I think captured the hearts of a 

nation and now the globe, and we thank Brent Butt for making 

that all possible. 

 

And I do have a little suggestion for the Premier who has 

appropriately declared April 13 as Corner Gas Day. Perhaps he 

could help us all celebrate by declaring it provincial gas tax free 

day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

request extended leave. 

 

The Speaker: — The Provincial Secretary has asked for an 

extended leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I had to ask for leave for an 

extended introduction because the last introduction I gave, I 

was harangued mercilessly by my colleagues for not having 

asked for extension. 

 

But today, I want to do things appropriately and properly 

because I have in your gallery today 27 guests, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re all members of the parliamentary program for public 

service that we offer through this building about a half a dozen 

times a year. So this group of people represent some of the 

finest public servants. 



2676 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2009 

We have a number of people from the following ministries: 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour; from 

Agriculture, from Education, Energy and Resources, from 

Environment, Health, Highways and Infrastructure, Municipal 

Affairs, the Public Service Commission, Social Services; 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport; and of course the 

Legislative Assembly Service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a program that has become a bit of a 

tradition, but I think the participants over the years have found 

it to be very beneficial. In part of the proceedings today, they’re 

going to hear from a member of the opposition and from a 

member of the government. Normally that’s me, but today the 

Minister of Social Services, the member from Humboldt, will 

be standing in in our stead. And I’d like all members of the 

legislature to welcome these public servants to their legislature 

and to their ongoing participation in this program today. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I’d like to join with the minister and 

welcome the 27 members of the public service to their 

Assembly. We always enjoy having you come visit us, and it’s 

wonderful to see you here today. 

 

And I generally am the person who comes visits with you after, 

but today Mr. Taylor’s going to stand in for me as I . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from North Battleford 

will be taking my place today. 

 

Thank you very much for coming and visiting us today, and we 

hope that you have a wonderful career in the public service of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, two individuals seated in the western gallery. I’m 

speaking of Iain and Dorene Mentiplay. 

 

Of course the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford will be doing 

a statement, as shall I, but the two individuals I’m mentioning, 

of course, are representatives of the Camp Balmoral Sons of 

Scotland. For those that were listening and for those that were 

in attendance earlier, the pipes and drums came to help us 

celebrate Tartan Day. And certainly the Camp Balmoral’s got a 

busy dance card, Mr. Speaker. They’re zooming around the city 

to help the celebrations. But Iain and Dorene have made it back 

here to listen to the members’ statements. 

 

So I’d ask all members to join me in wishing them a happy 

Tartan Day and to welcome them to their Assembly. Slainte 

M’hath, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue of living costs, 

including housing, that are having a major impact on 

Saskatchewan senior citizens, and that more affordable housing 

options would significantly help Saskatchewan seniors cope 

with the cost of living, especially those living on fixed incomes. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions in support of indexing minimum wage to deal 

with the increasing costs of living in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Indian Head, Regina, 

Melville, and Moose Jaw. I so present. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know those 

working in community-based organizations, the low wages 

result in high staff turnover, and the subsequent lack of 

caregiver continuity has a negative impact. I’d like to read the 

prayer, please: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the development and 

implementation of a multi-year funding plan to ensure that 

CBO workers achieve wage equity with employees who 

perform work of equal value in government departments. 



April 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2677 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the citizens come from the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, and 

Tisdale. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of rural residents of Saskatchewan 

who question why the Sask Party government is leaving them 

behind when it comes to providing safe and affordable water. 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to financially assist the town of Duck Lake 

residents for the good of their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by the good residents of Rosthern, 

Duck Lake, and Hague. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of a new Saskatchewan 

Hospital in North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners note 

that in 2006 the Government of Saskatchewan committed funds 

and resources to the development and construction of a new 

hospital in North Battleford. The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to call upon the Government 

of Saskatchewan to immediately recommit funds and 

resources for the continued development and construction 

of a new Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford and 

provide the Prairie North Regional Health Authority with 

the authority necessary to complete this essential and 

much-needed project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners all come from the constituency of 

The Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present it. Thank 

you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of students for fairness through the 

graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Regina as well as students from 

the University of Saskatchewan as well as a number of health 

care professionals who have graduate degrees, practising here in 

the province. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a long-term care facility in La Ronge. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good citizens of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Tartan Day 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today is Tartan Day, a day of 

appreciation for the Scottish descendants here in Saskatchewan 

and across the country. Today not only celebrates the signing of 

the Declaration of Arbroath, but the many contributions the 

Scots have made to our great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that all members had the opportunity to 

hear the Sons of Scotland, Camp Balmoral pipe and drum this 

morning. If not, you couldn’t have been in the building. The 

association, of course, represents one of the largest Scottish 

organizations in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Scotland has lent its colours to the people of this 

province and to the history of Saskatchewan. Walter Scott, 

Saskatchewan’s first premier, and W.R. Motherwell, our first 

minister of Agriculture, for example, were both of old Scotia. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in examining the roll call of members who 

have served this Assembly over the course of the last 100 years, 

we see that the Scots are very well represented. 

 

Perhaps the best known, the one whose accomplishments on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and of Canada saw him 

selected as the greatest Canadian, is one Thomas Clement 

Douglas, a son of Falkirk, Scotland. But of course, Mr. Speaker, 

the MacDonalds, McInneses, McIntyres, McIntoshes, and other 



2678 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2009 

Scottish clans are very much in evidence today. And I am 

proud, as I am sure others are in this Chamber, to be counted 

among their numbers. 

 

Slainte M’hath, Mr. Speaker. Have a great Tartan Day, and 

have a good ceilidh. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Mr. Speaker, today indeed marks Tartan 

Day here in Saskatchewan and in a number of provinces across 

our country. It’s on this day that we show our appreciation — 

arguably outwardly, some more than others — for the members 

of the Scottish clans that settled in this country. 

 

The original concept of creating a day to visibly recognize 

Scottish heritage was begun in the late 1980s by the Federation 

of Scottish Clans in Nova Scotia. Other provinces soon 

followed their lead. And with the initiative of the current 

esteemed member from Kindersley, Saskatchewan, 

Saskatchewan formally announced The Tartan Day Act which 

came into effect in 1992. 

 

Our province has its own tartan that features bands of gold, 

brown, green, red, yellow, white, and black which our 

legislative tour guides proudly wear on our behalf. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, those who consider themselves to be of 

Scottish heritage comprise one of our larger ethnic groups. The 

settlement of people of Scottish origin in Saskatchewan dates 

back more than two centuries to the fur trade. Later on a 

number of Scottish communities began to develop in places like 

Arcola, Carlyle, Douglaston, Langbank, Doonside, among 

many others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have mentioned previously that I am of both 

Scottish and Irish ancestry. And yes, we do enjoy a drink and 

we do not enjoy paying for it. Mr. Speaker, we would wish to 

thank you and have the House join me in thanking our Scottish 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Sound Stage Supports Film Industry 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, back in September 2002, the 

Saskatchewan-Canada sound stage opened for business and 

signalled a giant step forward for this province’s film and video 

industry. Between 1993 and 2001, the Saskatchewan film and 

video industry, consisting of some 40 film production and 

post-production companies, brought almost a quarter of a 

billion dollars worth of production to our province. 

 

It was recognized by both industry and government that if this 

valuable sector was to continue to grow and help diversify the 

provincial economy and provide Saskatchewan young people 

with training and jobs here at home, a production facility would 

be required. 

 

One group that didn’t think the sound stage was a good idea 

was the Sask Party, who voiced their derision and disapproval 

of this investment on behalf of the people of this province. How 

ironic of this Premier to proclaim a Corner Gas Day when 

according to the creator and star of Corner Gas, Brent Butt, it 

was the very facility that the Premier and his party vocally 

opposed that made the production of Corner Gas possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the film and video industry makes a huge 

contribution to the provincial economy. It provides hundreds of 

jobs and the opportunity for Saskatchewan young people to 

pursue jobs in the film industry here at home. The sound stage 

is a big reason for that, but if it had been up to members 

opposite, it wouldn’t exist. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Women’s Rights in Afghanistan 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 

past week we have been reminded that as Canadians we have 

much to be thankful for. We live in a society that has dedicated 

itself to the eradication of human rights abuse including those 

against women. 

 

It’s a different story in Afghanistan where they are considering 

a law that, if enacted, would not only take away women’s 

rights; they would also be subjected to legalized sexual assault. 

Under this law, women will be forbidden to leave their own 

homes without the permission of their husbands. In addition if 

wives refuse to have sex with their husbands, the men could 

legally sexually assault them. 

 

The NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] countries 

involved in Afghanistan, including Canada, are united in their 

opposition to this law, which is a throwback to the days of the 

Taliban. At this time it appears as though international 

condemnation may stop this attack on the Afghani women. 

 

As a proponent of rights for women and having served for terms 

as an executive member on the Saskatchewan Regina Council 

of Women and the Canadian federation of women whose 

organizations work hard on behalf of women and girls, I hope 

to pray that Afghani politicians do the right thing and reject this 

proposed law. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Project Day 2009 at the University of Regina 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, Saturday was a day of 

creativity, intelligence, knowledge, and youthful enthusiasm 

coming together in the form of Project Day 2009, the day for 



April 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2679 

graduating students at the Faculty of Engineering, University of 

Regina, to present their final projects to the world. 

 

This year I attended two presentations. The first was an 

environmental systems presentation on grey water reclamation 

and reuse at a local restaurant. The system in question allowed 

the restaurant to reclaim and reuse 80 per cent of the grey water 

from their dishwasher. Given increasing concerns in our society 

about the availability, conservation, and price of water, we are 

likely to see far more of these systems in the future. 

 

An industrial systems presentation also focused on 

conservation. The student presenters had noticed a fair amount 

of spillage from a conventional draft system for pouring a pint 

of beer. Their automatic beer dispenser consistently produced a 

pint in less time and with much less spillage but with an 

acceptable beer-to-head ratio of 6:1. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, I was 

not able to join the presenters afterwards at the local pub for 

more extensive research on the fluid dynamics of beer. 

 

These were but two of many excellent presentations and 

displays by the engineering students in environmental, 

industrial, electronics, petroleum, and software systems. Please 

join me in congratulating these young engineers for their 

projects and Dean Paitoon Tontiwachwuthikul and his faculty 

for organizing yet another stimulating and fun day. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Public Speaking Competition Held in Blaine Lake 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on Saturday I had the pleasure of being the guest 

speaker at the 4-H provincial public speaking competition held 

in Blaine Lake. The theme of the competition was Let Your 

Voice Be Heard, and the participants had no trouble doing that. 

 

Thirty-two contestants between the age of 6 and 21 from across 

Saskatchewan showcased their talents. The quality of all the 

speeches was excellent, and the judges had a difficult time 

selecting the winners. The young speakers demonstrated poise, 

knowledge, and passion in their speeches. Lionel Casavant and 

the organizing committee in Blaine Lake did a great job hosting 

the event that included ethnic entertainment and a fabulous 

Ukrainian buffet at the awards banquet. 

 

In the cloverbud category, ages six to eight years old, Sara 

Edwards from Glaslyn took first place with Wyatt Radics from 

Leask the runner-up. In the junior category, ages 9 to 12, saw 

Adam Thompson from Kelliher come in first, and David 

Edwards from Glaslyn was the runner-up. Intermediate 

category, ages 13 to 15, the winner was Taryn Reimer, who 

hails from White Fox, and the runner-up was Tyson Row, 

whose hometown is Marshall, Saskatchewan. Aimee Moore 

from Tisdale was awarded first place in the senior category, 

ages 16 to 21. Kendall McCormick from Weyburn was 

runner-up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 4-H is on the move, membership is increasing. I 

ask you and all members to join me in congratulating the 

contestants. I also want to commend the 4-H club leaders in our 

province for their time and effort in mentoring our province’s 

young people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Saskatoon United Way Achievements 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, United Way of Saskatoon & 

Area’s primary role is to raise funds for the community and 

invest them in agencies that provide a wide range of 

high-quality human services to meet the needs of our 

community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the United Way 2008 community campaign 

results were unveiled, and I along with members from the 

Saskatoon constituencies of Centre, Eastview, and Massey 

Place and almost 400 United Way supporters attended the 

achievement banquet held at TCU Place. United Way of 

Saskatoon & Area celebrated an unprecedented success, raising 

$4,138,926 to help build our community safety net and support 

those in need. This achievement, the highest in the United Way 

of Saskatoon & Area’s history, is due to the incredible efforts of 

the thousands of volunteers, donors, and partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, United Way of Saskatoon & Area came into 

existence in 1959 as a result of the partnership agreement 

between the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce and the 

Saskatoon District Labour Council. Business and labour leaders 

came together to form the United Way because they saw the 

need for the community to act collectively, identify human 

service needs, and raise funds to address them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order for the community to be truly great, it 

must be great for everyone. I would ask all members to join me 

in congratulating the United Way of Saskatoon & Area for 

embracing a philosophy that supports our community and 

leaves no one behind. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Auto Insurance Rates 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s lower auto 

insurance rates have been a significant factor in the lower cost 

of living in Saskatchewan. Earlier today we learned that, as of 

November 1, Saskatchewan drivers will be paying up to twelve 

and a half per cent more to insure light passenger vehicles. 

 

This rate hike comes on the heels of a massive power increase 

coming May 1, and after months of gouging Saskatchewan 

consumers with high natural gas bills all this past winter. To the 

minister: why does the Sask Party continue to make 

Saskatchewan people pay more for home heating, electricity, 



2680 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2009 

and now auto insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

morning I had the opportunity to announce the 4.2 per cent 

increase that SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] will 

be asking the rate review panel for. 

 

Our economy is growing. There’s 50,000 more vehicles and 

trailers in the province today than there was a year ago. Growth 

means that there’s more taxpayers, that there’s more going on in 

the province. Wages are increasing at a record rate; labour costs 

are increasing as well. 4.2 per cent is the first increase in the last 

eight years, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan will continue to have 

the lowest automobile insurance rates in the country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I hear a lot of excuses. The 

SGI auto funds rate stabilization reserve provides a cushion — 

not for the Sask Party as the minister likely believes — but a 

cushion to protect Saskatchewan drivers from big increases in 

auto insurance rates. This reserve today still has more than $100 

million in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: given the size of the rate 

stabilization reserve, how can the Sask Party possibly justify 

making Saskatchewan drivers pay more for auto insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, the rate reserve is at 

$100 million. It’s at the bottom of the range where it is 

supposed to be. Over the last year the portfolio, the investment 

portfolio of SGI was not unlike other investments portfolios. 

Indeed it had a challenging year but, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 

continues to be run well. What is happening, in addition to the 

increase, is some rebalancing that members opposite refused to 

do, so to ensure that there’s fairness in the rates that are 

allocated to all vehicle types. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, they had all of the answers 

18 short months ago and darn few of them today. Mr. Speaker, 

low auto insurance and utility rates helped make Saskatchewan 

the most affordable place to live in all of Canada, but how quick 

things change. Under the Sask Party, Saskatoon has fallen from 

the first to the fourth most affordable city in Canada according 

to the Sask Party’s own budget. 

The minister assured this Assembly on March 18 auto insurance 

rates would remain the lowest in Canada, despite investment 

losses in the Auto Fund and boondoggles like the $670,000 the 

Sask Party wasted on their failed enhanced driver’s licence 

scheme. Today in a media scrum, the minister sounded less 

sure. 

 

So to the minister: notwithstanding what might happen in other 

jurisdictions, will the Sask Party guarantee here today that 

Saskatchewan drivers will still be paying the lowest auto 

insurance rates in all of Canada after November 1? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, people across 

Canada are voting with their feet. They’re coming to 

Saskatchewan. Yes, they’re bringing their vehicles. They’re 

bringing their kids. They’re bringing all their resources to this 

province to ensure that we do have the fastest growing economy 

in the country. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, some costs are going up in our province — 

about $5 per month per vehicle — but, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to remind members opposite, this is also the place that last 

fall saw the largest, largest decrease in income taxes ever in the 

history of Saskatchewan, some 80,000 people removed from 

those rolls. Mr. Speaker, just a short couple of weeks ago, the 

largest property tax decrease ever in the history of 

Saskatchewan . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Announced right here in this 

legislature by my colleague, the Finance minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will continue to grow. It’ll continue 

to attract more people. It will continue to lead the way, and SGI 

customers will continue to pay amongst the lowest rates in the 

country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Uranium Development Partnership Report 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s worn 

pro-nuclear blinders from the beginning. The member from 

Prince Albert Carlton admitted to this Assembly on October 28 

of last year, with regard to the UDP [Uranium Development 

Partnership] that, I quote, “. . . you bet we are playing with a 

stacked deck and we wouldn’t have it any other way.” 

 

And the minister himself told his own party convention that the 

purpose of the UDP was to advise the government on how best 

to proceed, not whether they should. To the minister: will he 

admit here today that a report from the UDP rejecting a nuclear 

reactor was never a possibility? 

 



April 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2681 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for that question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the UDP was chaired by a nuclear physicist, the 

vice-president of the University of Saskatchewan; and 

represented First Nations, the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, labour though the IBEW [International Brotherhood 

of Electrical Workers], Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association, Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, 

the University of Regina, and the environmental community, as 

well as industry experts. 

 

Mr. Speaker. I had no idea, and neither did anybody else in this 

room, let alone the rest of the province, what the results of the 

UDP would be. I’m delighted that they are what they are. I 

think the UDP had the confidence because of its structure to not 

only recommend certain things, but to also recommend against 

certain things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well let’s talk about where they got their 

confidence because of their structure. Three of the member’s 

panels — a full 25 per cent of the membership — sit on the 

board of Bruce Power, the only company that they’ve shown 

interest in in building a nuclear reactor. 

 

Two are CEOs [chief executive officer] of uranium mining 

companies. The so-called environmentalist that he spoke of 

once said in a magazine “People who don’t want to live near 

nuclear facilities should probably move.” 

 

Another member obviously knew what the Sask Party wanted to 

hear, telling the Calgary Herald April 2 that the government is, 

“very gung ho” about a nuclear reactor. So to the minister: why 

won’t he just admit what everybody else already knows, that the 

Sask Party stacked the UDP to ensure that their report endorsed 

a nuclear reactor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that is probably the 

most ridiculous assertion that I’ve heard in this hon. Assembly 

for some time. 

 

But I’ll tell you this. I’ll tell you this. To the member: almost 

everyone in the province thinks that Dwain Lingenfelter will be 

the next leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well, almost everyone. 

 

I’m just going to tell you one of the things — and it’s a 

target-rich environment for Dwain Lingenfelter quotes, Mr. 

Speaker — but I’m going to say one of the things he said is, I’m 

not going to lay out the pros and cons of nuclear power. That 

discussion has been going on for decades in Saskatchewan, and 

most people seem to have entrenched positions. While we’ve 

been having that long debate, the rest of the world has moved 

on and concluded that nuclear will be an increasingly important 

part of the energy mix. 

 

That’s what Dwain Lingenfelter said, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

what they said last Thursday when they voted for our motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Now in spite of the member’s near-Freudian 

fixation with Lingenfelter, it’s interesting that, and I think the 

people of Saskatchewan find it unsettling that he spends more 

time researching Lingenfelter quotes than he does consulting 

with him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, he claims that the UDP was 

unbiased, but you’d never know it from how they went about 

their work. They went on company organized tours of nuclear 

facilities. They were asked to read pro-nuclear books. They 

obviously didn’t have much to discuss as a group, since they 

only met a few times during the reporting period. They spent 

more than 75 per cent of their entire budget to hire a pro-nuclear 

consulting firm. 

 

To the minister: given all of this, how can he stand there with a 

straight face and claim that the UDP was unbiased? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

thank the member for that question as well. It’s always fun. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, yes, apparently the UDP toured a 

nuclear facility. Imagine that. Imagine that. They’re studying 

the nuclear cycle, Mr. Speaker. If I was going to buy a car, Mr. 

Speaker, and I bet that member too, I wonder would he go to a 

car dealership or would he go someplace else. It’s absolutely 

appropriate what the UDP did and how they carried out their 

business. I’m proud of the work that they’ve done. They 

represent a broad cross-section of our society, and more power 

to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When the 

Saskatchewan Party announced the creation of the Uranium 



2682 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2009 

Development Partnership, they did not tell anyone that the 

majority of the work would be done by an outside consulting 

firm. The public only became aware of this fact after the release 

of the minister’s order creating the UDP from a freedom of 

information request. The order reveals that the decision to hire 

an outside consulting firm was “experience in the nuclear 

industry,” was made by the Saskatchewan Party government, 

not by the UDP. 

 

To the minister: why did he make the decision to hire an outside 

consulting firm, and why didn’t he leave such operational 

decisions to the supposedly arm’s-length UDP? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 

government, through Crown Investments Corporation, paid for 

the UDP, and accordingly we chose the best possible facilitators 

that we could. McKinsey & Company do business, Mr. 

Speaker, in 50 countries in the world, with two major offices in 

this one. We’re not dealing in the minor leagues here as that 

member is so accustomed to doing, Mr. Speaker. McKinsey & 

Company were the absolute best people we could get for the job 

and we got them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The UDP 

spent most of the Sask Party’s $3 million budget to hire this 

firm, McKinsey & Company, or about $25,000 per day, Mr. 

Speaker, is what that works out to. We know that the 

company’s services didn’t come cheap. We know that the 

company worked on this project full time. What we don’t know 

is exactly what taxpayers got for their money. 

 

To the minister: what did taxpayers get for their money from 

McKinsey & Company? What role did McKinsey play in 

preparing the final report? More specifically, Mr. Speaker, did 

McKinsey write the final report? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. McKinsey & 

Company performed the duties that facilitators normally 

perform when they’re working for boards of this type — boards 

who meet from time to time to set direction, and to finally in the 

final analysis, make decisions. They provided information. 

They distilled information. Mr. Speaker, they assisted. 

 

The member asked me if they wrote the report. Of course they 

assisted in writing the report. They assisted the board in writing 

the report. That would be their job, Mr. Speaker. They did it, 

and they did it very well. They condensed volumes of 

documents to a manner in which the board could deal with, and 

I congratulate them on a job well done. 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Public Consultation Process Regarding 

Nuclear Development 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious the debate over 

the future of nuclear power in Saskatchewan has been tightly 

scripted for months, and the upcoming public consultations may 

be the only real opportunity for input that anyone who isn’t the 

cheerleader for the nuclear power will have. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

critical that these consultations are conducted in a fair, open, 

and transparent manner and that they provide members of the 

public, including critics of nuclear power, with the opportunity 

to be heard. 

 

To the minister: what role, if any, will McKinsey & Company 

play in organizing or managing these public consultations? And 

if they are involved, how much more will they be paid for their 

work? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, a full and comprehensive 

public consultation process has been set up with nine meetings 

spread around the province where people can attend in person. 

Also a website at www.saskuranium.ca where people can obtain 

information about the UDP report and/or voice their opinions. 

 

There’s a phone number that people can phone to have an 

executive summary of the report forwarded to them. There’s a 

mailing address, Mr. Speaker, for people like myself who 

would rather do it that way than use electronic communications. 

And, Mr. Speaker, those opportunities are open, those 

opportunities are available to people right now and will 

continue to be until 15 June. 

 

The nine meetings will be held, plus three days of consultations 

for stakeholders besides that. Mr. Speaker, this is the most fair 

process. And no, McKinsey & Company will not be involved in 

it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be some debate 

about that comment the minister just made about this being an 

open and fair process. Last week in this House, the Minister of 

Enterprise assured this legislature and the people of 

Saskatchewan there would be a credible, a credible consultation 

process for the people of Saskatchewan to engage in. 

 

Then incredibly on Friday, he announces that this public 

consultation process shall last a matter of 18 days — two and a 

half weeks. My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier: does 

the Premier believe that it is credible to suggest that a 

consultation process on a issue of this magnitude deserves only 

two weeks? 



April 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2683 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I guess there’s a number 

of options before the province of Saskatchewan in terms of 

discussing this issue. You can have an interminable process, 

Mr. Speaker, one that doesn’t have an end date. 

 

You can choose, Mr. Speaker, to espouse the view that there 

ought not to be any public consultation at all, that the debate is 

over, as the would-be successor to the hon. member has said 

very, very clearly and on the record. Mr. Lingenfelter, who is 

apparently the favourite to become the new leader of the 

opposition, has said he doesn’t support any consultation process 

at all, that it should just happen. Time for debate is over. 

 

We don’t agree. We believe Saskatchewan people should be 

engaged. We first started talking about this in opposition, 

reiterated our interest in value-added uranium opportunities in 

the platform. We’ve been talking about it since, Mr. Speaker. 

People are aware of it because they’ve been sending me emails 

and letters in large numbers, both for and against nuclear 

development and other uranium value-added opportunities. 

 

The debate has been under way for a very, very long time. It’s 

going to become very focused and broad-based across the 

province in these public meetings, and I look forward to the 

input, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, even the Premier cannot stand in 

his place and justify a two-week, a two-week consultation 

period for an issue of this magnitude. Now over the course of 

the weekend, Mr. Speaker, many of us saw the large 

government ads that were placed in our newspapers, heard the 

radio spots — at some great expense — telling us all that we 

could refer to the website for information about this 

consultation process. We could go to the website and find out 

about this consultation process. 

 

Well last week, Mr. Speaker, you’ll remember, we had a 

problem with blackouts on government information. Well today 

I have a whiteout, Mr. Speaker. I have a whiteout on 

government information. I go to the website to try . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — I understand, Mr. Speaker, this government 

does not want to hear this kind of questioning, but they’re going 

to hear it — not just from this opposition — but they’re going 

to hear it from the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I go to the website, which they 

advertised, to find out about the consultation process. For 

instance when are these meetings to be held? At what time? 

Where? Who will be facilitating these meetings? How may I 

approach them? 

I go to the website, and what do I find, Mr. Speaker? I find this 

page, one sentence. It says, well, attend one of the public 

meetings that someday will be announced here on this website. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an issue of tremendous magnitude for the 

future of the people of Saskatchewan. How is it that they can 

claim this to be a credible process when they announce a 

consultation and then can’t even announce the dates of the 

meetings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, you know, governments in the 

past, including the one led by that member opposite, have said 

very clearly to Saskatchewan people that, on behalf of their 

government, that they believe Saskatchewan should be moving 

to add value to uranium. 

 

That member opposite talked about the need to look at nuclear 

reactor as an option for the province’s power. That member 

opposite, on behalf of his government of the day, talked about, 

in their Saskatchewan action plan on the economy, adding value 

to uranium. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Do you know much consultation that they announced as a result 

of that decision, that fiat? None. None, Mr. Speaker. Not one 

element of consultation. Not one public meeting scheduled. 

They just said, look, this is a priority of the government of 

Saskatchewan of the day. 

 

We said that prior to the election. We said the same thing 

during the last election, that we wanted to look at these 

opportunities. We laid out a process to analyze those 

opportunities. The UDP has said some of it makes sense, some 

of it doesn’t make sense. And now through online input, 

through letters, and through contacting MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly], and through public meetings, people 

will have a focused opportunity for participation. 

 

That is a lot more opportunity for consultation with the people 

of this province than that member ever offered when he either 

said, we don’t want nuclear or we do want nuclear — 

depending on what side of the issue he was on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, may I remind the Premier, the 

question is about the consultation process that he and his 

government is proposing. We’re asking some questions about 

the process. They will not tell us, either in the press on Friday 

or through the website — which they’ve advertised with public 

dollars — they will not tell us when these meetings are going to 

be, except generally in May and June. 

 

Well perhaps then they can tell us today the who of these 

meetings. These are intended, I expect, to be consultation 

meetings. I expect the government will be there to listen. Which 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2009 

of the ministers will be in attendance at these consultation 

meetings? Who will be chairing these meetings? Who will be 

facilitating the consultation process of which they are so proud? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

receive that question. We will be announcing a chairman for 

this process in the next few days and would be more than happy 

to announce it in this honourable Assembly and tell that 

member as soon as it is public. 

 

I’m flexible on the subject, but I don’t believe it’s my role to be 

at these meetings, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think it’s for me to 

influence the process one way or another. The members think 

that’s funny, Mr. Speaker, but I think that we want to know 

what the people of Saskatchewan think, not what politicians 

think. We already know what they . . . Well, I guess we don’t. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the issue of debate here is not 

just simply an issue of a nuclear reactor. It is the issue of the 

energy future, the electrical energy future for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Now this government has already devoted two 

and a half million, $3 million in the research around one 

potential component of that future. 

 

My question today is to the Premier: will he commit today to 

devote those same kind of resources to alternative energies, to 

renewable energies, and then, and then consult the people of 

Saskatchewan so that every option can be put in proper context 

with proper information so that an informed debate can happen 

in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the discussion 

around those alternative sources of energy have happened in the 

past in this province. And in fact under their government, and 

now under our government, we’re moving forward with 

renewables. We’re going to be moving forward, as the Minister 

of SaskPower said, with respect to wind, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

going to be moving forward with respect to biomass. We’ve 

already advanced the geothermal issue, Mr. Speaker, per our 

election campaign. Mr. Speaker, we’re moving forward with 

respect to net metering, something that side of the House 

approved. 

 

When it comes to uranium though, Mr. Speaker, we have done 

something different. That side of the House, Mr. Speaker, used 

to play both sides of the fence on the issue. They’d say they’re 

in favour of adding value. They may be in favour of nuclear, 

then have a convention. And the convention would threaten to 

revolt, and so they’d kind of back off on it a little bit, Mr. 

Speaker. But they still made pronouncements without ever 

bothering to ask Saskatchewan people. Neither did that party 

ever ask the people of Saskatchewan whether or not they 

supported that party’s policy that all we ever should do is mine 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a bigger vision for the resources of this province, for 

the economy of this province, Mr. Speaker. We will fully 

engage the people of Saskatchewan in terms of sustainable 

energy, affordable energy, and we will add value to our 

resources in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Premier and this 

government wants the people of Saskatchewan to believe that 

this is somehow a credible process. Well get this — the minister 

responsible goes to his own political party’s convention and 

says, this UDP report is not about whether we’re going ahead or 

not. We’re going ahead, and they’re going to tell us how to do 

it. 

 

A member of the UDP itself, a panel member in Calgary, the 

day before the UDP is released says, and I quote, this Sask 

Party government is “gung ho” on a nuclear reactor. They will 

not give us an adequate consultation. They say two weeks is 

fine. They will not present balanced options for the people of 

Saskatchewan to consider. They will not apparently even be in 

attendance at the consultation themselves. 

 

Again my question to the Premier is: how can he suggest that 

this isn’t a railroad to build a reactor as opposed to being a fair, 

open consultation process? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there ought not to be any 

doubt at all from the people of the province, or that member 

opposite, that this government would be looking at adding value 

to uranium. We campaigned on it, Mr. Speaker. We talked 

about it in opposition. Mr. Speaker, last Thursday in this House, 

I wasn’t able to be here, but I understand that members opposite 

stood up and voted in favour of that very thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Moreover here’s the NDP Energy and Climate Change Plan 

from 2007, I’m assuming endorsed by that member when he 

was the premier of the province. It says, “Ongoing assessments 

of the potential for a nuclear reactor to supply Saskatchewan’s 

domestic requirements or for export are regularly carried out by 

SaskPower.” 

 

Oh, is that right, Mr. Speaker? And what kind of public 

consultation process was there to set the stage for that kind of a 

statement in the official policy of the government? None, Mr. 

Speaker. I will take this minister and this government’s record, 

in terms of engaging Saskatchewan people and the opportunity 

to add value on uranium and find sustainable affordable energy 

for a growing economy. I’ll take this side over that side every 

day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Growing Forward Agreement 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today I, along with the federal Minister of Agriculture 

and Agri-Food, Gerry Ritz, announced the signing of a new 

Growing Forward federal-provincial agreement. 

 

This agreement will deliver more than $216 million in 

non-business risk management programming over the next four 

years to Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers. Highlights of the 

program include $52 million for a province-wide farm and 

ranch infrastructure program. This is an expansion of last year’s 

successful program in southwest Saskatchewan. 

 

This program will help producers throughout the province 

secure water sources to mitigate the effects of drought. Eligible 

applicants include farmers, ranchers, rural municipalities, and 

Indian bands across Saskatchewan. Funding will be provided 

for up to 65 per cent of the cost of community wells. The 

program will also cover 50 per cent of the eligible costs of 

on-farm projects which include large- and small-diameter wells, 

pipeline, and dugouts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is another example of a long-term 

infrastructure investment by this government. This program will 

provide benefits to farmers and ranchers for many years to 

come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Growing Forward agreement also includes 

funding for the environmental programming. Environmental 

farm planning has been very popular amongst producers across 

Saskatchewan. This programming will provide assistance to 

help producers address the environmental risks in their 

operation. Eligible projects include the purchase of GPS 

[Global Positioning System], fencing around feed supplies to 

prevent wildlife damage, relocation of livestock facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Growing Forward also indicates funding for farm 

business planning, research, and voluntary food safety 

programming. These programs will help, I believe, farmers and 

ranchers address a number of specific needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these Growing Forward programs are going to 

provide long-term benefits to farmers and ranchers. This 

government is putting our focus back on the farm gate, Mr. 

Speaker, where it should be. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of 

all I want to thank the minister for sending over his ministerial 

statement before question period. I have had an opportunity just 

briefly to read the agreement that was signed between Canada 

and Saskatchewan regarding this new Growing Forward 

program. 

 

And one of the things that I’m extremely interested in — and 

we had a discussion of this in spending estimates for the 

Ministry of Agriculture — is performance indicators. And I 

know that during our estimate discussion, I noted that there was 

a significant decrease in performance measures for the Ministry 

of Agriculture when you compared those performance measures 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Decrease, when you compare 

those performance measures to ’07-08 when there were a 

number of measures. 

 

I do note however that Canada is demanding that there be 

performance indicators and targets and so some of the 

discussion that was left out of the minister’s plan for his 

department this year is certainly contained in this new 

agreement with Canada. 

 

So I will be interested to know a year from now whether or not 

the Ministry of Agriculture meets the performance measures 

and indicators that have been laid out by Canada in this 

document, because I think that really will indicate how and 

where the ministry has been accountable for some very 

significant taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before 

orders of the day, I request leave to redirect a Bill to a different 

standing policy committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Redirection of Bill No. 46 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That Bill No. 46, The Labour Market Commission 

Amendment Act, 2008 be withdrawn from the Standing 

Committee on Human Services and committed to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 

 

That Bill No. 46, The Labour Market Commission 

Amendment Act, 2008 be withdrawn from the Standing 

Committee on Human Services and committed to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2009 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment 

Act, 2009 (No. 3)/Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la 

Loi de 1995 sur l éducation 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3). Mr. Speaker, this Bill 

will help to fulfill the election commitments of this government; 

namely to achieve a fairer balance for education funding, to 

assure the pre-kindergarten to grade 12 education system is 

properly funded, and to ensure the education portion of property 

tax is further reduced. 

 

After carefully considering the recommendations provided by 

Member of the Legislative Assembly for Rosetown-Elrose and 

his review of education funding, we stand ready to implement a 

long-term solution for education property tax relief, while 

increasing government’s responsibility for the province’s 

education system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Education Amendment Act will ensure 

property owners benefit from reduced education property taxes. 

This legislation also ensures school divisions have the funding 

they need to support a strong and accountable education system. 

 

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, the Bill will provide the 

necessary authority for the province to cut and cap mill rates for 

the three major property classes. This move will ensure fiscal 

equity and taxation fairness among property owners across the 

province. Mr. Speaker, you wouldn’t expect to pay a different 

amount in the provincial sales tax from one community to 

another in the province of Saskatchewan. Now property owners, 

no matter where they live, will have the same mill rate set on 

their property whether they live in La Ronge, in Swift Current, 

or in Canora. 

 

The Bill continues to respect the constitutional right of minority 

faith school divisions to levy taxes from members of the 

minority faith, and outlines the process for a separate school 

division to set tax rates. The Bill also continues to authorize 

school divisions to collect the education property taxes from 

their municipal governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a bold new approach that addresses a 

long-standing concern regarding Saskatchewan’s reliance on 

property taxes to fund education while taking into account the 

adequate funding for education for the province’s youth. As a 

result of this amendment, by 2010, $156 million will be put 

back into the pockets of property owners. Provincial funding for 

education will increase from 51 per cent in 2008 to 66 per cent 

in 2010. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:30] 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — To achieve the increase of provincial 

funding for the education system, the province will boost its 

share of funding to school divisions by $241 million to cover 

teacher salary increases and costs related to inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3). Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 89, The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 3). Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to speak at second reading of Bill No. 89, 

the Act to amend The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3). 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the explanation provided by the 

minister just moments ago and I have a few comments to make, 

both on his words and, Mr. Speaker, on the legislation in front 

of us. But, Mr. Speaker, as the title of the legislation implies, 

this is the third amendment to The Education Act since this 

legislative session opened, Mr. Speaker. This government never 

tires of amending The Education Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It does strike one as odd in the sense that usually, Mr. Speaker, 

a ministry or a department tends to view the needs for changes 

to Acts, Mr. Speaker, on an annual or a per session basis. And 

here we are, Mr. Speaker, doing the third amendment in a row, 

Mr. Speaker, when in fact this government could have 

addressed this issue, Mr. Speaker, more simply; especially, Mr. 

Speaker, when the second amendment could actually have been 

an amendment to the first Act, Mr. Speaker, and have been 

dealt with in the committee in this Chamber without having to 

go through the separate Act and the separate debate process 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that having been said, there is something that the public 

should understand in this context, Mr. Speaker, and that is for 

all intents and purposes, this Act here, although it’s not related 

to the financial affairs of the province, is really an enabling 

piece of legislation. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, it could be argued 

this is a budget Bill because the changes that the Act proposes 

are a direct result of financial changes that have occurred in the 

budget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are indeed seeing the government 

changing the way in which education is financed in this 

province .And, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation — the 

public has to understand — this piece of legislation directs how 

this change in education funding is going to take place. 

 

Let’s remember, Mr. Speaker, that up to this point the 

provincial government provided funding for school boards. 

School boards reviewed their needs and made decisions based 

on what the community, the students, and the local area 

required to provide adequate and appropriate education. And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, in doing so, the boards would decide, 

over and above the finances provided by the province, what did 

that local school division require in terms of funding in order to 

provide all of the services that the local area desired — whether 

that was size of classrooms, types of programs offered, that sort 



April 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

of thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that the school boards have 

been saying for years that they needed additional provincial 

support because without additional provincial support, the local 

needs, the extra needs had to be dealt with by increasing 

education property tax at the local level. Boards have always 

said, we need additional funding from the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this budget does indeed change the way 

education is financed to the tune of about $200 million, as the 

minister said in his speech. He says that this budget will provide 

an additional $200 million to the boards. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the education portion of property tax was, 

prior to this, raising approximately $700 million province-wide, 

Mr. Speaker. So for the province to be providing 100 per cent 

of the capital of education financing would have required an 

additional 700 million on an annual basis with cost of living 

applied in each of the years in the future in order to ensure that 

the education system today will be funded exactly the same as it 

was the previous year and the year before that and to address 

more local needs. 

 

Bottom line in all of this, Mr. Speaker, is that the boards still 

are going to need to ensure that they have the capacity to raise 

currently about $500 million a year over and above what the 

province provides them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what the public also needs to understand is 

that this legislation restricts the abilities of the boards to raise 

any additional money. What this legislation does, Mr. Speaker, 

is that it says that there will be grants provided by the province, 

Mr. Speaker, based on, and then a provincial mill rate applied. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the legislation doesn’t, as the minister said, 

ensure boards have the funding they need. I’m quoting the 

minister from his speech just a few moments ago. This 

legislation ensures the boards have the funding they need, Mr. 

Speaker, to provide adequate and appropriate educational needs 

at the local level. 

 

What this legislation actually does, Mr. Speaker, is ensures that 

the minister controls what’s going on within the education 

system in the province, Mr. Speaker. This legislation quite 

simply can be viewed and seen as a sweeping centralization of 

the authority for the Education minister over the education 

needs in this province. We can actually, Mr. Speaker. 

anecdotally refer to this legislation as an education 

centralization Act for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This legislation gives the minister the ability to direct boards 

and the decision that the boards will make. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister’s approval will be needed to set budgets, plans, 

expenditures, purchases of assets, sale, divestments of assets, or 

borrowing money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act provides the minister with more authority 

over the delivery of education at the local level than local 

boards have had or will have obviously in the future. Boards 

have lost their autonomy, Mr. Speaker, to make decisions to 

deal with very specific local needs, and they’ve lost the scope 

of their decision-making authority. Mr. Speaker, it could be 

summarized in saying that the boards have now lost their ability 

to respond to local needs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have heard this frequently in the past 

about the ability of the boards to fund the need specifically to 

their community. One of those needs, Mr. Speaker, very 

specifically addressed in the past, has been special-needs 

students and special-needs education in the system. Mr. 

Speaker, boards have frequently said that they need additional 

financial support to ensure that they can meet some of these 

very expensive requirements in delivering adequate education 

to all of the students within an area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one hopes that this centralization of authority is 

not a sign of things to come with regards to other government, 

local government, decision-making authorities in the future. Mr. 

Speaker, members opposite will know — not every member of 

the public will know — that in fact a while ago the province of 

Alberta made a decision to go to a single health board in the 

province of Alberta. Rural Alberta — the people who live 

outside of Edmonton, Calgary, and some would argue Red 

Deer, Mr. Speaker — rural Alberta has responded very 

negatively to the removal of local boards of health’s activities 

in terms of deciding what happens in the delivery of health care 

in that province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite have discussed in the past, in 

fact members opposite in an election platform, Mr. Speaker, 

talked about moving to a single health board in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is not something that I 

believe — nor do I believe my constituents in rural 

Saskatchewan believe — that we should be operating from a 

central authority for the delivery of decision making in health 

care. Nor, Mr. Speaker, do I believe that rural Saskatchewan is 

comfortable with the centralizing of authority in the hands of 

the Minister of Education over the decisions of the school 

boards nor the delivery of education through the school boards 

into the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government, under the auspices of reducing 

taxes, has made a fundamental change in the way our children 

will be educated. Mr. Speaker, I do not believe for a minute that 

the public believes that a change in the way their taxes are 

collected should have an impact on the way in which their 

children are educated. Mr. Speaker, I think had there been 

adequate consultation with the public, they would not have 

placed these two matters, Mr. Speaker, on the same level of 

priority when it comes to what they wanted their government to 

do. 

 

Number one, they wanted to see — the public wanted to see — 

a reduction, Mr. Speaker, in the way in which their taxes were 

collected on property for education. But, Mr. Speaker, they also 

wanted to know that their provincial government would 

adequately fund, for local purposes, the delivery of education 

throughout our province. This Act, Mr. Speaker, represents a 

historic change and as such eliminates the authorities of the 

school board. 

 

Now the boards, Mr. Speaker, will argue very clearly, the 

boards will argue very clearly that they were not consulted on 

this matter. The minister and the members opposite will argue 

that the member for Rosetown-Elrose did a sweeping study of 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard April 6, 2009 

the province and in fact talked to the school board members, 

Mr. Speaker. But the boards will tell you that they weren’t 

asked for an opinion on a provincial mill rate that eliminated 

their authority or autonomy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister, in his comments to a question the other day, 

indicated that he asked school boards to think of everything up 

to 100 per cent funding by the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 

don’t know if that was indeed his intention for the province to 

100 per cent fund education or not. But the boards of education, 

had they been presented in a question-and-answer format — or 

a format that said, here’s what we’re thinking; you respond to it, 

Mr. Speaker — the boards would certainly have argued in 

favour of maintaining some access to the local property tax base 

in order to ensure that the local needs are able to be financed 

when the provincial priorities don’t match with the local or 

community priorities. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that on 

occasion that happens. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have in this Assembly on occasion 

talked about the way in which this government would prefer to 

legislate and then consult. Well, Mr. Speaker, there was 

consultation on the issue of reduction of education property tax 

payments, Mr. Speaker. There was no consultation on the 

removal of the autonomy or the authority of the boards, nor was 

there consultation about adequate financing of education. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Bill in front of us today is about adequate 

financing of education. The Bill in front of us today is not about 

reducing education portion of property taxes. It’s about 

financing education. And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it is 

about the centralizing of authority for education in the office of 

the minister — not something that the public was consulted 

upon and not something that the public has a lot of sympathy 

for. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, school boards, teachers, students, and the 

community are now at the whim, and some would argue the 

whimsy, of the Minister of Education. Mr. Speaker, the boards 

are likely to see a huge increase in the amount of reporting and 

accounting processes that they will have to engage in. Some 

will argue, Mr. Speaker, that the boards will actually see an 

increase in their costs as they are required to increase the 

amount of paperwork provided to the Minister of Education, the 

amount of reporting that they must do to the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the members of the public, I think it should be 

pointed out that the minister, who had his time to speak, chose 

not to address a lot of these issues, and now from his seat he’s 

trying to address those issues. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

important that if the minister had something to say, he should 

have said it in his speech, Mr. Speaker, and not from the seat of 

his chair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we address this piece of legislation, Bill No. 89, 

we are addressing this from the perspective of education 

financing. We are addressing it from the position of concern for 

the role of teachers and professionals within the system. Mr. 

Speaker, we recognize that the most important work is that 

between students and the teachers, and we’re very concerned 

about what the future holds under this new environment, Mr. 

Speaker — this conscriptive environment that the minister has 

created. 

 

We worry, Mr. Speaker, that teachers can be pulled from the 

meaningful work with students to following the whims of the 

minister — directives — and they can be bogged down by 

reports, compiling statistics, and other time-consuming process 

that the minister may choose to impose upon the boards and 

their employees, Mr. Speaker — whether it’s administrative or 

teaching staff — in order to comply with what is directed by the 

minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although the minister did not address these 

issues in his speech, there are going to be a number of questions 

raised with him when we get to committee. In the meantime, 

Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House wish to 

continue to consult with boards, teachers, students, parents, and 

communities, Mr. Speaker. And I know that other members of 

the New Democratic Party caucus will wish to speak on this 

legislation. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, in order to facilitate that 

process on this side of the House, I would move that debate on 

Bill 89, an Act to amend The Education Amendment Act, 2009 

(No. 3) be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 90 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education 

Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act. 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into the context of the second reading 

speech regarding that Bill, I want to put on the record some 

information for the benefit of the members opposite, and 

especially for the member from The Battlefords. 

 

And he needs to be aware that in the Estimates document, on 

page no. 7, there’s a column that is entitled, specified budget 

Bills. And, Mr. Speaker, it says this: “Below are the budget bills 

that Government has specified to be passed in the spring session 

pursuant to Rule 33(1)(c) of the Legislative Assembly.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of Bills, but the very first two, 

the first one is The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3) and 

the second one is The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education 

Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, for the member to have stood on 

the last Bill and said, we don’t even know, we don’t know 

whether this has been declared a specified Bill, well, Mr. 

Speaker, I guess this side of the House will have to do the 

research for him as well because now we’ll have to indicate that 

he can find it on page 7. And, Mr. Speaker, I guess he better be 



April 6, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

sure because there are five other Bills there that the member 

opposite needs to know that are declared as specified. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us, the Bill before us is the 

miscellaneous statute Act. And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is one of 

two, Mr. Speaker. It’s one of two I am introducing. The first 

one we’ve already introduced. And the member has a lot of 

questions on that Bill, and we’ll clarify those questions for him 

in committee. So I encourage him to move that Bill to 

committee where he’ll get all the answers that he wants. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this second Bill helps us fulfill the election 

commitments of this government, one of which was a 

commitment to address a long-standing concern with how 

education property tax has been used in this province to fund 

education. Mr. Speaker, with the changes we are implementing, 

we are making life more affordable for Saskatchewan people 

while ensuring our education system is properly funded. To 

support this, I put before the House an amendment to repeal The 

Education Property Tax Credit Act. 

 

Our government has believed that, for far too long, property tax 

payers have paid a disproportionate amount of the cost of 

education in this province. In the last election, we promised to 

ensure that the education portion of property tax would be 

further reduced through enhanced education property tax 

credits. Mr. Speaker, the education property tax credit was a 

stopgap measure until a long-term solution could be found. 

 

In 2008-09, our government provided $158.6 million in 

provincial property tax credits. Mr. Speaker, the 2008-09 rebate 

program included rate increases from 38 per cent to 47 per cent 

on agricultural land and from 10 per cent to 12 per cent on 

commercial and residential properties. The education property 

tax credit by class for 2008 was the following: 91.3 million for 

agricultural property, 20.1 million for commercial property, and 

$47.2 million for residential property. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that this year’s budget has 

outlined a long-term solution to the issue of education property 

tax. Under our new system of funding education, we will cut 

and cap education property tax rates by setting province-wide 

tax rates for each of the three major property classes. 

 

As a result of the changes we are implementing, provincial 

funding for education will increase from 51 per cent in 2008 to 

66 per cent in 2010. Between 2008 and 2010, the total amount 

of long-term property tax relief provided to the people of 

Saskatchewan will be over $314 million, Mr. Speaker. As a 

result of our government’s permanent solution for education 

property tax, we no longer need legislation for the 

administration of education property tax credits, and we are 

moving to eliminate reference to them in The Education Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes set forth in this Act will help our 

government to meet its commitment to achieve a fairer balance 

for education funding to ensure the pre-kindergarten to grade 12 

education system is properly funded and to ensure the education 

portion of property tax is further reduced. This is good news for 

the people of Saskatchewan. Because of these positive changes, 

the stopgap measure of the credit is no longer needed. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and 

Amendment Act, 2009. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 90, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education 

Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise on second reading of Bill No. 90, An Act 

repealing The Education Property Tax Credit Act and making 

amendments to certain Acts consequential to the enactment of 

The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3). Mr. Speaker, I’m 

mindful of the clock, that in a few minutes we have committees 

scheduled to sit in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Therefore, my 

remarks will be very brief on this Act that is primarily 

consequential to the comments that I made a few moments ago. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while the government has expressed an 

interest in moving forward with long-term education property 

tax relief, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that these two pieces 

of legislation need to address — Bill No. 89 and Bill No. 90 — 

is long-term certainty in education financing, Mr. Speaker. And 

one of the things that we on this side of the House are most 

concerned about is that the boards, the teachers, the students, 

and the parents have confidence that in indeed the funding of 

education will be adequate to meet the needs of every local 

community throughout the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that having been said and mindful of the 

clock, I certainly do not want to interfere with the work of 

committee scheduled today. Mr. Speaker, I would move that 

debate on Bill No. 90, An Act repealing The Education 

Property Tax Credit Act and making certain amendments, Mr. 

Speaker, be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 90. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 

allow the work of the Human Services and Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice committees to do their important work, I 

move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — In order to facilitate the work of committees, 

the Government House Leader has moved that this House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:59.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2675 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2675 

  Elhard  ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2675 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2676 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2676 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2676 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2676 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2676 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2677 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Tartan Day 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2677 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2678 

 Sound Stage Supports Film Industry 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2678 

 Women’s Rights in Afghanistan 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2678 

 Project Day 2009 at the University of Regina 

  Van Mulligen ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2678 

 Public Speaking Competition Held in Blaine Lake 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2679 

 Saskatoon United Way Achievements 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2679 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Auto Insurance Rates 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2679 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2680 

 Uranium Development Partnership Report 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2680 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2681 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2681 

 Public Consultation Process Regarding Nuclear Development 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2682 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2682 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2682 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2683 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Growing Forward Agreement 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2685 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2685 

MOTIONS 

 Redirection of Bill No. 46 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2685 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 89 — The Education Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 3)/Loi n
o
 3 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l éducation 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2686 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2686 

 Bill No. 90 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Education Property Tax) Repeal and Amendment Act, 2009 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 2688 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2689 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


