




















































Hansard: April 01, 2009


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 51 NO. 43A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 1, 2009, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Lorne Calvert 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Calvert, Lorne NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Hon. Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Yogi SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Van Mulligen, Harry NDP Regina Douglas Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2615 

 April 1, 2009 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, seated 

in the west gallery, a young gentleman, Owen William Paul. 

Owen was born on June 10 of last year. He is seated with his 

mother, Jessica Paul, who is one of our caucus staff who is on 

leave right now. Owen‟s father is Jay Paul and his grandfather 

is Bill Waiser, a well-known author and historian in our 

province. And I would to ask all members to join in welcoming 

Jessica and Owen to their legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I present 

a petition and the petition hereby reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows, as committed 

to on August 24, 2007. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from the fine people of 

Pelican Narrows. And I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to present a petition 

today in support of indexing minimum wage to counter the cost 

of the dramatic increase in the cost of living in the province. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Leask, Spiritwood, 

Saskatoon, Canwood, Leoville, and Birch Hills. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of the 

government‟s policy on green vehicles. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners note that on November 15, the Government Services 

minister told his convention that government new vehicles 

should be run as E85 vehicles. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners ask: 

 

. . . the Legislative Assembly to be pleased to cause the 

government ministers named earlier in the petition to 

follow their own platform and government policies and 

trade in their Jeep Libertys for vehicles that are on SGI‟s 

2008 list of recommended fuel-efficient vehicles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords and surrounding area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for post-secondary 

students here in Saskatchewan through the necessary expansion 

of the graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately expand the graduate retention 

program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

students from the University of Saskatchewan, University of 

Regina, as well as a number of health care professionals who 

have graduate degrees, practising here in the province. I so 

present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition to support a long-term care facility in 

La Ronge. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 

Hon. Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by the good people of La 

Ronge and area. I so present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



2616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Perogy Paradise Fundraiser 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on March 14 I had the 

privilege of attending and being part of Perogy Paradise for the 

largest perogy smorg in Canada. This event took place just a 

few minutes outside of Saskatoon at the old Manhattan 

Ballroom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a fundraising event put on by Nashi, a 

group of dedicated individuals based in Saskatoon whose goal 

is to raise awareness of the global issues of human trafficking, 

particularly of children being lured by those trafficking in the 

sex trade in Ukraine. 

 

The idea of Perogy Paradise fundraiser was born to help raise 

money for the construction and renovation of the Klenovi Lyst 

or Maple Leaf Centre in Stoyaniv, Ukraine. The Klenovi Lyst 

will act as a safe house and training centre for children at risk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the event sold out almost immediately, and the 

550-plus in attendance were served in excess of 1,100 dozen 

perogies. Mr. Speaker, all these perogies were made and served 

by volunteers, and to the joy of many, second and third helpings 

were available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is truly an exceptional and amazing volunteer 

group, and I ask all members to join me in congratulating all the 

board members of Nashi for their commitment and dedication 

to this cause: Andrew Allsopp, Joanne Borys, Carol Cisecki, 

Savelia Curniski, Marianne Hladun, Betti Lawrence, Iris 

Lozinsky, Frederica Muranetz, Bev Petruk and all the 

volunteers of Nashi. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Cancer 

Awareness Month and during this time many initiatives are 

recognized that not only raise the awareness of the disease, but 

also advocacy, fundraising efforts, research, and treatments. I‟m 

very encouraged by my government‟s increased investment in 

cancer care and medications, and we need to continually 

recognize those that work and volunteer. 

 

However, we must remember the victims, which goes farther 

than some would realize. You see, Mr. Speaker, anyone that has 

helped a loved one fight knows very well the pain and hardship, 

and the toll that is taken. 

 

I‟m certain everyone in this Assembly has been touched by 

cancer in some way. I personally know many members here 

have felt the pain first-hand — loss of grandparents, a mother, a 

father, a husband or a wife, a daughter or a son. 

 

I would like to read a poem from a friend‟s recent funeral that 

reflects this thought: 

 

What about my family? 

This cancer is not just my disease, but my whole family‟s 

disease! 

Why doesn‟t anyone send them flowers? 

Why doesn‟t anyone write them a card or drop them a note 

or even call? 

Why doesn‟t anyone ask them how they are doing, or if 

they are having a bad day? 

Everyone seems so concerned and worried about me, but 

what about my family? 

Don‟t they need care and support, too? 

They are with me no matter which direction I travel on this 

journey. 

When I laugh, they laugh! 

When I cry, they cry! 

What about my family? This is their disease too! 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would encourage everyone to be mindful of all 

cancer initiatives and to give the support those fighting 

appreciate and need, not just in April but throughout the year. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Lions Club Fundraiser 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Moose Jaw Lions Club had a successful fundraiser recently in 

hopes of raising enough money to provide a guide dog to a 

deserving Saskatchewan person. 

 

A charity dinner and auction of Roughrider memorabilia had 

the goal of raising $6,000, but Moose Javians brought out their 

chequebooks and the club raised an amazing $12,000. 

 

The 175 diners were joined by 10 current and former 

Saskatchewan Roughrider players in a relaxed meet-and-greet 

at the Golden Nugget Centre. The headliner was undoubtedly 

George Reed, who spoke and took questions from the audience 

during the evening. 

 

The most admired item or hotly contested item was a round of 

golf with Mr. Reed, which went for $3,000. The evening saw 20 

items up for auction including everything from a Gainer the 

Gopher appearance to an art print by Yvette Moore depicting 

Dave Ridgway‟s 1989 Grey Cup winning field goal. 

 

As entertaining as the evening was for the guests, it was far 

more successful in its goal for charity. There will be two 

fortunate people in the province who will be receiving a Seeing 

Eye dog because of the Moose Jaw Lions Club hosting this 

successful event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

Moose Jaw Lions Club for contributing to Moose Jaw and our 

province by bringing freedom and mobility to people in need 

and giving them access to the world. Thank you. 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2617 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Development of the Uranium Industry 

 

Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan‟s uranium 

industry directly and indirectly employs approximately 8,700 

people in this province. It‟s estimated that more than 40 per 

cent of the workforce in the uranium industry is of Aboriginal 

descent. More than 50 per cent of those workers live in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yet yesterday one of the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

leadership candidates said that if elected premier, he would put 

the jobs of all these northern Aboriginals at risk. Indeed he 

called for the virtual shutdown of the entire uranium industry in 

this province and said his government would not even consider 

further value-added development. Such an unprecedented and 

radical move would have a ruinous financial, social, and 

emotional impact on the people of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that, when in government, the NDP supported at least 

the consideration of further value-added opportunities in the 

uranium sector. Tomorrow members of this Assembly will vote 

on a motion calling for support to consider further value-added 

development of Saskatchewan‟s uranium industry. I call on the 

members opposite, particularly the members for Cumberland 

and Athabasca, to do the right thing, quit playing political 

games with the jobs of northern residents, and support 

consideration of further development of the uranium industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Labour Community Service Awards 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

Friday, March 27, I along with the members from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley, the member from Regina Rosemont, the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview, and the Hon. Ralph Goodale 

and Councillor Louis Browne, attended the fifth annual Labour 

Community Service Awards night. 

 

The Labour Community Service Awards are given to those 

from labour who volunteer their time, effort, and energy to 

build a better community. They work to improve the social and 

economic lives of Regina people. 

 

This year‟s recipient of the Labour Community Service Award 

was Ms. Wendy Daku. Wendy volunteers wherever help is 

needed, but she‟s a mainstay at the Unions of Regina Christmas 

dinner. The recipient of the Regina & District Award of 

Distinction was Mr. Chris Banting, who has recently retired 

after 37 years with RWDSU [Retail, Wholesale and Department 

Store Union]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the award recipients for a 

job well done. I also want to wish success, continued success, to 

Regina & District Labour Council in continuing their efforts to 

improve the lives of Regina and Saskatchewan people. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Manufacturing Hall of Fame Inductee 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening in 

Windsor, Ontario, Mr. Gavin Semple, president and general 

manager of Brandt Group of Companies, was inducted into the 

Canadian Manufacturing Hall of Fame. The hall of fame 

honours excellence in the Canadian manufacturing sector. Mr. 

Semple was in a prestigious company last night as six 

outstanding manufacturers with vision, tenacity, were inducted 

into the hall of fame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that Gavin Semple is a resident 

of Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley, and I‟m also pleased to be able to 

call him my friend. Mr. Semple has long history with Brandt 

Industries going back to the early 1970s. Through his guidance 

and leadership, Brandt has become the largest privately owned 

company in the province, employing more than 1,200 people in 

five businesses, headquartered right here in Regina. 

 

Brandt Industries has received several other prestigious awards 

in the past. For seven consecutive years, Brandt has been named 

one of Canada‟s best-managed companies. Brandt was inducted 

into the Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame in 2005. The 

company is a true leader and demonstrates what can be 

achieved in our province when you combine hard work and 

dedication. Brandt is truly on the cutting edge in many areas 

and worthy of our admiration. 

 

Please join me in congratulating Mr. Gavin Semple on the 

receipt of this national award for manufacturing excellence. 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Don Allen Saskaloppet 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Don Allen was a long-time 

resident of La Ronge. He spent five years as a trapper and 

outfitter, and in the 1970s, for health reasons, he and his family 

took up cross-country skiing. Both Don and his family became 

skiers of considerable talent and renown. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what Don Allen is best known for is the Don 

Allen Saskaloppet. Mr. Speaker, for those who don‟t know, the 

Saskaloppet is a huge, annual cross-country skiing event. This 

year it was held March 7. Mr. Speaker, every year for the last 

26 years the Don Allen Saskaloppet has attracted hundreds of 

skiers to La Ronge — some from as far away as BC [British 

Columbia] — to ski some of the best cross-country skiing trails 

in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I of course want to acknowledge the late Don 

Allen and his family for their invaluable contribution to this 

event. I also want to acknowledge and thank the event sponsors, 



2618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

participants, and most of all, all the small army of volunteers 

who worked so hard this year, as they do every year, to make 

this 26th annual Don Allen Saskaloppet a success. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[13:45] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

SaskPower Rate Increases 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, last night in committee the Minister 

of Crown Investments Corporation said SaskPower rate 

increases are going to become a fact of life for Saskatchewan 

people. He said it‟s time for SaskPower to start regularizing rate 

increases. Can the minister confirm today that, at his request, 

SaskPower rate increases are going to become a regular fact of 

life for Saskatchewan people? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 

question. Mr. Speaker, indeed we had an interesting discussion 

in committee last night. We talked about future generation 

challenges in Saskatchewan and opportunities. Saskatchewan 

has the fastest growing economy in the country. We will need 

much generation going forward. And to answer the member‟s 

question, I would just point to something that the member from 

Regina Lakeview said, that people will indeed pay more for 

power to help on the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, residents of Saskatchewan know that any 

generation going forward will be more expensive than the coal 

that we‟ve been able to burn in the past. That‟s just the fact of 

life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — So, Mr. Speaker, the minister, after 16 months in 

office, has looked at his crystal ball and determined that power 

rates have been too low for too long, and Saskatchewan people 

will now have to pay more. First the minister took away from 

Saskatchewan people the lowest cost utility reality that was 

reality for Saskatchewan people. Now the minister is saying put 

on your helmet, fasten your seatbelt, higher rates are just around 

the corner. And don‟t look at your provincial government for 

any help when the bills get beyond your ability to pay. Simple 

question, Mr. Speaker: why is the minister so quick to predict 

regular power rate increases? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, all members in this 

legislature, as most people in Saskatchewan know, the NDP 

underfunded SaskPower for many, many years. We have an 

infrastructure deficit, Mr. Speaker. We have one in highways. 

We have one in hospitals. We have one with schools. And yes, 

we have one with Crown corporations in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP did not plan for growth, whether it was 

to deal with the economy, whether it was to deal with the 

Crown corporation — SaskPower in this instance. Mr. Speaker, 

we will be ready for growth. We are preparing for growth, and 

SaskPower will be able to meet those challenges going forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, last night the minister said he 

expects the growth in the user base to cover some of the 

growing costs at SaskPower — growing costs led by growing 

borrowing costs for megaproject infrastructure plans of the Sask 

Party. Private sector forecasters are saying Saskatchewan‟s 

GDP [gross domestic product] growth this year will be little 

more than one-half of one per cent. Some forecasters are saying 

no growth at all this year. 

 

Can the minister tell us what his SaskPower growth projections 

are respecting power electrical use for the coming year and the 

coming years? And while he‟s at it, why is it that the Sask Party 

is so determined that all the major private sector forecasters are 

so wrong? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m a little 

surprised at that line of questioning. I‟ll provide a little update 

for the member opposite. Conference Board of Canada, 

Monday this week. Number one city in economic growth in the 

country — my city, the largest city in Saskatchewan, 

Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Number two, Mr. Speaker, number 

two city in Canada. Number two for growth — the city that we 

are in today, the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Number one for growth as a 

province in the country, Mr. Speaker — the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said in this 

legislature before, we will look at all options for growth. We 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2619 

will look at all options to ensure that we have the electrical 

generation needed to power the most aggressive, robust 

economy in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We go back to 2002 and Kyoto. The NDP had no plan beyond 

that. They again wrapped themselves in the flag of things like 

Kyoto. They . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Minister‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Employment Trends 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier tells workers in other 

parts of Canada that Saskatchewan is unaffected by the global 

economic crisis, but since December more than 3,000 workers 

and their families have lost their jobs — three-quarters of them 

in communities outside Regina and Saskatoon. For example: 

Babcock & Wilcox in Melville, 43 employees; Agrium in 

Vanscoy, 300 employees; Mosaic potash in Esterhazy and 

Colonsay, 1,000 employees; PotashCorp in Lanigan, 

Rocanville, and Allan, 940 employees; not to mention the 1,500 

forestry workers currently out of a job — all from communities 

outside the major cities. 

 

To the minister: why has he not invested the same time and 

money in helping these Saskatchewan families as he has in 

recruiting others to move here? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That‟s an 

interesting question. And I think the people on this side of the 

House are fully aware that as a province we‟re not immune to 

the vagaries of the market. There are people who unfortunately 

have suffered job losses. We‟re sympathetic. We understand the 

importance of having a job. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is also a province of great opportunity. 

There are still 6,500 jobs on the Jobs First Saskatchewan 

website going begging, and we are looking at employment 

opportunities all around the province for very specialized skills. 

That‟s why we have a recruitment fair happening in Toronto; 

that‟s why we‟re participants there. 

 

But in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with people 

who are suffering job loss in this province. We‟ve provided a 

variety of integrated services to job seekers. We‟re providing 

assistance with the resumés. We have advice to where to look 

for jobs. We have jobs that are available, the job listing 

available in local communities. There‟s career counselling, and 

we‟re making referrals to our CBO [community-based 

organization] partners. We are taking a very proactive position 

when it comes to helping those people who have lost their jobs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — They can pull out the Stephen Harper sympathy 

card if they want, but that doesn‟t affect the reality for people 

here in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan may have more job 

vacancies than other provinces, but that doesn‟t mean that these 

jobs are necessarily the right fit or the right salary for the 

thousands of laid-off workers and new grads entering the 

workforce. 

 

A quick scan of saskjobs.ca will show anyone looking for work 

that some sectors have very few postings. And many of the jobs 

posted are for part-time, casual, or summer employment. 

 

To the minister: will he admit that he has no plan to help 

laid-off Saskatchewan workers and recent grads find jobs that 

match their experience, their education, and their income needs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, the situation the member 

opposite just described would happen whether we were in a hot 

economy or a slowing economy. Not every job has qualified 

candidates to match. Not every qualified candidate can find a 

job he wants or she wants at the time they‟re looking. But as a 

whole, Mr. Speaker, our province is the best place to be looking 

for work. If you‟ve just lost your job, there are job opportunities 

to be had here. And for those who are having a little more 

struggle with finding new employment, our government is 

offering all kinds of services to assist those individuals during 

this difficult time period. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to remind that member that finding a 

job in Saskatchewan would be a preferable exercise as opposed 

to anywhere else in Canada, not to mention any place else in the 

United States right now. Our unemployment claims are the 

lowest in Canada. There are other jurisdictions that are seeing 

huge increases in unemployment claims, and our statistics in 

Saskatchewan are the lowest in the nation. We‟re very proud of 

that reality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, many of the laid-off workers in 

communities like Lanigan, Vanscoy, and Rocanville, or in Big 

River, Hudson Bay, Carrot River, and Meadow Lake are 

challenged to find adequate employment in their home 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in times of economic uncertainty, social and 

family ties are more important than ever. As loved ones are 

forced to move or commute long distances to make ends meet, 

families are put under stress. In times of economic uncertainty, 

rural communities are especially hard hit. 

 

To the minister: why has he forgotten about the Saskatchewan 

families, especially the rural families already living here who 



2620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

are unable to find a suitable job? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s simply unfair and 

inaccurate to say that we‟ve forgotten about those people. 

Those are the very people that we care about the most. They‟re 

the people that live in our constituencies, by and large. They‟re 

the people that make our communities a vibrant and active place 

and a very enjoyable place to reside. Those are the people who 

vote for us. Mr. Speaker, those are the people who have our full 

attention. 

 

I just read off a list of the activities that our government is 

undertaking to support those very people who lost their jobs. 

But I want to remind that member, that if you are out of work, 

there‟s no place better to be than Saskatchewan. Not only do we 

assist in finding new employment opportunities, there actually 

are employment opportunities here in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can identify one situation in the city of Swift 

Current in particular. The new Living Sky Casino there is 

desperately looking to hire people. They can‟t find enough 

people to make that casino operate to the level of First Nations 

employment that they would ordinarily like to have. They are 

actively seeking people. 

 

There are job opportunities everywhere in this province, and 

we‟re here to support their undertaking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, a story on CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] radio this morning indicated that the 

Sask Party is in Ontario trying to entice students and workers 

with promises of jobs in potash, oil and gas, and uranium. That 

same story noted the hundreds of layoffs in those sectors in 

recent months, and the fact that there are only six jobs in the oil 

and gas sector posted yesterday on the saskjobs.ca website. 

 

My question to the minister is this: why would you be in 

Ontario talking about jobs in these sectors when there are only 

six jobs posted on the website? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I presume the 

assumption is that we are in Ontario recruiting workers for the 

oil and gas industry. Mr. Speaker, if there‟s only six jobs there, 

I think we‟ll fill them locally. But there are many other jobs, 

literally thousands of jobs in this province, going begging right 

now. If that wasn‟t the case, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn‟t have 23 

private sector companies leading an initiative to the job fair in 

Ontario. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — The fact of the matter is that this 

initiative was undertaken by the private sector to help fill their 

needs. This particular exercise, Mr. Speaker, was very 

successful previously. We had a number of job applicants come 

to Saskatchewan and find full-time employment. We‟re very 

pleased with that. But you know what, there‟s room for many 

more. People from all across the country understand that this is 

the province to be to find good employment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people looking 

for work are speaking out on websites across the province. A 

sampling, and I want to quote: “I‟ve been trying to pick up a 

part-time job to supplement my income. Every time I‟ve 

applied every place I‟ve applied tells me they‟ve received 

hundreds of resumes.” “Saskatchewan is not the gold mine Wall 

is trying to make it sound like.” “The mines are laying people 

off like crazy.” 

 

To the minister: when is the Sask Party going to listen to the 

voices of people living in the real economy who are telling him 

that there is a problem? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if there is such doom 

and gloom prevailing over the province of Saskatchewan, if 

there‟s a big, black cloud hanging over us, that would beg the 

question: why did 14,500 additional people come to this 

province last year? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m quite surprised they 

could find their way through all the gloom and doom that 

prevails in this province, that big, black cloud hanging over us.  

 

Mr. Speaker, they might believe that, but the people on this side 

of the House do not. We believe Saskatchewan is a land of 

opportunity, that our future is bright, and that when we get over 

this bit of a hump, we are going to see such exceptional growth 

we will be the envy of the entire nation, bar none. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Cost of Living 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do note that we have 

had significant population growth in the last two years. But we 

also note, we also note . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2621 

Ms. Atkinson: — I do note that there were about fourteen and a 

half thousand people that moved to the province in 2007, and I 

think that would be the last year of the NDP government. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, an important ingredient in Saskatchewan‟s growth 

in recent years has been the affordable cost of living in this 

province. But another comment pointed to how this has 

changed under the Sask Party, and I quote: 

 

Before moving to Saskatchewan, anyone would be well 

advised to do some thorough research into the cost and 

availability of both rental housing and real estate for sale 

because these costs have risen dramatically and are getting 

actually quite ridiculous when compared to average 

wages. Be also advised that utility rates and property taxes 

around here are not even close to being the lowest in the 

country.  

 

To the minister: when is the Sask Party going to address real 

issues like the cost of rising utility rates in order to make 

Saskatchewan an affordable place to live, work, and raise a 

family? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this question is so 

typical of the NDP. You know, they‟d rather go back to a 

declining population when 35,000 people left the province, 

when house prices were collapsing, when you couldn‟t hardly 

give a home in rural Saskatchewan away to anybody because 

there was nobody coming to occupy it. They‟d rather have it at 

a plateau or descending into the depths of despair. That‟s the 

vision they have. They‟re constantly looking backwards. 

 

This government is looking forward. The people of this 

province are looking forward. That‟s why this party won the 

election. That‟s why our support in rural Saskatchewan, urban 

Saskatchewan, northern Saskatchewan is growing. Because 

they see vision and leadership here, and a government that cares 

about these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the costs might be going up, but the programs this 

government has introduced have made living in Saskatchewan 

really more affordable across the board. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Uranium Development Partnership 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, my question will be for the 

Minister for Enterprise Saskatchewan. The minister has made it 

very clear in this House and again with the press that a 

consulting firm was hired to assist the Uranium Development 

Partnership in producing their report. Mr. Speaker, we know, 

again from the minister, that $3 million has been budgeted for 

the project of the UDP [Uranium Development Partnership]. He 

has also said that the lion‟s share of the money will go to the 

consulting firm. 

 

So my question, on behalf of the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. Is 

the majority of this money going to the consulting firm? Who is 

the consulting firm? How much are they being paid? When did 

they begin their work? And will the public of Saskatchewan see 

the entire report that is provided by the consulting firm to the 

UDP? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the member for that series of questions; I hope I can remember 

them all. 

 

The consulting firm is Mackenzie and Associates. The cost is 

not $3 million, as I had stated incorrectly. Although 3 million 

were budgeted for that, it‟s considerably less, under 2.5 total. 

Oh the members laugh at that, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t think 

half a million dollars is a significant saving. Perhaps that‟s why 

they had such issues with balancing the budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll give the minister 

another chance. I know it was a number of questions. When did 

the work of this consultant begin? When did the work of the 

consultant begin? We‟d like to know the answer to that 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you see, the problem here is that the government 

established a terms of reference, a request for proposals for this 

consulting firm. The government put together a request for 

proposal for this consulting firm. Now I have a copy of it here, 

Mr. Speaker, again obtained through freedom of information. 

But guess what, Mr. Speaker. As soon as I open it, what do I 

begin to see? Blacked out. Blacked out. Blacked out. Where is 

the transparency? 

 

Will the minister, as he did yesterday, provide the complete 

request for proposals that was handed out by his government to 

secure this consulting firm? Will he today produce the complete 

document? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member for those questions as well. I‟ll say this, Mr. Speaker, 

that we will be providing the UDP report in its entirety to the 

public. And at this point, I don‟t see anything to be gained by 

revealing the details of a contract between this government and 

Mackenzie and company. 

 

And I can hardly wait, Mr. Speaker, to reveal the entire UDP 

report to the public and to the media on Friday. And that 

member, I‟m sure, will be interested — although I don‟t know 

what he‟ll talk about in question period after that. 

 



2622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in this RFP [request for proposal] 

put together by this government, this RFP claims to state the 

statement of intent for this consulting operation, the proposed 

project structure, the proposed deliverables, and the timelines 

— all of which are blocked out, blacked out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question again is to the minister: will he reveal 

the entirety of this RFP that was used to choose this consultant? 

Will he do as he did yesterday and make the entire document 

public? 

 

You know, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I found sentences that were 

excluded from public attention. Today we find paragraphs that 

are being hidden from public attention. What is this government 

trying to hide? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

that that member understands cabinet rules because once upon a 

time he was there. And it‟s a vivid memory still and burned into 

the minds of the people of Saskatchewan, that time period that 

he was there, Mr. Speaker. And not a happy memory it was. It 

was a time of doom and gloom. And the fact is that member 

fully understands cabinet rules, and references in documents of 

that nature that refer to cabinet and cabinet decisions will be, 

are, and always have been blacked out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this is not a cabinet 

document. This was a request for proposals to put a consultant 

together with the Uranium Development Partnership. It‟s not a 

cabinet document. It seeks to set out the terms of reference, the 

purpose, the deliverables, Mr. Speaker, and timelines. Why in 

the world would the government not want the people of 

Saskatchewan, who are paying — we learned today — $2.5 

million for this work, why should the taxpayers who are 

funding this $2.5 million project not be told even the simple 

thing, what are the deliverables that government is asking for? 

 

I‟m going to ask the minister again: will he reveal the entire 

RFP to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — That member fully understands the rules 

regarding cabinet and documents that are available to the 

opposition and to the public. But I will undertake this, Mr. 

Speaker: I‟ll undertake to review that document, and if there are 

parts of it that have been erroneously blacked out, I will make 

those available to that member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would presume that before this 

document was made public, the minister has already reviewed 

it. If he hasn‟t, then that‟s a serious question all of its own. If 

he‟s already reviewed it once and blacked it all out, what is it 

that he will do today that changes his mind? Well I hope he 

does change his mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister and this government want the people 

of Saskatchewan to believe that the Uranium Development 

Partnership is somehow an objective, fair body. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, then perhaps the minister can answer this question. 

According to freedom of information, to the minutes of the only 

meeting we know about in 2008, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

responsible indicates that members of the committee are invited 

to attend to a nuclear reactor for a tour. 

 

Well my question to the minister was: are they invited to tour a 

medical isotope facility? Have they been invited, and did they 

tour a refinery? We also learned from those minutes, Mr. 

Speaker, that the committee was instructed to read a book, a 

very pro-nuclear development book. How can the minister 

suggest that this kind of a process is fair and objective? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the 

member‟s reference to the members of the UDP and their 

integrity are demeaning to say the least. This absolutely is a 

blue-ribbon panel, put together of Saskatchewan people of the 

highest level of integrity, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And I wonder which members of that panel that that member 

takes issue with, Mr. Speaker. Is it our First Nations 

representatives on that panel? Is that what it is, member? I 

wonder if it‟s the First Nations representative. Is it our urban 

municipalities representative that he has a problem with? Is that 

it? Is it the rural municipal officials that he has a problem with, 

Mr. Speaker? Well who is it? Why is it that that member can‟t 

show some respect to this committee? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Government Services. 

 

U-Brew and U-Vin Available in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased today to announce that businesses can now offer 

U-brew and U-vin services across the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2623 

Hon. Mr. D’Autremont: — The introduction of this new type 

of liquor permit is just one of the many changes to provincial 

liquor regulations that take effect today. U-brew and U-vin 

operations offer supplies, space, equipment, and expertise to 

customers who want to make their own wine and beer on site in 

the store rather than in their own home. 

 

It‟s a new opportunity for businesses across this province and 

one I think that many Saskatchewan citizens will be excited 

about. It will allow aficionados and neophytes alike to take 

advantage of the expertise available at these new U-vin and 

U-brew operations. 

 

Another change to the province‟s liquor regulation is the 

introduction of wine recorking in Saskatchewan. All 

liquor-permitted establishments will sell wine by the bottle, will 

now be required to recork unfinished wine bottles if requested 

by the customer. This new initiative will encourage responsible 

consumption because customers who are out at their local 

restaurant or bar will have the option to buy wine by the bottle 

but won‟t feel compelled to finish the bottle before leaving the 

establishment. 

 

Still another change that many Saskatchewan residents will 

welcome is a new permit to allow businesses to offer home 

delivery of beverage alcohol. Home delivery offers an option to 

customers who may not be able to get to an SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] liquor store, 

off-sale, or franchise to make their purchases. 

 

Current liquor permittees such as off-sale outlets and liquor 

franchises or other businesses may apply for this new home 

delivery permit. It‟s a simple concept. Customers call the 

delivery company, order their products, and later that day the 

order is delivered to their homes. As with other types of liquor 

service in the province, customers must be of legal drinking age 

to purchase the alcohol. It will be up to the delivery service to 

ensure proper identification so that no minors are buying 

beverage alcohol. 

 

There‟s also a number of other changes that take effect today. 

Liquor permittees will face increased fines and penalties for 

matters regarding public safety such as serving minors, 

overserving, or overcrowding. There were also amendments 

made to the operating rules such as the hours of operations that 

bars and other liquor-permitted establishments must remain 

open. The new rules allow more flexibility for these businesses 

to determine what hours are appropriate for their particular 

business. 

 

Similarly there were other small changes made in other areas, 

like minimum production requirements for brew pubs and 

extending the hours for special occasion permits from 8 to 12 

hours. All current liquor permittees, restaurants, bars, pool 

halls, brew pubs, and others will receive information about 

these changes by letter in the coming days. The information is 

also available online at www.slga.gov.sk.ca. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The intent behind all of these changes, big and small, was to 

reduce unnecessary red tape, give businesses more flexibility in 

their current operations, and present more opportunities for 

business that may want to expand their operations. There are 

also a number of changes expanding social responsibility to 

those who sell or consume beverage alcohol. This has been one 

of my main priorities since becoming Minister Responsible for 

Liquor and Gaming. 

 

The review of existing regulations, consultations with all the 

various stakeholders, and development of all of these changes 

has been a lengthy process. I think consumers, existing 

permittees, as well as other interested business people will be 

happy with the changes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I‟d 

like to thank the minister for sending across a copy of his 

statement so I could review it and have a look at it before it was 

presented here in the House. 

 

Very pleased to be able to offer some comments. Mr. Speaker, 

when the minister said that this has been his main priority since 

he was appointed Minister of SLGA, that‟s been 16 months. 

And most of these regulations had been, the work on them had 

been done in the year and a half previous to that. 

 

So other than the U-brew and U-vin operations that offer 

supplies, space, equipment, and experience to customers, that is 

a new addition to what had been previously approved. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it had been turned down because there hasn‟t been a 

big uptake in other provinces across Canada of this program. 

And there has been a number of concerns over whether it is you 

are able to enforce the regulations that are in place and how 

successful they actually are. So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll have a look 

at that and we‟ll have to keep an eye on it and see how it 

progresses. 

 

But there are a couple of good things that have been done in 

these regulations and I have to say the wine recorking is a very 

good step, encouraging responsible consumption. Patrons 

should by no means be under any type of feeling there, the need 

to finish a bottle of wine that they have bought with the supper 

or a dinner when they are out for the evening. So the recorking 

and the ability to take home unfinished bottles is a very good 

move. It‟s extremely low cost when it comes to any 

requirements that are put on any of the restaurants, and it truly 

is a good change. 

 

The business to offer home delivery or allowing businesses to 

apply for permits to offer home delivery of beverage alcohol 

does raise some concerns over adequate enforcement. Now the 

minister has said that there has been ample regulations put in 

place and the social responsibility aspect of it has been looked 

after and addressed, and we‟re hoping that that‟s accurate. And 

also I guess I would have some questions on the quantity that 

can just be ordered over the phone and delivered to your home. 

 

There‟s a couple of things. We‟ll have to go through the 

regulations in more detail to see what‟s stated in there, and if 

not, I may have to ask the minister a few questions. Home 

delivery though does raise a number of red flags for a number 



2624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

of groups. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a number of other things that are being 

done. Many of them are housekeeping. Liquor and gaming 

regulations need to be updated on an ongoing basis, so we are 

pleased to see this piece finally move ahead. And I have to say 

the brew pub piece where you‟re changing the minimum 

production requirements, that will be a good move and will be 

well received in a number of areas across the province with one 

exception. I guess there will be a need for the minister and his 

officials within SLGA to make sure that the new regulations are 

enforced. 

 

The changes to the special occasion permits will be well 

received by many. I think, all in all, Mr. Speaker, there‟s some 

pretty good changes. A couple that we will have to keep our eye 

on and see how they do work in cities across the province. But 

overall I‟m very pleased to make some comments on the new 

regulations, and we‟ll just keep our eye on them in the coming 

years. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of municipal 

government. 

 

Property Assessment Information Website 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to inform 

members of the House that as of March 31 of this year, 

Saskatchewan communities and taxpayers were provided with 

access to a new website designed to help people access 

assessment information for their properties. The Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency, or SAMA, announced the 

introduction of a new website called SAMAView. 

 

SAMAView allows the general public access to individual 

property assessment information for all SAMA client 

jurisdictions. This website visually presents assessment 

information using easy-to-understand maps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, easily accessible property assessment information 

is especially important to the public during a revaluation year 

such as 2009. SAMAView gives the public a tool to 

independently gather specific information without having to 

contact municipal or agency offices. 

 

It‟s important for taxpayers to remember that assessments do 

not reflect individual selling prices, but typical property values 

for the 2006 base year. However valuation accuracy depends 

upon the information SAMA has about each property. Owners 

will be able to easily verify the information SAMA has used to 

determine the assessed value. If an error is detected, owners are 

asked to contact their SAMA regional office to update their 

property identification and information. 

 

SAMAView provides two ways to search individual properties. 

First, through a text-based property search based on jurisdiction 

and assessment ID [identification] number, legal land 

description, street name, condominium unit, or civic address. 

And two, a map-based search based on SAMA assessment 

property layer maps. The text-based search is recommended for 

those with a dial-up Internet access. 

Mr. Speaker, property information with supporting photography 

includes mixed use, agricultural land, residential, condominium, 

commercial, elevator, railway, and pipeline classifications. 

 

The site provides links to other websites, such as the ministries 

of Municipal Affairs and Education, independent jurisdictions, 

and contracted service providers. To access SAMAView, I 

would encourage people to go to www.sama.sk.ca and click on 

the SAMAView logo on the home page. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is working to provide the people 

of Saskatchewan with information to assist their understanding 

of the assessment system. That announcement furthers our 

commitment to an assessment system that supports a growing 

economy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you very much to the minister for sending across his statement. 

Mr. Speaker, with the access that Saskatchewan residents have 

to Internet — being one of the most wired jurisdictions 

anywhere in North America — it is an improvement and 

definitely a step forward to have SAMA have more information 

online and have accessible for people right across the province. 

 

To try and understand, SAMA can be pretty difficult and 

challenging to understand how our assessment works, and I‟m 

sure SAMA has received a fair number of questions this year 

with reassessment. And with notices being mailed out over the 

past little while in many of the municipalities, I‟m sure there 

will be more questions. But the more information that‟s online, 

the easy access to that information is the right step forward. It‟s 

the appropriate way to move and I‟m sure many citizens across 

the province will be very pleased with the information that‟s 

here and I‟m sure we will only see improvements in the coming 

years on the SAMAView website. Thank you very much and 

thanks to the minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee on 

Crown and Central Agencies has been instructed to move Bill 

No. 57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 without 

amendment. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2625 

The Speaker: — Agreed. When shall this Bill be read a third 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Corporations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill, and that this Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Corporations has 

moved that Bill No. 57, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 327 and 328. 

 

The Speaker: — The answers to questions 327 and 328 tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Innovation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m pleased to present to the House for second reading The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2009. 

 

As the members of this House are well aware, the Invest in 

Saskatchewan program encourages Saskatchewan employees 

and individuals to invest in funds or pools of capital called 

labour-sponsored venture capital corporations. These 

corporations invest in Saskatchewan-based, small- and 

medium-sized businesses. The objective is to encourage the 

residents of this province to make equity investments in small- 

and medium-sized, Saskatchewan-based businesses. 

 

This will accomplish several things, Mr. Speaker. It will create 

and maintain jobs. More than that, it will encourage long-term 

investment in local communities which reinforces one of the 

foundations of our province. It will also strengthen the 

provincial economy by providing venture capital to 

Saskatchewan companies to assist with their growth and 

development. 

 

This venture capital will be of vital importance in the near 

future as the global economy stabilizes itself and regains its 

footing after the recent turmoil that we have seen, Mr. Speaker. 

And over the longer term this program will build a lasting and 

productive relationship between labour, business, and 

government to the benefit of this province. 

 

The amendments in this Bill relate to the differential tax 

treatment provided to federally and provincially registered 

funds in the program. The proposed changes will increase the 

provincial tax credit for federally registered funds from 15 per 

cent on the first $3,500 invested to 20 per cent on the first 5,000 

invested per investor per year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These changes will increase the fairness of the choices open to 

investors. It will provide options which are more equitable and 

which remove a potential disparity between the available funds. 

We feel these amendments are in the best interests of the Invest 

in Saskatchewan program, of the current and future provincial 

economy, and of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move for second reading of The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Enterprise and 

Innovation has moved second reading of Bill No. 84, The 

Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased today to rise to speak at second reading of Bill No. 84, 

An Act to Amend the Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Act and, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the explanation 

provided by the Minister of Enterprise and Innovation just a 

few moments ago, an explanation that outlined the reasons 

behind this Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, before taking a look at the specific 

provisions in this Bill, I think it is important that the members 

of this Assembly and the members of the public who are 

watching or who read this debate at some point later, Mr. 

Speaker, understand that Saskatchewan‟s had the 



2626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

labour-sponsored venture capital corporations doing business in 

this province for quite some time. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have 

a couple of funds that are doing extraordinarily well, have 

indeed provided Saskatchewan residents with benefits that are 

not only personal through their investments, but also indirectly 

through their investments in the province. Mr. Speaker, the 

minister in his explanation indicated that indeed 

labour-sponsored venture capital corporations do in fact create 

and maintain jobs in this province, and, Mr. Speaker, they 

provide venture capital to Saskatchewan companies. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, that‟s the key. Those are the key reasons 

why these funds were supported in this province both by 

government and by individuals who are investing. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the main reasons why people invest is of 

course personal. There is a tremendous tax credit, tremendous 

tax advantage, of putting hard-earned Saskatchewan tax dollars 

into a labour-sponsored venture capital corporation, Mr. 

Speaker, not to mention the possibilities of growth or return. 

But by and large financial planners and others who promote 

labour-sponsored venture capital funds in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, promote these funds primarily as their upfront tax 

benefit for individuals. 

 

The broad benefit, Mr. Speaker, is that the funds raised then go 

to work for Saskatchewan people in the Saskatchewan 

economy. They do create jobs because there‟s venture capital 

provided to Saskatchewan firms. And, Mr. Speaker, as those 

firms become successful they provide a return to the fund, and 

that fund then returns a financial benefit to their fund holders — 

shareholders if I can use that term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Labour-sponsored venture capital corporations have been a part 

of the Saskatchewan economy, the Saskatchewan way of doing 

business, Mr. Speaker, for quite some time. And we continue to 

support the corporations, Mr. Speaker, and indeed we want to 

ensure that any legislation or regulation serves the three 

interests: the interests of the fund, the interests of the 

subscribers to that fund, and the interests to the corporate 

beneficiaries of that fund, those who would receive the venture 

capital. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we reviewed this legislation, we are 

reviewing legislation that contributes to job creation — a lot of 

it in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — that contributes to the 

wealth and well-being of Saskatchewan people who have taken 

hard-earned, tax-paid dollars and invested them in one of these 

funds in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are some individuals who have taken 

considerable, personal risk over the years in order to ensure that 

the funds operating in this province are successful. A lot of 

hours, a lot of sweat, and a lot of commitment not only to the 

success of the fund, but the success of the companies that are 

supported by the fund, Mr. Speaker. So when we review this 

legislation, the goal is to ensure that when the government is 

moving to make any changes that it is not negatively impacting 

either the funds or the contributors or the beneficiaries of that 

fund. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what this legislation does, as it was described 

by the minister in his explanation is for all intents and purposes, 

it mimics what the federal government has done with regards to 

labour-sponsored venture capital corporations and, Mr. Speaker, 

it would encourage funds that are currently registered federally 

that operate outside Saskatchewan to in fact sell their product 

here in Saskatchewan. That‟s what it seems to be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that we have on reading 

the legislation based on, well on reading the legislation without 

the opportunity to have asked a lot of questions at this point . . . 

I think the public should know this legislation was introduced 

just a few days ago, Mr. Speaker. So we‟re debating this here 

today with very little time for consultation at this point. But, 

Mr. Speaker, a couple of things come to mind. 

 

The first and foremost of this is there is a pool of money sitting 

in Saskatchewan that finds investing in a labour-sponsored 

venture capital corporation acceptable. Not all Saskatchewan 

residents find the level of risk to be within their tolerance level, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is a pool of money — probably a defined amount, the 

labour-sponsored capital funds could tell you what that is on an 

annual basis — where the individual investor‟s tolerance to risk 

level, Mr. Speaker, is high enough to make this an acceptable 

investment in their portfolio. It isn‟t for everybody, Mr. 

Speaker, because there is an element of risk here. That having 

been said, that pool of money, Mr. Speaker, the corporations 

would say, has a ceiling on it on an annual basis. So if we 

expand the number of funds to which that pool could eventually 

go to, we could diminish the amount of money that the funds 

registered and operating in Saskatchewan have because the pool 

is now divided out among a greater number of funds. 

 

The other thing that we want to be very certain of, Mr. Speaker, 

that when funds registered nationally are now able to receive 

investments from Saskatchewan and the tax credit applied in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, when that happens we want to 

ensure that the funds that are registered nationally will have 

some requirement to actually invest in those types of businesses 

operating inside Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, so that 

Saskatchewan money continues to serve the interests of 

Saskatchewan people. In other words, the businesses that are 

the recipients of venture capital, primarily again, Mr. Speaker, 

in rural Saskatchewan where a considerable number of the 

companies currently funded through Saskatchewan‟s venture 

capital corporations are located. 

 

So our concern, Mr. Speaker, rests solely with not seeing the 

pool of funds available for investment in Saskatchewan being 

diminished by a law, by legislation, by regulation that in fact is 

simply here because it was done in Ottawa so it should be done 

here. 

 

So over the next little while, Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues 

will be consulting further with those who are working with 

labour-sponsored venture capital corporations in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We‟ll be sharing this legislation with them. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we will be seeking their input into this process. 

 

I can only assume, Mr. Speaker, that those who are proposing 

the Bill — the present government, the Minister of Enterprise 

and Innovation — have already consulted with, have already 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2627 

talked to those who are involved in this business, Mr. Speaker. I 

can assume that, but I can‟t presume that, Mr. Speaker, because 

certainly events of recent weeks about the lack of consultation 

that government engages in, Mr. Speaker, has been very 

apparent. In fact we are aware that this government seems to 

believe that we should legislate first and consult second. And, 

Mr. Speaker, while I would like to assume that they have indeed 

consulted already since the legislation is in front of us, I should 

not presume that to be the case based on our history. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will take some time to review this with 

those who are most affected. And our goal in doing that is quite 

simply to preserve the original intent and preserve the ability of 

these labour-sponsored venture capital corporations to do good 

business in Saskatchewan, supporting Saskatchewan businesses 

that invest in rural Saskatchewan that provide the opportunity 

for good jobs and building our communities. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, knowing that we‟ve got some 

consultation to do before we send this off to committee and 

knowing that there are other members of my caucus who will 

wish to speak on this legislation before we send it off to 

committee, I would, at this point, move that debate on Bill No. 

84, An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital 

Corporations Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 84. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of Bill No. 85, The Municipal Grants 

Act. As announced in the 2009-2010 budget, the provincial 

government is implementing a new municipal operating grants 

program. This program will provide predictable funding to 

support municipal operating expenditures. The Bill replaces The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Act and provides the legal 

framework for government to implement the new program. 

 

This Bill and the regulations that will follow demonstrate our 

government‟s commitment to keeping our promises. In the 2007 

provincial election campaign, we promised to develop a new 

revenue-sharing deal that includes a portion of the province‟s 

own-source revenue. Mr. Speaker, this is exactly what we have 

done. 

 

Municipal operating grants will grow based on the growth in 

provincial sales taxes. This year the municipal operating grant 

will be 90 per cent of 1 percentage point of PST [provincial 

sales tax]. In 2010-2011 and each following year, we will 

provide one full percentage point of PST to municipalities for 

operating expenditures. We are increasing operating funding for 

municipalities by 24 per cent over last year and meeting our 

commitment to provide predictable, stable operating funding for 

local governments. 

 

Government did not develop the new program in isolation. This 

program is the result of an analysis of municipal needs 

conducted with the municipal sector. I would like to take this 

opportunity to thank the many people for participating in the 

review: SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association]; SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]; UMAAS [Urban Municipal Administrators‟ 

Association of Saskatchewan]; RMAA [Rural Municipal 

Administrators‟ Association of Saskatchewan], that‟s the urban 

and rural municipal associations and their administrative 

associations; as well city managers, the city mayors‟ caucus, 

New North, and the northern revenue sharing trust account 

management board. Mr. Speaker, their ongoing commitment to 

work with the ministry and with government to meet our shared 

goal of a strong and vibrant municipal sector is very much 

appreciated indeed. 

 

Once this Bill has been passed and has received the assent of 

the Lieutenant Governor, it will come into force retroactively to 

April 1, 2009, the very first day of the province‟s 2009-2010 

fiscal year. The details of the new municipal operating grant 

program will be incorporated in regulations in the coming 

months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this funding is important to the prosperity and 

well-being of all communities and the municipalities in 

Saskatchewan. I hope all members of the legislature will 

support this legislation to increase funding for municipalities. 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 85, The 

Municipal Grants Act. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved second reading of Bill No. 85, The 

Municipal Grants Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today to speak to second 

reading of Bill No. 85, An Act respecting Grants to 

Municipalities, making consequential amendments to other Acts 

and repealing The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak, I want to thank the 

minister opposite for his explanation of the Bill provided in the 

last few minutes. I am surprised however, Mr. Speaker, that the 

minister did not take a little bit more time to actually explain 

how this process of change from revenue-sharing formulas to 

grants will work, Mr. Speaker. I appreciated, however, the fact 

that in committee the other day the minister answered quite a 

number of questions that I raised with regards to the way in 

which grants will be provided to municipalities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks today I will also take a few 

moments to outline the way in which it was explained to me 

how this process will work, but at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 

explain some of the impact that that may have on municipalities 

and of course express some of the — not concerns but — 

language that some of the municipalities have raised with me 

over the last few days. 



2628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

[14:45] 

 

That having been said, Mr. Speaker, and before I address the 

Bill directly, let me just say that I am aware that the Ministry of 

Municipal Affairs has been working with municipalities on this 

since the election of 2007. I‟m also aware, Mr. Speaker, that 

this process of discussing changes to the revenue-sharing 

process began by the former Department of Municipal Affairs 

prior to the November 2007 election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, back when I was minister of Government 

Relations, which was the name of the department prior to the 

election in 2007, we had engaged in preliminary discussions 

with municipalities to find a new way of providing funds — a 

new way other than the traditional revenue-sharing program. 

And Mr. Speaker, it obviously took the new government some 

time to work through this with the municipalities, as it took my 

government some time to work through the preliminaries of 

this. After all, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with a number of 

individual municipalities. We were dealing with a number of 

different municipal organizations. And Mr. Speaker, we were 

dealing with a couple of agencies that would be affected by this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously Saskatchewan‟s largest cities, 

Saskatoon and Regina — although they are members of SUMA, 

the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association — had a 

very specific and differential view of revenue sharing, Mr. 

Speaker. The largest cities, the fastest growing population 

component and in fact physical growth component of the 

provincial economy, Mr. Speaker, had a stake in how provincial 

revenues would be applied in the future. Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association representing 

cities, towns, villages, Mr. Speaker, all had an interest in seeing 

that the provincial government would provide funding at a level 

that would allow them to meet needs expressed by their 

communities. 

 

Rural municipalities through the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities, Mr. Speaker, that is all those rural 

communities that were not villages and towns, Mr. Speaker, 

also had a significant interest in this process because of course 

the funding for rural municipalities was tied up in the 

revenue-sharing program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the northern communities — and this Bill 

addresses funding for northern communities — as well through 

the organization called New North were also very interested in 

revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, and have always been concerned 

that their share of the revenue-sharing pool was never either fair 

or enough, Mr. Speaker, to cover the needs of the people of the 

North. 

 

And then finally, Mr. Speaker, you also have addressed in this 

legislation, the interests of Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency known as SAMA, who of course are 

funded by local municipalities and by the provincial 

government and more recently, Mr. Speaker, with the addition 

of funding from the school boards across Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you have a large number of individual 

interests that had to be at the table to work through the whole 

process of moving from revenue sharing to a form of sharing 

provincial revenues for the benefit of municipal residents. We 

all know, Mr. Speaker, that if you‟re a resident of a 

municipality in Saskatchewan, you are also a resident of 

Saskatchewan. Provincial interest is very significant. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the municipal interest is obviously very close to the 

hearts of people who live in their communities. 

 

It is the municipal government after all that provides the quality 

of life for people. And the municipal government, the municipal 

leaders made it very clear in all of their arguments to the 

discussion table that if it wasn‟t for parks and paved streets, 

sidewalks, trees, snow removal, recreation facilities, cultural 

facilities, in some cases police services, in most cases fire 

services, garbage collection, provision of safe drinking water 

. . . Mr. Speaker, we have provided municipalities with the 

responsibility to deliver most of those things that provide the 

quality of life for the people who live within our communities 

in our province. So, Mr. Speaker, those municipal leaders have 

always expressed concern that as provincial revenues grew, that 

revenues for municipalities should also grow. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, there was criticism of times in the 

early 1990s when the revenue-sharing pool actually dropped in 

size, Mr. Speaker, and then of course it started to grow again as 

resources in the province became available . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . The members opposite have been critical in the 

past — and I hear from the comments across the way right now, 

Mr. Speaker — have been critical of this drop in revenue 

sharing that occurred in the mid-1990s. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think the municipal leaders are aware and 

the members opposite should be aware — although it appears 

that they aren‟t, Mr. Speaker — should be aware that in fact 

what was happening to that revenue pool was a direct result of 

the province‟s inability to fund all that had previously been 

funded because of the huge debt load that the province was 

carrying after the 1991 general election. Mr. Speaker, the 

Conservative government from 1982 to 1991 had created a debt 

load that almost prevented Saskatchewan from borrowing funds 

to allow it to continue to operate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all residents in Saskatchewan actually 

contributed over the years 1991 through 1995-96. All residents 

in Saskatchewan contributed to help get this province back on 

its feet away from the bankruptcy, the near bankruptcy that the 

previous Conservative government had put it in. And municipal 

leaders at the time understood that the only way that the 

province would be able to continue any revenue sharing was for 

that pool of dollars to drop. And they understood that, Mr. 

Speaker, and they worked through it with the province and with 

others. And in fact all sectors of the Saskatchewan economy, 

Mr. Speaker, had to dig in and deal with that near bankruptcy 

situation. 

 

The other piece of news, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite conveniently forget is that in 1995-96 there was a 

significant change in funding imposed on the provinces by 

Ottawa. The federal budget in that year, Mr. Speaker, actually 

changed the way in which funds were provided to the provinces 

for the provision of education and health care. That program 

changed dramatically, Mr. Speaker, for the provision of 

education and health care. And as a result of that, the provincial 

costs for providing education and health care increased 

dramatically. 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2629 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again . . . and the members opposite 

certainly don‟t understand this situation. So, Mr. Speaker, it 

took almost until 1999, almost eight full years, Mr. Speaker, for 

the New Democratic Party government in this province to 

overcome the debt that was created by the cousins of the 

members opposite and the new rules imposed by Ottawa on the 

circumstances, the financial circumstances, of this province. 

 

But what happened, Mr. Speaker, as soon as the province of 

Saskatchewan began to get out of debt and create some new 

revenues? Mr. Speaker, those new revenues began to be shared 

with municipalities so that in each of four years that new 

revenues were available, that revenue-sharing pool was 

increased in 2004, in 2005, in 2006, in 2007. Mr. Speaker, 

every year, every year the revenue-sharing pool increased ad 

hoc as a decision of the government of the day. Mr. Speaker, it 

increased because there was a recognition that indeed the pool 

had to be rebuilt to its base and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

recognized that the quality of life of Saskatchewan people is 

indeed influenced by the ability of the municipalities to deliver 

it. That funding was important, was critical, and therefore it 

moved forward. 

 

As the economy improved, Mr. Speaker, municipal leaders 

indicated to the province a desire to share more greatly in those 

increased revenues. And, Mr. Speaker, the government of the 

day, the New Democratic Party, myself as minister of 

Government Relations and later the member from Regina — 

it‟s not Coronation Park, Mr. Speaker, it‟s Douglas Park — 

Regina Douglas Park, met with municipal leaders across the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and agree that we needed to find the 

right formula to ensure that municipalities could in fact have a 

greater share in this. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, finding the match that would serve urban 

municipalities, cities, towns, villages, the big cities, the rural 

municipalities, and of course those others that are involved, as I 

said, Mr. Speaker — including SAMA, which also has an effect 

on school boards, Mr. Speaker — all had to be at the table, all 

had to be a part of the process. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what was taking place here was what we 

consider to be the right way of doing things. You consult first 

and then you make changes and legislate later. That‟s the right 

process, Mr. Speaker. So what we‟re seeing right now, Mr. 

Speaker, is a piece of legislation that follows this process of the 

municipalities are able to support the legislation and the 

program because they‟ve been part of the process that created it. 

They aren‟t reacting to some theoretical idea that somebody in 

government had that they‟re now going to test out after they‟ve 

written it and have committed it to concrete, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The budget provisions have generally been received well by the 

municipal sector simply because they have indeed been a part of 

the creation of the program and indeed the legislation itself. 

And every one of them, Mr. Speaker, knows that this process 

began long before the members opposite were elected. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the reason it was a long time, because they needed to 

find that common ground. They knew how important it was to 

have all parties with some agreements in common interests, Mr. 

Speaker. And it didn‟t happen overnight because one person 

said, this is the way it should be. You had a lot of competing 

interests. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we‟ve got here is the legislation that is 

going to implement a program that does away with the way it 

was always done and introduces a brand new way of 

distributing funds. Now there are risks associated with this 

process, Mr. Speaker, and I think the municipal leaders are 

aware of those risks. We will examine some of them when this 

legislation goes to committee. But, Mr. Speaker, what 

communities have been used to, Mr. Speaker, is now gone. 

There‟s a new process that‟s been introduced and it‟s going to 

take a bit of time for the municipalities to fully integrate into 

this. Fortunately they‟ve been involved in the creation of the 

legislation so they have a reasonable understanding of what 

they might expect. But the devil‟s always in the detail, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

What we‟ve got here is now a grant of government. In fact the 

name has changed in this legislation from revenue sharing to 

operating grant. And the other night we talked in committee — 

members of the opposition and the minister — we talked about 

this change from revenue-sharing formula to government grant. 

 

Now there is no real formula here, Mr. Speaker, other than the 

fact that we‟re going to see a per cent next year. This year is 90 

per cent of 1 per cent of the PST. But the program really is 1 

per cent of the PST will be provided annually to the 

municipalities. That‟s it. Very simple, very straightforward. 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, the numbers will be known about 

six months in advance of the municipal budget process. And 

that‟s a good thing because municipalities wanted some 

certainty in the process. 

 

But the bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, this still is a grant. And I 

think everybody understands the difference between a 

revenue-sharing formula and a grant. We had with the revenue 

sharing, Mr. Speaker, at least a base, and it would continue year 

after year after year after year. With a grant, Mr. Speaker, or 

what‟s known as a grant, it sort of seems like it‟s at the 

discretion of government, and that here one day, gone the next. 

There‟s always concern, Mr. Speaker, about discretion in 

providing funding, especially when the premise is certainty. So 

we need to have not just certainty of dollars, Mr. Speaker, we 

need to ensure certainty of delivery. And that‟s something the 

municipalities have expressed some interest in. 

 

Let‟s just have a quick look at the first couple of provisions 

that‟s in the legislation itself, Mr. Speaker. After the title and 

the interpretation we get to some of the clauses. I just want to 

put on record, Mr. Speaker, what some of these clauses say. 

Basically, clause no. 3, under grants to municipalities: 

 

Grants to municipalities 

3  The minister may make grants to a municipality in 

accordance with the regulations for any prescribed 

program or prescribed purpose. 

 

So in other words, Mr. Speaker, the legislation does not set out 

a per cent of PST. That‟s going to be in the regulations. So, Mr. 

Speaker, those regulations can be changed without a change in 

legislation. 

 

Secondly, point no. 4 in the legislation under grants for 



2630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

municipal purposes or municipal programs, it says: 

 

The minister may make grants in accordance with the 

regulations to any person, agency, organization, 

association, institution or body within or outside 

Saskatchewan for any prescribed municipal purpose or 

prescribed municipal program. 

 

So funds available under this program, Mr. Speaker, also apply 

to not just the municipalities but to organizations, associations, 

institutions, or bodies inside or outside Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what did this government have in mind when they 

talk about using this pool of 1 per cent of PST which will be 

described in the regulations? How will that impact the overall 

per capita distribution to municipalities across the province? 

We don‟t know that at this point, Mr. Speaker, and we need to 

examine that. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, point no. 5, payment of grants, “Any 

grant paid pursuant to this Act is subject to any or all of the 

following” conditions: number one, any term or condition 

imposed by the minister; number two, any term and condition 

contained in an agreement pertinent to the grant between the 

minister and the recipient; and number three,  any prescribed 

terms and conditions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the legislation is a wide open file folder. 

There‟s absolutely nothing in that file folder at the moment. The 

minister can have any term, any condition, any prescribed term 

or condition attached to these grants, Mr. Speaker. It does not 

need the legislation to change. It does not need the legislation to 

be amended in any way, Mr. Speaker. It‟s all done through 

agreements and it‟s all done through regulation. 

 

And then finally, Mr. Speaker, under 6, holdback of grants, the 

legislation says and I quote again: 

 

The minister may refuse to pay a grant, or may suspend or 

adjust a grant, if the minister is satisfied that: 

 

(a) the recipient has failed to comply with this Act, the 

regulations, [or] any . . . Act or regulations to which the 

recipient is subject or the terms and conditions of a grant; 

or [secondly] 

 

(b) it is in the public interest to do so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I guess we have to ensure we understand 

what is and what is not a public interest. That is a legal term 

that . . . There is a definition, a common definition subscribed to 

under the terms of a contract, Mr. Speaker. But when there‟s a 

failure to comply with the regulations that we haven‟t seen yet, 

Mr. Speaker, there are obviously some hesitancies within the 

municipal sector as to what this might mean. 

 

The bottom line with those provisions that I outlined, Mr. 

Speaker, is that for all intents and purposes this legislation 

simply allows the government to do what it says it‟s going to 

do. But it does not outline what it has to do, when it has to do it, 

or how it has to do those things. We‟ll obviously see some of 

that in the regulatory process down the road. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we talked about the devil in the detail 

again, municipalities have always raised the issue of what their 

population count is for revenue sharing. The old 

revenue-sharing formula, Mr. Speaker, had a per capita 

distribution method attached to it. The new operating grant also 

has its distribution formula attached to the per capita basis, or 

the number of people who live within a community. 

 

Municipalities across Saskatchewan have expressed in the past 

concern that because the distribution formula — the per capita 

determination — is based on the previous Canada-wide census, 

that quite often populations grow quickly but the grant or the 

old revenue sharing did not grow with that population increase. 

 

And right now, Mr. Speaker, that is indeed the circumstances in 

Saskatchewan. Revenue- sharing funds and now the operating 

grant are going to be paid out, number one, based on — if I‟m 

not mistaken — the PST calculations for ‟07-08 based on 

population numbers settled by census in 2006. So even though 

the population has grown and the value of the PST has grown in 

‟07-08, ‟08-09, and now we‟re in the ‟09-10 budget, the 

operating grant is based on all of these numbers from the past. 

 

On the one hand it‟s hard to criticize, Mr. Speaker, because 

there is certainty, which is what all of the parties asked for. The 

formula provides certainty. We know what the distribution is 

going to be. But on the other hand, as we go forward, Mr. 

Speaker, every five years the new population numbers come 

out. And for four years after that the municipalities that are 

growing — and the government and supported by the 

opposition feels that Saskatchewan will continue to grow — 

every four years after the census, municipal numbers are going 

to be out of whack, Mr. Speaker, especially in the larger 

communities where population growth will be most significant, 

most notable, and more importantly, Mr. Speaker, where 

additional funds because of that growth are going to be more 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a community like North Battleford that may 

need to create a new subdivision because of growth and need 

for additional housing, the costs of building and providing that 

servicing in the early year, Mr. Speaker, is difficult for a 

community. When you‟re trying to build a cultural or 

recreational facility as they are in Moose Jaw or as they are in 

North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, finding the municipal funds . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Duncan: — To introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 

colleague for the opportunity. Mr. Speaker, this afternoon 

joining us in the west gallery are three youngsters from the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. We‟re joined by James, 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2631 

Mary, and Dominic, and they are accompanying their father, 

David Sidloski, here in the Assembly today. They‟re up in 

Regina on some appointments and thought they‟d stop in to see 

if the legislature was in session and take in some of the debate. 

And I want to ask all members of the Assembly to help me in 

welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Although 

no one likes to be interrupted, that was a fine interruption and I 

didn‟t mind that at all. And welcome as well to our guests 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the population concerns that 

exist within the municipalities and about catch-up. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I would hope that discussions between municipal 

leaders and the Government of Saskatchewan will continue to 

ensure that, as we move forward, we are going to be addressing 

some of the next stages of issues that come with proper and 

adequate funding for municipalities. And this applies equally, 

Mr. Speaker, to cities, towns, villages, and rural municipalities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let‟s not forget the resort communities in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and let‟s not forget the role that they have played 

and their citizens play in our economy, and in developing the 

quality of life. I notice, Mr. Speaker, that this legislation also 

addresses what the legislation refers to as a cabin owners 

association. So, Mr. Speaker, it is important to note that that 

exists in here. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, the legislation also addresses the 

northern municipal trust account. Mr. Speaker, the northern 

municipal trust account is a very important means by which the 

provincial government supports the needs and activities of 

communities in Saskatchewan‟s North. Mr. Speaker, these 

communities have a greater challenge of raising funds to 

provide the services for their communities because their 

assessed tax base, Mr. Speaker, is so much different and so 

much lower than that which exists in communities anywhere 

else in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a significant challenge for northern 

communities to use simply the local tax base to support the 

municipal needs or the delivery of services throughout those 

communities. And I think anyone opposite who has travelled in 

northern Saskatchewan understands exactly what I‟m talking 

about and what they have talked to us about. So, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s very important that this legislation does address the issues 

raised by New North, by the leaders of northern Saskatchewan, 

and fully recognizes the northern municipal trust account. 

 

And I think the last piece that we have to fully understand is 

that the legislation also provides some direction with regards to 

the assessment management agency. I think we all know that, as 

much as any discussion about assessment in Saskatchewan 

brings both yawns and cries, Mr. Speaker, the discussion and 

the needs to understand assessment and the assessment process 

in our province is absolutely critical to the ability of our 

communities to function and do what they need to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s why quite a number of years ago the 

Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency was created, 

why there has been a number of reviews over the years, why in 

fact the assessment management agency has had changes both 

to its way of operating and its board, and, Mr. Speaker, why 

there has also been an evolution of the assessment management 

tools that the agency, the people who work for the agency, and 

the contractors who work for our municipalities in assessment 

management have been given over the years to ensure that this 

gets done correctly. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve said the public will either yawn or cry at a 

discussion about assessment. Mr. Speaker, it‟s a very 

complicated field whereby you certainly need particular 

expertise, and when we discuss that expertise people‟s eyes will 

droop. And of course, Mr. Speaker, it becomes something that 

at the end of the day very few people, even with explanations, 

fully understand. 

 

But people will cry, Mr. Speaker, because no one believes that 

their assessment is correct, Mr. Speaker. People will cry 

because this process has a direct impact on us as individuals, as 

property owners throughout the province. And, Mr. Speaker, 

every one of us property owners in the province of 

Saskatchewan needs to know and wants to know and wants to 

be assured that the assessed value of our property has been done 

correctly — more importantly, has been done fairly. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Assessment Management Agency in this province 

has done a tremendous job over the years, and continues on an 

annual basis to review the work that it and its contractors need 

to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the municipalities know that this is important, and 

school boards also know that this is important, Mr. Speaker, 

because a considerable amount of the funding available to run a 

municipality — or in fact the school board, Mr. Speaker — is 

the assessed value of the property times a mill rate established 

by that municipality. So the taxes that are collected off of 

individual properties to support that portion of the operations of 

a municipality and of a school district, Mr. Speaker, come from 

the assessed value. 

 

So the Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, Mr. 

Speaker, needs to, number one, have adequate funding, and 

needs to be able to operate, Mr. Speaker, one, with some 

independence, but more importantly with some sensitivity to the 

needs of the municipal sector. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation has provisions in it that have 

application to the Assessment Management Agency. But I think 

the most important part of this, Mr. Speaker, is trying to 

understand if there are any current disputes out there that affect 

the Assessment Management Agency, Mr. Speaker, because the 

provisions of this legislation may in fact affect the way in which 

those disputes can be resolved. 



2632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

And while I have my feet, Mr. Speaker, on this issue, I‟m sure 

that the members of the government are fully aware, members 

of the opposition are being made aware, Mr. Speaker, that for 

the second rollover of assessment circumstances, Mr. Speaker 

— the words just escape me now the way this process comes 

out — but, Mr. Speaker, for the second circuit of assessment, 

hoteliers in this province have made some very strong 

arguments about the fairness of assessment, commercial 

assessment, the rollout of changes from market- to 

income-based assessment for the purposes for commercial 

properties. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Assessment Management Agency is 

aware of these things. I think the government is aware of them. 

And it‟s my understanding that there are discussions taking 

place that may in fact provide some remedy to this, Mr. 

Speaker. It is very important that assessment in this province be 

certainly seen and, in fact, be as fair as possible to all. Because 

at the end of the day, we‟re all in the same boat. It‟s the 

assessed value of our property that assures our individual and 

collective contributions to our municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation — as short as it is, with as few 

clauses as it has — has tremendous impact for all residents of 

this province. We are all residents of a city, town, village, rural 

municipality, northern community, or resort village. Every one 

of those is affected by this legislation. 

 

The bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 

economy has done quite well in recent years. That economic 

growth began . . . We could see it beginning back in 2006, Mr. 

Speaker. And this government has inherited a considerable 

amount of additional revenues and an economy that continues 

to generate additional revenues. This is the time, Mr. Speaker, 

to introduce an effective change to the way in which revenue 

sharing occurs. Mr. Speaker, this is also the time to recognize 

that the process of getting here was one of extensive 

consultation and then legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that, 

by and large, with some matters that need clarification and 

some issues that need to be brought forward for further clarity 

and certainty, Mr. Speaker, this is legislation that municipalities 

have greeted with some level of . . . My light has gone out. Oh 

here we go. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was just trying to be very careful, Mr. Speaker, so that 

Hansard can pick up all my wonderful words here. And I do 

find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that all I have to do is stop 

speaking for a minute and the members wish to have me 

continue. I‟m very grateful. I‟m very grateful for the support 

that the members opposite want to have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have expressed my thoughts on this 

legislation. I have provided some explanation to the people of 

Saskatchewan about the legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve 

indicated that there are some matters of certainty that we wish 

to clarify. And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move at this 

time that debate on Bill No. 85, An Act respecting Grants to 

Municipalities, making consequential amendments to other Acts 

and repealing The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now 

adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 85, The Municipal 

Grants Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 86 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 

today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Amendment Act, 2009. The amendments 

to The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Act 

accomplish two main goals. First, they provide for the creation 

of the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Fund to 

better protect consumers by enhancing compliance and 

enforcement activities. And secondly, they clarify the role of 

the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission with respect 

to the administration of The Securities Act, 1988. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you are aware, the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission is the regulator and 

quasi-judicial adjudicator with respect to financial services in 

this province. Its responsibilities include the credit union 

system, insurance, pensions, securities, trusts and loans, payday 

loans, and mortgage brokers. 

 

To sustain and protect Saskatchewan‟s economic growth, the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission needs to be able 

to respond in a timely manner to the demands of investors, 

issuers, retirees, financial institutions, and other market 

participants. To ensure the commission can meet these needs, 

the Bill proposes amendments to The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Act to establish a special purpose fund. 

The revenue derived from the fees charged to the regulated 

entities under financial services regulations will flow into the 

fund and be used to pay the ongoing operating expenses of the 

commission. 

 

This fund will be administered by Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission under the direction of the Treasury Board 

and myself, as Minister of Justice and Attorney General. There 

will be full transparency and accountability with respect to the 

operation of this fund. It will be subject to the oversight and 

direction of the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission, 

which is a seven-person panel of experts in financial services 

matters, appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

Furthermore, the accounts and financial statements of the fund 

will be audited by the Provincial Auditor. The commission will 

be required by this Bill to table an annual report in the 

Assembly regarding the operations of the fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in taking this step, Saskatchewan joins British 

Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and New 

Brunswick in providing for direct funding for the Securities 

Commission through fee revenue. This change will enhance the 

ability of the SFSC [Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission] to ensure ongoing compliance with its legislation 

and allow it to add resources that will help prevent financial 

services fraud by educating consumers and more effectively 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2633 

punishing wrongdoers under the existing enforcement 

proceedings. 

 

The Act makes a series of consequential amendments to The 

Securities Act, 1988 to reflect that the SFSC now performs the 

function of the former Securities Commission under that 

legislation. The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 

Act allows the commission to take over functions under various 

financial services legislation, as a way of providing improved 

regulatory financial services. The changes in this Bill reflect the 

status quo that the Financial Service Commission now serves as 

a Securities Commission under The Securities Act, 1988. 

 

Accordingly, rather than having to read two Acts and 

regulations together to understand that the SFSC performs this 

function, this Bill will now make the amendments necessary so 

that both Acts reflect the reality that the SFSC has performed 

and will continue to perform these functions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, adequate regulation of the financial services sector 

is now more than ever vital to this country‟s strong financial 

services industry. Saskatchewan needs to continue to reform 

these functions in a modern and progressive fashion. The 

establishment of a fund and the ability to self-fund through fee 

generation ensures that the SFSC will be a responsive and even 

proactive regulator on behalf of Saskatchewan investors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of An 

Act to amend The Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission Act, to make related amendments to The Securities 

Act, 1988, to make consequential amendments to other Acts and 

to repeal The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 

Assignment Regulations. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 86, The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Amendment Act, 2009. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

minister in his second reading speech outlined both the 

purposes of the Bill, which include making it clear that the 

regulation of securities comes under the Financial Services 

Commission, and the role that the commission plays which 

includes not only regulation and, as the minister said, 

quasi-judicial adjudication in respect to securities but also the 

credit union system, trust and loans, insurance, pensions, and 

other aspects of the financial services industry in the province 

of Saskatchewan — a number of key roles played by a small 

group of highly competent people who perform a great service 

to the Saskatchewan public. And I think that — although these 

industries are relatively small in an actual context within 

Saskatchewan and the commission is relatively small and 

covers a wide range of very important areas in ensuring the 

protection of people‟s deposits, people‟s investments, people‟s 

pensions, people‟s insurance — they have done, this group of 

people have done a sterling service for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The opposition supports in principle the objectives of this Bill. 

And at the conclusion of my remarks, we‟ll be allowing it to go 

to committee without further second reading debate. That said, 

Mr. Speaker, this matter of creation of the fund arose in 

estimates in the committee for Justice and Intergovernmental 

Affairs, I believe, this just previous Monday evening. And the 

manner in which it arose, Mr. Speaker, is that there was a 

decrease in the funding from the Ministry of Justice to the fund 

for the upcoming year. And the reason of course why there is a 

decrease in the funding is because the commission is becoming 

something of a stand-alone agency further to this Bill. And 

funding will end coming from the Ministry of Justice, and it 

will be funded by the fund created by the fees obtained by that 

the work, the regulatory work, of the commission. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The minister pointed out in estimates in response to my 

questions that indeed — and the officials did as well, Mr. 

Speaker — that indeed the commission would continue to be 

audited by the Provincial Auditor and there would be oversight 

by Treasury Board and the minister would be involved as the 

minister responsible for the commission and that there would be 

a report to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons that the opposition is not 

engaging in extensive second reading debate is because a major 

issue for us was addressed in response to my questions. What I 

heard, what I believe I heard, and what I certainly will want to 

seek further assurance from when the Bill is being dealt with in 

the committee is that oversight by the legislature will not be 

confined merely to the receipt of a report, that currently the 

Financial Services Commission is a line item in the estimates 

for the department or Ministry of Justice, as it‟s now called, 

Ministry of Justice. And therefore the executive director of the 

commission appears with the minister in estimates for that 

ministry and answers questions if there are any questions about 

the work of the commission. 

 

Certainly an audit by the Provincial Auditor is oversight. And 

certainly approval of the budget by Treasury Board, whatever 

that involves, if it involves very much these days, Mr. Speaker, 

is oversight. But I trust that this will be the type of agency that 

will be reporting to the legislature as, say, the Information 

Technology Office reports to the legislature in estimates. We 

will not as legislators, as members of this Legislative Assembly, 

lose our oversight over the Financial Services Commission. 

 

That is the principle I wish to speak to, that we wish to speak to, 

in second reading debate. That is the principle that we will want 

to be assured again in committee or will continue to be the case, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That said, the concept of the fund and certainly making it clear 

that securities as well as all the other enumerated roles of the 

Financial Services Commission continue to be performed by 

this commission and in its now more autonomous or what will 

be its more autonomous and independent function are principles 

with which we agree. And we think we gain something by the 

government‟s proposal, and support it in principle. 

 

And all the opposition wants to be sure of is that we don‟t lose 

anything that we don‟t have to lose in the case of legislative 

oversight. That said, Mr. Speaker, I think I have telegraphed 

that I will return to these concerns in committee. But for the 

moment, those will be the conclusion of our comments on this 

legislation. 



2634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 86, The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 

2009 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I designate that Bill No. 86, The 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 

2009 be referred to the standing committee on 

intergovernmental and justice committee. 

 

Bill No. 87 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

wish to announce to the Assembly the receipt of Royal 

Recommendation for the following Bill. This was not received 

in time to appear on the order paper; therefore I beg to inform 

the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having 

been informed of the subject matter of Bill No. 87, The Income 

Tax Amendment Act, 2009, recommends it to the consideration 

of the Assembly. 

 

I am pleased to rise and move second reading of Bill 87, to 

amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. Mr. Speaker, in addition to 

introducing the largest single year education property tax cut in 

Saskatchewan‟s history, our government‟s second budget also 

included a significant tax initiative in support of investment in 

research and development by Saskatchewan businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the course of the past year, our government 

met with a broad spectrum of representatives of Saskatchewan‟s 

research and development sector. The purpose of these 

meetings was to discuss ways to improve the effectiveness of 

Saskatchewan‟s existing R & D [research and development] tax 

credit. This tax credit, Mr. Speaker, provided a non-refundable 

benefit equal to 15 per cent of qualifying R & D expenditures 

undertaken in Saskatchewan. The credit reduced the amount of 

provincial corporate income tax that a company had to pay. 

Unused amounts could be carried forward for up to 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our consultations made it clear the R & D tax 

credit was not helping smaller companies, and was not helping 

start-up enterprises bridge the gap between the initial research 

and commercial development. Mr. Speaker, these companies 

are often not taxable. Therefore they are not benefitting from 

the tax credit, even though they are often in the greatest need of 

the tax credit‟s financial assistance. 

 

Our consultations convinced us, Mr. Speaker, that the most 

significant improvement we could make to the R & D tax credit 

would be to convert it from a non-refundable tax credit to a 

fully refundable tax credit. Mr. Speaker, this Bill makes 

amendments to the existing R & D tax credit to convert it to a 

refundable tax credit. 

 

Last year, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan completed its business 

tax reforms that included an increase to the small-business limit 

to $500,000. Small businesses are eligible to pay the reduced 

corporate income tax rate of 4.5 per cent on business income up 

to this limit. The similar federal limit was $400,000. In order to 

avoid replicating a number of rather complex provisions of the 

federal Income Tax Act, the provincial legislation simply 

grossed up the 400,000 federal small-business limit to achieve 

the $500,000 provincial amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in its 2009 budget, the federal government moved 

to similarly increase the federal small-business limit to 

$500,000, matching the Saskatchewan amount effective January 

1, 2009. As a result, this Bill proposes amendments to recognize 

the new federal amount and to maintain the $500,000 provincial 

small-business limit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government also recently announced a 

series of changes to the taxation of dividend income. These 

changes will have an unintended impact on the provincial 

taxation of this income. In order to ensure that the provincial 

tax on this dividend income does not increase, Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill proposes amendments to maintain the current 11 per cent 

dividend tax credit rate for eligible dividends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year our government introduced the graduate 

retention program to provide up to $20,000 in tuition rebates to 

our post-secondary graduates. Last October, Mr. Speaker, my 

colleague, the Minister of Advanced Education, Employment 

and Labour announced an expansion of this program to 

post-secondary graduates from the rest of Canada and beyond. 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, this Bill also introduces an 

amendment to expand the definition of eligible tuition fees 

under the program. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill includes technical amendments to 

the former R & D tax credit provisions that have been requested 

by the Canada Revenue Agency in order to clarify 

administrative issues with that credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Act to Amend the 

Income Tax Act, 2000. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 87, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 

2009. Is the Assembly ready? I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased today to rise and speak at second reading on Bill No. 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2635 

87, An Act to Amend the Income Tax Act, 2000. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise immediately following the minister‟s explanation of the 

Bill and the reasons why it is necessary. And Mr. Speaker, I 

thank the minister for his explanation and the direction. It‟s 

very helpful in a technical Bill of this nature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly acknowledge that there is legislation 

required when budgets change the way in which certain 

programs operate or makes funds available, when the federal 

government takes certain steps to change the way in which 

program or policy affects the collection of income tax and 

whereby provincial policy or budget changes affect The Income 

Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is specific to The Income Tax Act 

here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I think the minister‟s 

explanation was quite detailed and is most welcome at this time. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the minister in his remarks talked about the 

provincial budget and some of the changes that had been made 

to affect small business and research and development in this 

province and explained how the legislation actually affects the 

way in which income tax will be collected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that it bears noting that The Income Tax 

Act has been changed substantially over the years. Most 

recently, Mr. Speaker, one of the most significant changes in 

income tax in Saskatchewan was actually made to the corporate 

capital tax here in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don‟t have to go back very far in our really 

short history as a province. We don‟t have to go back very far 

to see how some of the most dramatic changes that are affecting 

our economy occurred. 2005, Mr. Speaker, was Saskatchewan‟s 

centennial year. And prior to 2005, Mr. Speaker, there had been 

considerable discussion about potential growth for 

Saskatchewan‟s resource sector. 

 

And the resource sector, Mr. Speaker, was making overtures to 

government about the need for change in the way in which the 

corporate capital tax was applied to their operations because, 

Mr. Speaker, they saw a future for investment in Saskatchewan 

resources. But in order to ensure that Saskatchewan‟s tax 

treatment of that investment was fair, when compared with 

other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, they talked to government. 

 

Well the premier at the time, the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale, seeing that it was an opportunity in Saskatchewan‟s 

centennial year to host an economic summit celebrating 

Saskatchewan‟s past but looking to the future of the province of 

Saskatchewan, in 2005 therefore, in the city of Saskatoon, an 

economic summit was held in which representatives of all the 

resource sectors — whether it was oil and gas, potash, uranium, 

steel manufacturing, agricultural equipment manufacturing — 

all the sectors active in manufacturing and resource 

development were in attendance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the message was very clear to the people of Saskatchewan 

and to government. And indeed some, the significant 

representatives of the resource sector, were the most vocal, Mr. 

Speaker, that for Saskatchewan to continue to move forward 

with investment and the creation of jobs and the development of 

wealth in this province, the Government of Saskatchewan 

needed to provide changes that would affect the corporate 

capital tax operating in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting to note others who were in 

attendance at that conference, Mr. Speaker. Even those 

representing social service agencies were present because they 

understood that the creation of wealth would determine how the 

province was able to meet its social obligations. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s also interesting to note who was not present at 

that summit whereby people like Jerry Grandey and others were 

very determined to talk about the benefits of a growth economy 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Who was absent, Mr. 

Speaker? Absolutely every single member of the opposition 

party, the Saskatchewan Party, and the party that‟s now in 

government. Every single member missed the conversations 

that took place at those tables and from the podium about the 

need to make some changes in the way in which investment 

revenues — capital revenues — in this province were treated. 

 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, in the months that followed 

that economic summit, Mr. Speaker, the government, then led 

by the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, responded to the 

investors, potential investors and the corporations doing 

business in Saskatchewan by actually making substantial and 

significant changes to the corporate capital tax in 

Saskatchewan. A change, Mr. Speaker, that was greeted with 

great enthusiasm by the sectors. More importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, as they say, the proof is in the pudding. Well in this 

case, Mr. Speaker, the proof was investment increased in this 

province dramatically. 

 

And as a result in 2006-2007 greater revenues came to the 

province of Saskatchewan. A reduction in the tax of the 

corporate capital tax and an increase in provincial revenues, Mr. 

Speaker. The industry said, you do this for us and we will 

deliver to the people of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

industry stepped up and they did what they said they would do. 

And now, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing an economy in the 

province of Saskatchewan that because of changes that took 

place in ‟05 and ‟06, we are now seeing, Mr. Speaker, changes 

in the economy that have provided this government with an 

opportunity to do some things that they would not have been 

able to do had they been government in ‟05 or ‟06. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, there‟s about $2 billion of revenue over 

and above what it was in ‟05-06, Mr. Speaker, that this 

government now has the ability to do things. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

the critical thing in this argument is that it‟s thanks to these new 

revenues that the current government has that we‟re able to do 

the things that are, to a certain extent, referenced in the changes 

to The Income Tax Act in front of us and some of the other 

measures in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These were matters that were put in place before Saskatchewan 

was considered a boom province and, Mr. Speaker, we now are 

in a situation where preserving the economic integrity of our 

economy is the concern of the people. It‟s no longer concern for 

growth, Mr. Speaker, because growth is occurring. It‟s now 

preserving the benefits of that growth for those people who are 

investing in the province and who are benefiting from that 



2636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

investment. 

 

The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, when this legislation addresses 

things like changes in the dividend tax credit, the graduate 

tuition rebate, the small business threshold, the research and 

development tax credit, Mr. Speaker, these are all matters that 

can be addressed today because there are additional revenues 

available to government to be able to operate. And in fact, we 

are able to do some things that the federal government wants us 

to do because of that. 

 

But there is one provision in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, that 

really stands out and that‟s the provision, Mr. Speaker, of the 

graduate tuition rebate. I think that anyone who is in university 

today is aware that prior to 2007, there was a graduate tuition 

program, a university retention program in place in the province 

of Saskatchewan. There were some promises made during the 

2007 election and some things that took place after that 2007 

election, Mr. Speaker, regarding the way in which the tuition 

rebate program applied for people, young people particularly in 

our province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this legislation indicates, the explanatory 

notes indicates that in October 2008, the government announced 

an expansion of the program eligibility criteria for their 

graduate tuition rebate to allow tuition paid to out-of-province 

educational institutions to qualify. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 

we know that at the end of 2007 and into 2008 when the new 

government‟s first budget came out, they had changed the 

tuition program to exclude out-of-province educational 

institutions from qualifying for the program. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there was an outcry from students inside and 

outside this province about this change. Well, Mr. Speaker, it 

didn‟t take long for this government to hear the cries of 

Saskatchewan young people and others who are attending 

universities across Canada, Mr. Speaker, and they made a 

change. Members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

complimented the government for making that change. 

 

The only trouble is, Mr. Speaker, that the government didn‟t 

make all the change; they made partial change, Mr. Speaker. 

And while this legislation in front of us, Bill No. 87, 

acknowledges and puts in place the provisions necessary to 

allow this change to take place, Mr. Speaker, there‟s so much 

more that this government could do. 

 

And I want to give a lot of credit while I‟m on my feet, Mr. 

Speaker, to the member from Saskatoon Massey Place — a 

member who was recently elected to this House, who is doing a 

tremendous job representing his community. But more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, he‟s doing a tremendous job 

representing young people who are attending universities in 

Saskatchewan and outside Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan 

residents, Mr. Speaker, who should be receiving a benefit from 

our graduate tuition rebate program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Massey Place has 

collected signatures from individuals on petitions and presented 

them in this Chamber. Mr. Speaker, he continues to do so. Mr. 

Speaker, he has raised on two occasions that I‟m aware of — 

March 4 and March 12, I believe, Mr. Speaker — he‟s raised 

the issue in the Chamber. He‟s asked the Minister of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour to make further changes to 

this program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just to clarify for the public, I want to quote 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place on a couple of 

occasions where he spoke in this Chamber during question 

period. First of all, Mr. Speaker, from Hansard of March 4, 

page 2132, the member from Saskatoon Massey Place says, and 

I quote: 

 

. . . there is no doubt that the innovation, knowledge, and 

ideas that come with higher education are an essential 

factor in fuelling a modern economy. If we want 

Saskatchewan to thrive, we must encourage those with 

higher education to build their lives here and contribute to 

our economy. But the Sask Party doesn‟t seem to get that. 

They axed the successful . . . [New Democratic Party] 

graduate tax exemption program and replaced it with a 

pared-down graduate retention program. Sadly the Sask 

Party‟s version of the program leaves masters and Ph.D. 

graduates out in the cold. Those who pursue their 

education beyond undergraduate degrees are completely 

excluded from the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Massey Place also 

said on that very same day, March 4 at page 2133 of Hansard, 

and I quote: 

 

Our province needs those with graduate level degrees. We 

need to recruit physiotherapists, social workers, 

psychologists, academics, and business grads as much as 

the professions already included in the retention program 

. . . after a lot of pressure the Sask Party has already 

admitted that it was wrong to exclude out-of-province 

graduates. Now it‟s time they realized their other failure 

and extend the program to those with graduate level 

training. These are all careers where the competition with 

other provinces to retain our best and [our] brightest is 

steep. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very clear comments from the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. Mr. Speaker, I think that graduate 

students feel well represented and that their arguments have 

been well carried by the member. 

 

If we read an article in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix from March 

5, the day after the member first raised this issue in this 

Chamber, we see additional information relating to this 

program. And it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, the headline writer 

of The StarPhoenix titled this story: “„It is a sad irony‟ graduate 

students won‟t get rebate.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the writer acknowledges that adding 

out-of-province graduates to the program after leaving them out 

in the cold was a reversal of policy, a welcome reversal of 

policy. But of course he acknowledges the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place, supported by all members on this side 

of the House, have called on the government to do the same for 

graduate students. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to add those additional 

comments to mine with regards to the Bill, comments that I‟m 

making in regards to the Bill in front of us. 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2637 

I think the members opposite will regard this legislation as 

primarily housekeeping, simply tidying up The Income Tax Act 

to fall within the provisions of the direction provided by the 

budget and by policies that have been directed this way from 

the federal government. 

 

And by and large, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t disagree with that 

provision. But, Mr. Speaker, I think it is incumbent upon all 

members to fully acknowledge that there continues to be work 

that needs doing, in addition to the changes that will provide 

additional benefits to Saskatchewan people through the 

dividend tax credit, the small business threshold, and the 

graduate tuition credit, not to mention the research and 

development tax credit. 

 

These are initiatives, Mr. Speaker, that support work, people, 

companies doing business in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, we can‟t forget that this is a continuation of a long 

process of tax changes that evolve with the business interests 

and needs of those working, investing, and supporting the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while I have added a few thoughts to this 

debate, I know that other members of the New Democratic 

Party caucus will want to speak to this Bill before it proceeds to 

its normal conclusion. So therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

that debate on Bill No. 87, An Act to amend The Income Tax 

Act, 2000 be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 87, The Income 

Tax Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 88 — The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

wish to announce to the Assembly the receipt of Royal 

Recommendation for the following Bill. This was not received 

in time to appear on the order paper. Therefore I beg to inform 

the Assembly that His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, having 

been informed of the subject matter of Bill No. 88, The 

Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009, recommends it 

to the consideration of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of the 

corporate capital tax amendment Act, 2009. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is introducing an amendment to 

the corporate capital tax Act, to provide the authority for a 

remission of corporate capital tax to those financial institutions 

that acquire through amalgamation the assets of a non-financial 

corporation and create a capital tax liability as the result of the 

acquisition. 

The amendment applies to those amalgamations occurring on or 

after July 1, 2008. This coincides with the elimination of the 

general corporate capital tax on July 1, 2008. This provision for 

a remission of tax will provide a remedy for an unattended tax 

consequence of a financial institution which did not have a 

permanent establishment in Saskatchewan prior to acquiring the 

assets of a non-financial corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment will encourage business to 

expand into Saskatchewan, preserve jobs, and participate in the 

growing economy that we continue to enjoy during these very 

challenging economic times. I‟m pleased to move second 

reading of the corporate capital tax amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 88, The Corporation Capital Tax 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to rise today to speak at second reading of Bill No. 88, 

an Act to amend the corporate capital tax Act. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, I wish to thank the minister for his explanation of this 

Bill, which I think the public would find very challenging to 

understand having just had the Act in their hand, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will not speak at great length about this Bill, because indeed, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s going to take a little time to fully understand 

and appreciate the impact or the consequences that may occur 

because of what‟s in it. For the public at home, this is a very 

short piece of legislation. It is by and large less than a page and 

a half in length but, Mr. Speaker, it is of consequence here to 

the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to those who are watching, they will have heard 

my comments on the changes that occurred previously on the 

corporate capital tax itself. And, Mr. Speaker, I will not repeat 

those comments. For those who are reading this or are picking 

this message up at a later date in Hansard, Mr. Speaker, for 

those who wish to know more about my thoughts on the 

corporate capital tax, please refer back to debate on Bill No. 87, 

The Income Tax Act, where I outlined the history of recent 

changes to the corporate capital tax Act. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things that we need to 

understand about this legislation in front of us, Bill No. 88, is 

essentially the impact that this new provision will have, 

particularly on our credit unions in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The credit union has certainly been making 

investments in our communities, making acquisitions within our 

communities to strengthen businesses that have existed within 

our communities, but for whom a relationship with or affiliation 

with the credit union has certainly increased their fiscal capacity 

to deal with the challenges that exist out there. 

 

I did find the minister‟s remarks about dealing with the 

challenging times — I think his quote was, dealing with 

challenging times around us, Mr. Speaker. I have not heard the 

minister specifically refer to these challenging times in recent 

weeks, Mr. Speaker, because I‟ve heard him talk in glowing 

terms about the Saskatchewan economy and the resilience of 

the Saskatchewan economy. 

 



2638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

I know that he made some reference the other day to recession 

in the province of Saskatchewan. But indeed, I think the public 

understands that, whether or not we feel it generally, or that the 

statistics of three months ago, six months ago, and a year ago, 

bear out that Saskatchewan is a better place today economically 

than it has been, these are challenging times, Mr. Speaker. And 

we must ensure that we are aware of what the future looks like, 

Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the past, recent or otherwise. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, our financial institutions in this province, that 

being those regulated by the province — the credit union sector, 

Mr. Speaker — have to engage in a world that is affected by 

economic circumstances outside our borders, and many times 

the impact that that has in our communities. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, if the credit union has made acquisitions 

and there are losses that are brought into that acquisition for the 

credit union, this legislation has some impact on the credit 

union itself. Mr. Speaker, we will have to spend some time to 

investigate this impact. We want to ensure that we are 

protecting those who are investing in our communities, 

particularly our rural communities, and that often is the credit 

unions and the affiliates of the credit unions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want the government to know we will 

consult, we will ask some questions, we will seek clarification 

on those questions and the implications of this Act. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we will certainly bring the results of that consultation 

back to the Chamber, back to the government, and certainly 

through the committee process when this legislation finds itself 

there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that having been said and knowing that it will 

take some time to complete our consultation on this, I move 

now that debate on Bill 88, An Act to amend the Corporation 

Capital Tax Act be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 88, The 

Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by The Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 46 — The 

Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure this afternoon to rise and enter debate on Bill No. 

46, an Act to amend the Labour Market Commission. 

Mr. Speaker, this has caused a number of concerns right across 

the province in a variety of sectors. And when we look back at 

the history of the Labour Market Commission, how it was 

established in 2007 and formed on the basis that labour market 

planning and coordination is best achieved through some 

partnerships between labour, business, education, training 

institutions, government, and other stakeholders, and that there 

was a need within the province to have a more coordinated 

approach and a better set of plans put in place to make sure that 

we had the labour market that was appropriate to our growing 

economy. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even in 2007 we recognized the need 

that there was many improvements happening in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and there needed to be some comprehensive 

plans put in place so we would have better planning going 

forward. And even now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we see that 

our economy has slowed down somewhat, we‟re still on the 

positive side here in the province of Saskatchewan. But we 

know it has slowed considerably and we are seeing concerns 

right across North America and, in fact, across the world. 

 

Any of the experts will tell you that during a time of slower 

economic activity is a time when you should be continuing on 

with your planning, continuing on with your training, and 

building for the point in time — which will inevitably happen 

— when the economy will take off again and there is a need for 

the skills and training that you have been working on. 

 

But instead of trying to play catch-up during the busy times in 

the economy, we need to continue on with training and planning 

to make sure that, during these slow times, we work to prepare 

for when the economy begins again to pick up. 

 

So there was a fair bit of surprise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 

we saw the legislation that in effect ends the work of the 

commission and rolls it over into this huge corporation called 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, which we‟re not quite sure of any 

results as of yet — after 16 months being in place — other than 

growing a great number of commissions and committees and 

sector initiatives. But we haven‟t seen actually anything 

concrete come out of it. So there is a number of concerns when 

we see the board from the Labour Market Commission, some 

very well-respected people in our community, that had put in a 

great deal of work and offered their advice and their guidance in 

moving ahead with the commission when it was first 

established. 

 

And there really was a number of things that were considered 

when we look at the establishment of the Labour Market 

Commission, and it really was to conduct a labour market issues 

analysis and define some labour market priorities for across the 

province and really define and lay out what barriers that limit 

labour market attachment, what‟s specific to Saskatchewan, and 

what other issues did we need to deal with and have a look at in 

the province. And they really put forward some evidence-based 

solutions. 

 

So it actually was quite successful, did a great deal of work, and 

my understanding is that one of their major reports is being 

completed soon. And I truly hope that the minister and the 

government will look at that report, take its advice. Like I say 

there‟s been a great deal of work that‟s been put into this whole 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2639 

issue by some very dedicated citizens from a variety of areas 

across the province. 

 

And if they‟re looking at skills shortages and labour supply and 

demand, and I think we will all recognize — and I‟m hearing 

some comments from the report that‟s been compiled and the 

work done by the commission — that there is some 

expectations that these issues will continue to represent some 

major challenges for the province of Saskatchewan, and that 

skills shortages will be a major economic issue over the next 

decades. So this isn‟t a quick fix. 

 

We cannot fix it all by encouraging people to immigrate or 

move to the province of Saskatchewan. We need to make sure 

that we are putting in place the proper foundation for residents 

of the province so they have the accurate information and the 

accurate counselling and ability to access the training and 

education that they need to fill jobs that are required in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So now there are a number of agencies impacting the labour 

market. And no single agency has responsibility for everything. 

So when we first put the Labour Market Commission in place, I 

think everyone recognized that there was a need to really 

connect the dots within our labour market here in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and that planning and labour market 

coordination needed to be achieved. And that was decided that 

there needed to be some partnerships put in place so we had 

representatives from the labour community, the business 

community, and government. And it was recognized at that time 

that there was also a need for labour, business, and government 

to collaboratively tackle some of these hot issues. So this 

partnership was put in place. 

 

And like I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve seen a great deal of 

work come forward. And we are expecting a more long-term 

report on market conditions here in the province of 

Saskatchewan shortly. And I truly hope that even though these 

changes are being proposed by the minister, that they will carry 

on with the work that‟s been started by the commission. 

Because there has been a great deal of groundwork that‟s been 

done — very good groundwork. So I truly hope that the 

minister does move ahead with that information, and whatever 

reports and recommendations that the Labour Market 

Commission made to the minister, that they will move that 

forward. 

 

It really makes no point at this . . . well, it makes no sense at 

this point in time that the minister for the pure fact of doing 

away with something that the previous New Democratic 

government created and worked hard to make successful, to 

purely get rid of it because it was an organization and an 

initiative that was begun during the time of the previous 

government. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And we‟ve seen that on a couple of occasions where it seems to 

be just to get rid of previous initiatives and to rebrand them as 

coming from the new government. They will go through this 

process of ending a program and then revitalizing it and starting 

it under a different brand. But quite often, Mr. Speaker, it will 

be same program, same legwork that was done previously, same 

basis that the program is launched, with some pretty minor, 

with some pretty minor changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a couple other areas that are a bit of a 

concern. When they‟re rolling this commission into Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, there‟s a couple of changes that they have made. 

It looks like they‟re doing away with any of the current Labour 

Market Commission advisory councils. We don‟t know if they 

will be maintained or not. And also representatives that are on 

these councils, whether it‟s from youth, poverty groups, 

women‟s groups, disability persons, advocacy groups, the 

immigrant community, there is a definite move to abolish any 

of the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Northwest has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

Assembly, I‟d like to introduce a friend of mine, Mr. Don Funk, 

in the west gallery. Don is the Chair of the Saskatoon Mayor‟s 

Prayer Breakfast, and a good friend of mine; the manager of a 

Canadian Tire auto; and has been, through the years, a great 

supporter of Teen Challenge and a stalwart in our city and in 

the Christian community. I welcome him to his Assembly 

today, and welcome all members to welcome with me to him. 

 

Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission 

Amendment Act, 2008 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟ll pick 

up where I left off. I was talking about one area of concern with 

the changes that look like they‟re being proposed for the Labour 

Market Commission, in that instead of having a broad 

cross-section of our population represented on the advisory 

councils, that this whole area that addresses the social economy, 

board positions are being abolished. So no more will we have 

any representatives or any voice on Labour Market Commission 

and what‟s the best to access, what training, what programs, and 

that two-way discussion and communication that needs to take 

place to make sure that we‟re truly successful, that the people in 

this province have an opportunity to be truly successful. That 

position is gone. 



2640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

And it really is a loss to the board, I must say, Mr. Speaker, 

because often I know in my work life we would often say, well 

why don‟t the bosses come and talk to us on the shop floor 

because we work with it day to day, we understand the 

day-to-day issues, and we should have some input into what 

happens to long-term programs and into issues that directly 

affect those people. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what‟s happening 

here. Those folks that are directly impacted by this are being 

left off any consideration or having any input. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government has a responsibility to 

help Saskatchewan meet the many challenges that come with 

economic growth, and we also have to help citizens meet with 

challenges that they maybe faced in their day-to-day life, and to 

be able to access a better future and be a contributing member 

of society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan want to be active 

participants in our economy. Some may need a little more 

supports, some may need a little bit more help and guidance in 

getting there. But people truly want to be active participants in 

our economy and contribute to the province, and it really is the 

responsibility of the government to make sure that those 

supports are there, that the resources are there to make sure that 

we do the best we can for the people we represent, wherever 

they are in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a great deal of respect for the work that 

the labour commission has done in this province. There is some 

disappointing changes that are coming forward with it, rolling 

over into Enterprise Saskatchewan. Again I‟d like to express, I 

truly hope the minister will carry on with the work that the 

Labour Market Commission has done and maybe will give a 

little more consideration to expanding the representation and 

the voice that is present on whatever sector team will be 

responsible for this, the labour market strategy in the future. It 

is an area that we need to keep working on in this province. We 

have a long ways to go to make sure that we have that secure 

and stable marketplace. It‟s too bad that the work has ended but, 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue on and I‟m sure there will be 

many more questions that we will have in committee. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister Responsible for Enterprise 

and Innovation, that Bill No. 46, The Labour Market 

Commission Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 45 — The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise and speak on The Credit Union Amendment Act, 

primarily because it‟s a pleasure to speak about our province‟s 

credit unions, which I want to do in a way that I think is quite 

relevant and salient to the Bill before us. 

 

The credit unions of course are institutions, financial 

institutions, that were extremely important — fundamental 

might be a better word, Mr. Speaker — to the establishment and 

development of our province and of its economy and similar 

institutions across the country, particularly in rural parts of 

Canada. Very fundamental, like the co-op movement generally 

to the establishment of local and then wider provincial 

economies. Because credit unions were formed by the people 

who lived here, governed by the people who lived here, and 

were to a certain extent creatures of necessity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Larger financial institutions didn‟t have interests necessarily in 

these developing small local economies, didn‟t have institutions 

or branches here, therefore didn‟t understand necessarily the 

needs of, and the opportunities, but the needs of the people 

here, the opportunities that the people here provided for 

themselves but also for those that were willing to invest in them 

and provide them with credit. And the credit unions filled that 

gap and fill that gap very well, Mr. Speaker, and to this day, I 

think, are seen as exemplary institutions within our province. I 

don‟t believe that a person has ever lost a penny on deposit in a 

credit union in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Canadian deposit insurance fund is and has been, continues 

to be irrelevant as far as deposits at credit unions, Mr. Speaker. 

It may have had to be used on occasion to protect somebody‟s 

deposit in a bank, but it has never had to be used to protect 

somebody‟s deposit in a credit union. The credit unions have 

always ensured that that was the case themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in this province, very importantly, the credit union 

movement stuck by agriculture in good times and in bad times, 

Mr. Speaker. And I know that as Justice minister, when I 

regularly met with the Credit Union Central and the central 

governance of the credit unions, that the state of the agricultural 

economy, conditions in rural Saskatchewan as well as urban 

Saskatchewan, always top of mind with credit unions. And 

credit unions of course were invested financially in that 

industry, in that economy, on a local level across the province, 

community after community after community, whatever the 

conditions were. 

 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2641 

And we have seen over the last few years as other financial 

institutions abandon communities, credit unions stay and in 

many cases move in to replace bank branches that have left 

communities. Their social commitment, their broader 

commitment to community organizations — and I think of my 

local credit union in Saskatoon in the area of, say, innovations 

like micro lending, Mr. Speaker — I think is not outdone by 

any large banks that act in our province. They are leaders in that 

respect as well. And they are not stodgy, old financial 

organizations at all. They are the sources not only of social 

innovation, but technological innovation. Mr. Speaker, the 

ATMs [automated teller machine], Mr. Speaker, were brought 

to Saskatchewan, automated tellers were brought to 

Saskatchewan not by bank A or bank B, Mr. Speaker. They 

were brought to Saskatchewan by credit unions. Very important 

institutions and institutions that have been responsible, 

trustworthy, and which have people‟s trust. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill deals with the governance and 

regulations of the credit unions and the institution that oversees 

the credit union movement. And I think it is a proper concern of 

this government, as it was of the previous government, 

continues to be a concern of the Ministry of Justice — 

following its changed name from the Department of Justice, but 

a concern that predates any change in government — although 

the people involved in the governance of the credit union 

system obviously were people of high integrity who carried out 

their responsibilities with judgment and with honesty and with 

the best interests of the credit union and the public in mind, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And quite frankly credit unions have to be conservative. That‟s 

the way they‟re funded. That‟s the way they‟re structured. 

That‟s the powers they have. They had to be conservative in 

lending and, therefore, leave riskier type of lending to other 

institutions, Mr. Speaker. But if the global financial system, the 

global banking system, had been governed by the type of people 

that govern the credit union movement in Saskatchewan — and 

following the principles of probity and integrity and honesty 

and just good common sense that governed the credit unions of 

Saskatchewan — the world would be a much happier place 

right now, Mr. Speaker. There‟s no question about it. 

 

What we have seen in New York and London, we have not seen 

from credit unions in Saskatoon and Regina. And a lesson could 

be learned by a number of Masters of Business Administration 

from people who run the credit unions of Saskatchewan. 

 

That said, it‟s not only important that we continue with the type 

of governance that we have seen in our credit union movement, 

but that it be seen as a rational, independent, autonomous, fair 

governance. And the board of, I guess what you would call 

CUDGC [Credit Union Deposit Guarantee Corporation] for 

short, does not appear, I think, to be as independent of the 

institutions that‟s regulating as other similar boards do. And this 

Bill is attempting to make the necessary changes to bring this 

governance in line with modern principles of governance, not to 

correct any of the evils that have affected the banking system 

around the world, but to certainly again lead the way in 

showing how financial institutions should be governed. 

 

The only question I think the opposition has is whether having 

decided to make this change, we‟re making exactly the right 

change. Perhaps — and I‟m not saying this is the case, Mr. 

Speaker — we‟ll be having a discussion in committee. And I 

am the last speaker from the opposition on this matter in second 

reading, so we‟ll be having that discussion relatively soon. But I 

think there needs to be a discussion quite appropriately, and the 

result may very well be that we all agree that this is on balance 

a good Bill. This is on balance a good makeup for the new 

board. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But there are appointments being made by Credit Union 

Central, independent people not affiliated with the credit union 

movement. Is this sufficient to assure the public that the credit 

unions are being governed in the most appropriate way, or 

should these appointments be made by the public? I‟m not 

answering that question, Mr. Speaker, yes or no. I don‟t want to 

raise any concerns in the credit union movement that I don‟t 

have confidence in how they‟re governed. I hope my remarks 

have suggested I have great confidence in them. 

 

But for the interests and the protection of the wider public, the 

details of how this option was chosen from the range of options 

that were before the government need to be discussed in, not in 

a partisan way, not in an adversarial way, Mr. Speaker, but as a 

conversation, I think, between legislators who have on both 

sides of the House, certainly in the case of credit unions, the 

best interest of the credit union movement and the best interest 

of the public in mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that‟s the approach that the opposition will be taking into the 

committee discussion, Mr. Speaker. Strong support and 

understanding of the role that credit unions play in our financial 

system, understanding the desirability of ensuring modern 

governance principles govern the regulation of the credit union 

system, and wanting to make sure that those principles — 

support for the credit union movement, support for modern 

governance — are reflected as well as they possibly can be in 

this legislation. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the Bill 

presented by the Minister of Justice, Bill No. 45, The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2008 be now read the second time. Is 

the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice, Mr. Speaker. 



2642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 51 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 51 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe I‟m also 

the last speaker from the opposition in respect to the second 

reading debate on this Bill as well, Mr. Speaker. And at the 

conclusion of my remarks, which may or may not be before 5 

o‟clock today, this matter as well can move on to committee. 

 

I have, because of one provision of this Bill, some remarks to 

make about the role of the Provincial Court in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and some remarks to make about the role of the 

minister responsible for the Bill, and responsible for — in part 

at least — protecting the independence of our court. The 

Minister of Justice and the Attorney General, his role in 

bringing forward this legislation and his role generally in 

protecting the constitutional independence of that branch of 

government, and in particular the Provincial Court, which is a 

court appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council in 

Saskatchewan, upon the advice of the Judicial Council; a matter 

that I might touch upon as it‟s touched upon in this legislation. 

 

I have said on many occasions within the Provincial Court, 

upon the appointment of Provincial Court judges, and on at 

least one occasion in this Chamber, that I believe in a very real 

and practical way, the Provincial Court is arguably — and I 

would argue in many ways, in many real and practical ways — 

the most important court. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when one picks up a legal argument written 

by an academic or by a lawyer in making an argument for a 

client, and the authority for the proposition as to what is the 

law, how a law should be interpreted or what the law is, is a 

Provincial Court judgement. You know that the state of law — 

assuming that is the highest authority — the state of law is far 

from decided, Mr. Speaker. The law is more or less decided 

when the Supreme Court says that that‟s what the law is. The 

Supreme Court can change its mind. Perhaps our Supreme 

Court should change its mind more often, Mr. Speaker, in my 

opinion, but I would be digressing.  

 

But certainly there are levels of appeal beyond the Provincial 

Court, and what the Provincial Court decides the law is. How 

does a Provincial Court judge interprets this provision or that 

provision of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, for example, 

may be very important in the case where she makes that 

decision, but hardly decides the law. And if the matter is 

appealed, either in that case or another case, and a Court of 

Appeal, ultimately the Supreme Court of Canada, arrives at a 

different decision, Mr. Speaker, then the law is not what the 

Provincial Court judge said that it was. 

 

And so why, Mr. Speaker, would I argue that the Provincial 

Court is such an important court. And the reason I would argue 

that, Mr. Speaker, and the reason I believe that is that 90 per 

cent of criminal cases are decided by the Provincial Court. 

Small claims, which after the actions of our government while I 

was Minister of Justice, now go up to $25,000 a year, I believe, 

or are at least approaching towards that number — that was the 

goal that I had set — all those cases, Mr. Speaker, go before the 

Provincial Court. 

 

So most accused, the vast majority of accused, most victims, 

and most self-represented litigants — people who cannot afford 

lawyers., either just because they can‟t afford lawyers or 

because the amount involved doesn‟t warrant paying a lawyer 

on a cost/benefit analysis — most of those people, accused, 

victims, self-represented litigants, they end up before the 

Provincial Court. 

 

And even in matters — most matters, there may be a right to 

appeal — but even in matters where there is technically, legally 

a right to appeal, to go perhaps as far as the Supreme Court of 

Canada in theory to determine what the law truly is, for most of 

those people, Mr. Speaker, there is, for all practical matters, no 

real right to appeal. It‟s not something they can afford. Perhaps 

it‟s really not worth it to them to correct what they feel was an 

injustice, but still may very well have been an injustice. But the 

practical, the resources to appeal, the will to appeal, to continue 

to work in a system that, I mean, lawyers can find frustrating, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s just not there. 

 

And so any arbitrariness, any harshness, any lack of appropriate 

discretion on the part of a Provincial Court judge can be the one 

and only consequence to someone who may very well be a 

member of . . . Given who the Provincial Court deals with, 

particularly accused, particularly victims who are 

disproportionately Aboriginal as well, disproportionately poor, 

and self-represented litigants — these are the people who don‟t 

get a lot of second chances in life, Mr. Speaker. And if they 

don‟t get a fair shake by a Provincial Court — maybe the only 

court they‟ll see, perhaps the only court they see, likely in many 

cases the only court they see — then the justice system has not 

been fair to them. 

 

And how our Provincial Court judges interpret the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms for example; interpret the rule of law, for 

example; interpret legislation to protect and advance the 

interests of victims, for example; Mr. Speaker, is crucial. 

Whatever a higher court judge might say, if that interpretation 

and the benefit of it is not enacted in practice by our Provincial 

Court judges — in these vast majority of criminal cases, vast 

majority of small claims cases, Mr. Speaker, for victims and 

accused and self-represented litigants alike — then those rights, 

those freedoms, those protections guaranteed by law are not 

really guaranteed for the people who need them most and who 

look to the only court to which they have in all those 

circumstances, real access, and all those courts where they will 

personally appear, Mr. Speaker, instead of sending an advocate 

to come bat for them in a higher court, in those rare cases where 

they in fact can do and do do that, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why 

I say the Provincial Court is such an important court. 

 

It is vital, I think, a vital part of the job of the Judicial Council 

in Saskatchewan and a vital job of the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, but in particularly a vital job of the Attorney General 



April 1, 2009 Saskatchewan Hansard 2643 

to concern himself with the quality of appointments to this 

court, for all the reasons that I‟ve outlined.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a work that one would necessarily 

entrust to anybody who meets the bare minimum qualifications 

of having received a law degree and practised for 10 years, Mr. 

Speaker. It simply is not. And I know that when I became 

Attorney General of the province of Saskatchewan, the quality 

of those appointments was of fundamental importance. And as a 

matter of fact, through series of coincidences, Mr. Speaker, 

many of them unfortunate circumstances, I ended up being the 

Attorney General responsible for appointing approximately 

one-third of the court in a four-year period. I hope that, not only 

maintaining the standard, the high standard of the Provincial 

Court, but that I enhanced the standard of the court by those 

appointments. 

 

I think four appointments have been made by the current 

Attorney General. I would assume from the quality of his 

appointments that he has a similar ambition to maintain, if not 

enhance, the quality of the Provincial Court. And given that I 

may have some criticisms, albeit constructive, of the Minister of 

Justice in these matters, I do want to recognize that that is my 

impression of what he has been doing and commend him for 

that and, Mr. Speaker, to encourage him to encourage him to 

continue to conduct himself in that way and to make the best 

possible appointments to this court. 

 

And, you know, for members who may not have heard my 

remarks about the value of the Provincial Court, I will not 

return to them, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t want to be repetitive and I 

know the Speaker won‟t allow me to be repetitive in that 

respect. But I do want to reaffirm the importance of those 

remarks. Because I do want to come to the provision that is in 

this legislation and why it‟s in this legislation, why I don‟t think 

it‟s appropriate provision, Mr. Speaker, and what I fear that it is 

indicative of. And I hope that I am mistaken, and certainly it‟s 

not a road that if the Attorney General is going down it, he can‟t 

turn back. He certainly can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There is a provision in this legislation that would allow the 

Judicial Council to continue to investigate a judge who is no 

longer a judge, a judge who is retired from the bench, despite 

the fact that the Judicial Council has no sanction. The highest 

sanction of the Judicial Council against a judge who has in 

some way become unfit to hold office is to recommend to the 

Attorney General that that judge be removed from that office. 

There‟s no other sanction beyond that. And so where a judge 

removes himself from that office himself or she removes herself 

from that office, there is no other sanction. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And the minister in his public comments about this Bill said 

that he didn‟t think it appropriate, now that he‟s minister, to add 

any other sanction. So we have the prospect when this becomes 

law, as it will — the government has a majority and I don‟t 

think they‟re inclined to retreat from this provision; I doubt it 

very much because of the reasons why I think it‟s here — 

there‟ll be a provision that says the Judicial Council can do 

something that a Judicial Council would never do. Nobody is 

going to sit and investigate a person who is no longer a member 

of and no longer falls under the governance, is no longer subject 

to any sanction of that professional body. 

 

The Law Society is not going to investigate someone who is 

now outside of their jurisdiction and to whom they can impose 

no sanction. Mr. Speaker, that is not the work for serious people 

to investigate matters that aren‟t of their real concern and which 

they cannot address. Police services are not going to investigate 

matters that they cannot address, that they cannot discipline 

because the person is retired. And the legislation doesn‟t allow 

them to pursue that person beyond their retirement. It‟s not 

going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it is noteworthy, it is noteworthy that of the perhaps dozens 

of pieces of legislation governing, governing professions in 

particular, Mr. Speaker, and the investigation of offences and 

the discipline of members, that the government has not 

proposed amendments to the investigation or discipline of 

anybody else in any other profession or occupation that would 

otherwise be outside the jurisdiction and would still be beyond 

the sanction of that governing body except Provincial Court 

judges, Mr. Speaker. Why Provincial Court judges? 

 

Now unfortunately police officers and lawyers are being 

disciplined all the time, Mr. Speaker — far too often for me as 

lawyer to feel comfortable about. Although in a way I do feel 

comfortable about it, Mr. Speaker, because I know I belong to a 

profession that‟s self-governing, that takes self-government 

seriously, that investigates when there are complaints, and 

disciplines when there are infractions. And so I can be unhappy 

that members of my profession don‟t always rise to the standard 

that I would like them to, but I‟m happy that my profession 

holds them to account. 

 

But no amendment as to expanding the jurisdiction of the Law 

Society in respect to discipline of non-lawyers, no . . . And 

there have been cases in Saskatchewan where the behaviour of 

someone, when they were a lawyer before they were appointed 

to the bench, comes into question and the Law Society says, 

well there‟s nothing we can do about it now. He‟s now a judge, 

not a lawyer any more. We can‟t do anything about it. 

 

Does the government move to correct that? No, Mr. Speaker. 

Does the government move to correct this discrepancy, this 

problem in any case where there are regular requirements for 

investigation/discipline? No, Mr. Speaker, they don‟t. Where do 

they make this proposal, Mr. Speaker? To whom? For judges? 

And why, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Two judges in all the time I‟ve practised law in Saskatchewan 

— 20 years, Mr. Speaker, or so, perhaps a little bit more, Mr. 

Speaker — in all that time, Mr. Speaker, two judges have 

retired rather than be suspended by the Judicial Council — two. 

And that is not exactly a great evil compared to what the 

investigations/disciplines that are needed to conduct other very 

worthwhile, very well-staffed professions and occupations 

within the province. But it does point to the fact that if you care 

about the quality of the court, Mr. Speaker, you don‟t often 

have to address the matter in a disciplinary way afterwards, and 

these are very rare circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second of them and the most recent of them is what gives 

rise to this amendment, Mr. Speaker. And this amendment, and 

my remarks will make this quite clear, this amendment is in my 



2644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 1, 2009 

view — I think it‟s the only defensible view, Mr. Speaker — 

this amendment is an act of political face-saving on the part of 

the current Minister of Justice. That‟s the only explanation for 

it, Mr. Speaker. The provision will not be used. The provision 

will hardly ever arise, Mr. Speaker. I would hope that the 

quality of the court, I think which is if anything improved over 

the years, will ensure that it very rarely arises, and when it does 

arise, Mr. Speaker, a Judicial Council is not going pursue a 

judge who has left the bench voluntarily — not willing to be 

removed from the bench — beyond, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When Charles II returned to England, he was very disappointed 

to find that Oliver Cromwell had died of natural causes, Mr. 

Speaker. And so he dug him up and hung his corpse, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is what this would suggest the Judicial 

Council reduce itself to. That it would punish somebody with an 

investigation when they have escaped all real sanction because 

they are removed from the jurisdiction of the Judicial Council 

as Oliver Cromwell was removed, except for his bodily 

remains, from the jurisdiction and power of Charles II, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And so why are we doing this? Why are we doing this, Mr. 

Speaker? Well the reason we‟re doing this is because the 

members opposite — not all the members opposite; some of 

them weren‟t here at the time — but prior to the last election 

when the Minister of Justice was the Justice critic, the members 

opposite, and I believe for reasons that I will get into, really 

without the approval, certainly without the comfort of the 

Justice critic, wanted to play cheap politics with the 

uncomfortable position in which the last, most recent member 

of the Provincial Court resigned when he was under 

investigation by the Judicial Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and what that case certainly points out in the case 

of judges, but probably in the case of attorneys general as well, 

Mr. Speaker, is that no set of laws, no set of rules is a 

replacement for character and the exercise of good judgment. 

And when character and good judgment fail, Mr. Speaker, 

human beings have to make decisions. And when the exercise 

of good judgment fails in the case of a judge, Mr. Speaker, then 

how is that going to be dealt with? In an attempt to maintain the 

principle of independence of the court, how is that to be dealt 

with? 

 

Well we have a way of dealing with it, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

through the work of the Judicial Council. And their governance, 

their independence has to be accepted, and it has to be accepted 

in spirit, Mr. Speaker. And when I come to talk about why this 

proposal is a troubling indication, I will return to that. 

 

I said at the time, Mr. Speaker, when members of the opposition 

as then they were, through the Justice critic, raised the matter of 

the investigation of a judge in the Legislative Assembly in 

question period, after the Justice critic volunteered to me that he 

did not think that was appropriate, Mr. Speaker, I said at the 

time to the press, who asked the question: well do you think 

judges shouldn‟t be held to the same standard as everybody 

else? I said, Mr. Speaker, no I do not think they should be held 

to the same standard as everybody else. With respect to police 

officers, with respect to lawyers, with respect to teachers, with 

respect to almost anybody in our society, I think judges should 

be held to a far higher standard than anyone else, Mr. Speaker. 

It is a privilege — a privilege — to sit here, in this branch of 

government. It is a privilege to sit on the bench. It is a privilege 

to sit on the Supreme Court of Canada. But for reasons that I‟ve 

outlined already at the beginning of my remarks, it is a privilege 

and an honour to sit in the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. 

To paraphrase Winston Churchill, with that privilege, with that 

honour, comes responsibility. It is also, as well as a privilege 

and honour, a great responsibility and a great trust. 

 

And it was very clear, and the issues that were raised in that 

case were referred by the then minister of Justice, by me, to 

outside prosecutors, prosecutors in Alberta. It was clear in that 

case that there had not been criminal conduct on the part of that 

judge. And that would become clear in a criminal case 

involving other accused later, and it did become clear. And it all 

became part of the public record, and the judge in this case 

testified as a witness in that case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that‟s not the end of the question because our standard for 

judges should not be whether their conduct is criminal or not, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s not the standard to which we should hold 

ourselves in this Chamber. It‟s not the standard to which we 

should hold those to whom we appoint to the court. We need to 

hold them to a much higher standard than that, Mr. Speaker, 

and it requires an exercise of character. It requires an exercise 

of integrity. Most of all, I think in these circumstances, it 

required an exercise in judgment that I am quite disappointed, 

was very disappointed at the time, Mr. Speaker, to find was not 

there. 

 

And I speak on some of these matters of my disappointment in 

respect to what brought this provision to us. Not so much in the 

anger I felt at the day, Mr. Speaker, months and years ago, but 

still with considerable sadness, Mr. Speaker, that someone who 

is entrusted with a great deal of trust and responsibility failed in 

that trust and failed in that responsibility. And it is rare, but for 

those very good reasons the matter came before the Judicial 

Council. We‟ll never know, but I expect, and I expect that the 

subject of the investigation had the same suspicion, that this 

would have resulted in a recommendation to the attorney 

general — at the time, me — to remove the judge from office, 

Mr. Speaker. And any matter that would do that is indeed a 

serious matter. 

 

Now I make those remarks to assure everybody in this Chamber 

that my opposition to this provision, my concerns about the 

motives of the government in bringing this provision forward, 

do not arise from any desire to protect or explain away conduct 

that required this investigation, that would have required . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being the time of adjournment, 5 p.m., this 

House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2615 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2630 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2639 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2615 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2615 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2615 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2615 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2615 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Perogy Paradise Fundraiser 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2616 

 Cancer Awareness Month 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 2616 

 Moose Jaw Lions Club Fundraiser 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2616 

 Development of the Uranium Industry 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2617 

 Labour Community Service Awards 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2617 

 Manufacturing Hall of Fame Inductee 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2617 

 Don Allen Saskaloppet 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 2617 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 SaskPower Rate Increases 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 2618 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2618 

 Employment Trends 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2619 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2619 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2620 

 Cost of Living 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2620 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 2621 

 Uranium Development Partnership 

  Calvert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2621 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2621 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 U-Brew and U-Vin Available in Saskatchewan 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 2622 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2623 

 Property Assessment Information Website 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2624 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2624 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2624 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 57 — The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2008 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 2625 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2625 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 84 — The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Amendment Act, 2009 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2625 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2625 

  



 

 Bill No. 85 — The Municipal Grants Act 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2627 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2627 

 Bill No. 86 — The Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 2632 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2633 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2634 

 Bill No. 87 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2634 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2634 

 Bill No. 88 — The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 2637 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 2637 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 46 — The Labour Market Commission Amendment Act, 2008 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 2638 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 2640 

 Bill No. 45 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2640 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 2641 

 Bill No. 51 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2008 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 2642 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Intergovernmental Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Crown Corporations 

 

 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Information  

Technology Office 

 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

 

 

Hon. Wayne Elhard 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Provincial Secretary 

 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice 

Attorney General 

 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Enterprise and Innovation 

 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for Capital City Commission 


